                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF MUNICIPAL
                     GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS



                          Jeffrey S. Lax



                      Working Paper No. 1657




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 1985




The Social Science Research Council graciously supported the
research presented in this paper through grant SS-25-83-04. Roo
Canfield assisted, indispensably, with the empirical analysis.
Linda Edwards, Jonathan Leonard, Robert Lipsey, flonald Walls, the
research staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and the
members of the Seminar in Urban Economics at Harvard university
have been generous with constructive comments. Only I am respon-
sible for the content. The research reported here is part of the
NRER's research program in Taxation and project in Government
Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1657
                                             July 1985

                   Economic Effects of Municipal
                      Government Institutions
                             ABSTRACT


This paper presents an analysis of employment and compensation practices

under alternative institutions of municipal government which

demonstrates that institutional variations have significant, important.

and predictable effects upon outcomes in municipal labor markets.

Municipal inetitutions in which a single official is responsible for

office performance provide that official with incentives to emphasize

efficiency in the production of municipal services. Institutions in

which responsibility is shared provide individual officials with incen-

tives to emphasize the allocation of municipal resources to their par-

ticular constituencies, among whom municipal employees may be prominent.




   Independently, city managers and mayors chosen through direct elec-

tion reduce levels of employment and increase employee compensation.

Managers offer compensation packages which emphasize nonwage components.

In cities which have both institutions, competition between the two

nullifies employment reductions and exacerbates compensation increases.

Employment increases with the age of the manager's office.




  City councilmembers chosen through at-large or nonpartisan elections

increase levels of both employment and compensation. Compensation

packages under both emphasize current components. With both reforms,

employment and compensation increases are compounded.


                                              Jeffrey S. Zax
                                              N.B.E.R.
                                              269 Mercer Street, 8th Floor
                                              New York, NY 10003
The institutions within which economic activity is conducted appear only

infrequently in economic analysis. For most purposes, economists take

institutions to be artifacts of more fundamental behavioral characteris-

tics. They assume that economic agents understand their own resources

and objectives, and those of agents with whom they interact. In concert,

these agents simply orgarzize institutions within which resources and

objectives can be most conveniently reconciled. Any array of resources

and objectives automatically implies a particular institution. For

analytical purposes, knowledge of institutions is redundant if resources

and objectives are themselves known.




   These assumptions are probably appropriate in markets where informa-

tion is readily available, where institutions are readily malleable and

where power is readily appropriable. However, in markets where relevant

information is dear, institutions are protected by custom or higher

sanction, and power can be closely held, institutional structure can

exert substantial independent influence on market outcomes. For example,

markets in which institutions of government play large roles are un-

deniably sensitive to those institutions.




  The importance of institutions, and of government institutions in

particular, has not escaped attention. For example, political science

offers a sophisticated theory of the economic behavior characteristic to

different municipal government institutions. Some empirical studies of

local public labor markets have, independently of political theory,

recognized one source of variation in municipal government structure.

Unfortunately, analysis in th9 general traditions of urban economics and
municipal public finance has typically been executed without reference

to institutional differences.




   This paper presents an analysis of employment and compensation prac-

tices under alternative institutions of municipal government. This

analysis serves two purposes. First, it expands on the two themes from

which it draws: It shares a theme with previous economic work in which

municipal institutions appear, in its examination of local public sector

labor markets. It extends previous analyses of municipal labor markets

by examining levels of employment, and of nonwage compensation com-

ponents, as well as levels of wages. This analysis also shares a theme

with the political theory of municipal government; it evaluates all

important variations in municipal government structure. It extends

previous analyses of municipal government structure with theoretical

reconsiderations and empirical tests.




   The second purpose of this paper is to demonstrate the general

proposition that institutions, those of municipal governments as a case

in point, exercise important influence over economic activity. This

influence is often systematic and predictable. The behavior of municipal

officials -- whether elected or appointed -- who wish to remain in

office is constrained by the structure of the office they hold arid the

method by which they are selected.




   City managers and mayors chosen through direct elections require

broad support from the electorate in order to retain their positions.

They obtain more useful political support from a city population


                                  —2-
satisfied with municipal services than from Municipal employees blessed

with patronage. The analysis in this paper demonstrates that these

officials reduce municipal employment levels, but increase employee

compensation. A small work force of skilled, well-paid employees

produces municipal services most efficiently, and serves best their

political ambitions.




   Under most electoral systems, city councillors can often gain elec-

tion through the support of small constituencies within the electorate

as a whole. The active support of municipal employees can be a valuable

asset to council candidates to whom the opportunity to court other

interest groups has been denied. The analysis in this paper demonstrates

that city councillors who are elected through nonpartisan ballots or

through city-wide elections increase both levels of municipal employment

and of compensation for municipal employees. Elections held under these

conditions offer limited opportunity to council candidates who wish to

rely upon traditional neighborhood or party loyalties. Councilmembers

instead take advantage of the easy appeal to municipal employees with

whom they have been generous.




   The behavior of municipal government institutions changes as they

age. Municipal government institutions of early vintage may embody

older, labor-intensive techniques of production. The analysis in this

paper demonstrates that municipal employment levels are higher in cities

with older, council-manager government forms.




                                 -3-
                   I.                       ci1   9!!ent

Government institutions, by their designs, partially insulate government

officials from the citizens whom they nominally represent or serve. For

example, terms in office guaranteed by statutory election schedules or

by civil service regulations are characteristics of public office which

serve the explicit purpose of protecting incumbents from 'inappropriate'

citizen pressure. These and other characteristics of public offices

reduce the sensitivity of government officials to marginal changes in
                        1
citizen preferences.




      Public officials evaluate public reaction to their official perfor-

mances in terms of signals derived from flows of two different political

'currencies'; money --      both government revenues and political contribu-
tions -- and votes. Distributions of these two forms of political

'wealth' by citizen characteristics differ dramatically. They are only

imperfectly substitutable for each other. The concurrence of signals in

these two currencies unavoidably complicates their interpretation.

Changes in distributions of citizen preferences may imply inconsistent

changes in monetary and electoral signals. Changes which give rise to

consistent signals may speak less forcefully than if only one type of

signal were possible. In these conditions, there is no guarantee that

marginal changes in citizen preferences will be expressed so as to be

intelligible to public officials, no matter how public-spirited.



  1
      "Political power is very much like market power in that it permits
      the powerholder to indulge either his brutality or his flaccidity."
      (Hirachman, pg. 58).


                                      —4-
     If public officials recognize marginal changes in citizen

preferences, they may frequently experience little compulsion to ac-

comodate them. Electoral signals may, by their categorical nature, be

muted. Marginal changes in citizen preferences which reduce satisfaction

with an incumbent, but which still leave the incumbent with a majority

over any challenger, may be treated as of little consequence. 2




     Public officials also have the ability to resist, or counter, the

effects of monetary signals. They can compel payment of taxes illegally

withheld. They can request transfers from higher levels of government to

replace revenues lost through migration of dissatisfied citizens. They

can solicit additional funds from 'infra-marginal' citizens, those whose

current tax payments are exceeded by the value they place on government

services.




     For all these reasons, government offers no guarantee that the

relationship between citizen preferences and government behavior will be

invariant to the specific institutions of government. Marginal changes

in citizen preferences may not be recognized by public officials. If

they are recognized, public officials may still be free to avoid chang-

ing public policy in exact measure with changes in citizen tastes. They

will use this freedom to pursue their own objectives, within the oppor-

tunities available through their offices. The policies they pursue will,




 2
     Migration as a signal — - 'voting with the feet' -- entails a similar
     problem. Migration is usually a categorical, discrete decision br
     the migrant. Dissatisfaction with public services which leaves
     present jurisdiction preferable to all others may also be safely
     ignored.


                                   -5-
therefore, depend upon the alternatives defined by the specific institu-

tions of which they are a part.




   Municipal governments in the United States present an ideal context

in which to observe the extent of this dependency. They embody many

different combinations of municipal institutions. These combinations

very significantly in the off ices to which they allocate executive,

legislative and administrative responsibilities. Municipal government

behavior should vary systematically with changes in the array of in-

stitutions which comprise a municipality, if government structure exerts

independent influence over its actions.




   Labor economists, in the explication of other issues, have produced

some incidental evidence of systematic variations in municipal behavior.

  Analyses of municipal compensation practices regularly consider the

relationship between compensation levels and methods of city administra-

tion. Ehrenberg/Goldstein find higher wages'irl cities administered by

city managers for employees in six of ten municipal functions.

Edwards/Edwards report that compensation levels for municipal sanitation

workers are higher under city managers. Ehrenberg and Ichniowski report

similar results for fire fighters.




    These issues have been ignored in the empirical literatures of urban
    economics and of local public finance. "Models ... are supposed to
    be useful for appraising the impacts of government policies, but
    governments as decision-making bodies are absent.'
    (Goldstein/Moses). In a more recent example, "No consideration of
    public decision making will be attempted here." (Bucovetsky).

    City managers are professional administrators, appointed by elected
    municipal officials to supervise the execution of sunicipal policy.
   These articles agree on three counts. Without exception, they choose

the presence or absence of city managers as the one characteristic of

municipal government structure which has important consequences for

municipal behavior. Second, they conclude that city employees obtain

higher levels of compensation under city managers. Third, they offer no

explanation for the prominence they confer upon city managers, and

little justification for the effects they estimate.




   Edwards/Edwards are more concerned than are the other authors to

provide some insight into the influence of city managers. They suggest

that city managers offer higher salaries to their employees because they

have professional commitments to standards of 'fairness' in compensation
-- such as those represented by 'comparability' measures -- and because

they can enforce sensible work rules. While these notions are helpful,

they do not constitute a theory of city manager behavior. In sum, these

studies demonstrate only that at least one institutional characteristic

of city government appears to have independent effects upon city be-

havior.




   The economic literature does not recognize institutional characteris-

tics of city government other than the city managership, and does not

attempt to offer a comprehensive theory of city government behavior.

Political scientists have offered such theories, through explicit con-

sideration of city legislative structure as well as city administrative

institutions. These theories imply that municipal economic behavior will

vary significantly with differences in the structure of municipal

government.



                                 -7-
   Lineberry/Fowler, recalling the reform movement in municipal

politics, identify the character of city councillor elections and of

city councillor representation, in addition to the presence or absence

of city managers, as important characteristics of city government struc-

ture. Proponents of municipal reform advocated, among other programs,

the institution of city managers, the conduct of nonpartisan council

elections, and election of councilmen at-large.   These three elements

of the reform agenda have proven to be most durable. For example,

Baker/Colby, in concurrence with Lineberry/Fowler, define a city as

'reformed' if these three institutions have been adopted. Bryant finds

that of seven initiatives originally stated in the "Model City Charter",

only nonpartisan elections, at-large councilmen and city managers have

achieved oint acceptance among American municipalities.




  The goals of the reform movement define the roles that political

scientists expect these institutions to play. Adherents to that movement

advocated them as means to ensure that municipal services were provided

professionally, efficiently, and uniformly (Lineberry/Fowler). The

economic behavior of municipalities which have adopted them should

differ in two dimensions from those which have not, if they fulfill

their mission. Reform city governments should reduce the scope and cost

of the local public sector (Lyons). For example, they should reduce the

size of the municipal labor force (Baker/Colby). At the same time,

reform governments should employ more sophisticated financial strategies




   Public affiliations with national political parties are prohibited
   in nonpartisan elections, though most such elections permit affilia-
   tions with local parties. In at-large elections, all municipal
   citizens are entitled to vote for all vacant city council seats.
and more sophisticated personnel policies in the execution of wore

sophisticated programs. They should place greater emphasis on the pur-

suit of intergovernmental grants, greeter emphasis on civil service

standards for employment and greater emphasis on urban planning (Cole).




   These hypotheses have not elicited satisfactory empirical demonstra-

tions. Political scientists have had difficulty demonstrating that city

managers, councilmen elected in nonpartisan elections and councilmen

elected from at-large districts have any effects, at all, much less that

their effects are consistent with the reformist mission they have been

established to accomplish. Neither Cole nor Norgan/Pelissero discern any

important effects of reform institutions. They claim that empirical

political science routinely rejects the hypothesis that such effects

obtain.




   This is an exaggeration. Reform institutions have, in some instances,

revealed reform effects. Tucker reports, in a case study, that a reform

agency is characterized by more professional management then is an

otherwise similar 'traditional' agency. In larger samples,

Lineberry/Fowler and Lyons find that expenditures in reformed cities are

reduced. They also find that taxation is reduced. Baker/Colby identify

reduced levels of employment in cities with reform government institu-

tions. However, reform institutions are also associated with unexpected

effects. Lyons, for example, claims that these cities receive fewer

grants per capita. Clark claims that general expenditures are greater in

reform than in traditional municipalities. This evidence, while incon-

clusive, justifies further exploration of variations in the economic



                                 -9-
behavior of municipal institutions.




   The analysis presented here departs from thatin the literature of

political science on two counts. It reinterprets the significance of the

three characteristics --   city   managership, councillor representation and

councillor partisanship -- which have already been considered. It iden-

tifies two important characteristics of city government --    the   method of

mayoral election and the age of government institutions -- whose in-

fluence has not previously been explored. These departures give rise to

a new characterization of the influence municipal institutions exercise

over municipal economic behavior.




   The incentives to which municipal dfficials respond are largely

defined by the functions which their offices are designed to fulfill.

The municipal offices in which executive and administrative authority

resides are held by a single individual who must assume individual

responsibility for the exercise of that authority. The offices in which

legislative authority resides are typically held by many individuals,

who are collectively reponsible for legislative activity. This contrast,

rather than that between reform and traditional regimes, distinguishes

the two important political contexts within which municipal officials

must act.




   Independent municipal executive authorities are represented in the

offices of the city manager and of the mayor chosen through direct




                                    -   10   -
             6
elections.       The individual who holds either of these offices is solely

responsible for the execution of its duties. In either office, that

individual's performance must therefore be acceptable to a large part of

the municipal electorate if his or her tenure is to be extended.




     City managers and mayors chosen through direct elections must provide

adequate levels of municipal services throughout their cities, in order

to create a broad constituency. Their executive authority better serves

their political ambitions through the promotion of efficient, impartial

service provision than through the patronage of favored interests. For

example, city managers and mayors chosen through direct elections should

preside over municipal governments in which municipal labor forces are

comprised of relatively few, highly skilled and highly paid employees.

Labor forces in municipalities which lack either of these independent

executive officers are more likely to be swollen with loyal, if un-

productive, constituents of other municipal officials.




  This broad characterization, as it applies to the behavior of city


 6
     Citizens choose among individuals who have declared their candidacy
     specifically for the mayoralty, wheie the office is filled through
     direct elections. Where the office is filled indirectly, citizens
     vote only for city councillora. The mayoralty is assumed by an
     elected councillor, chosen, for example, as the candidate
     whoattracted the moat votes in the popular election, or as the
     victor in a subsequent election held among successful council can-
     didates. In these cities, mayoral responsibilities are largely
     ceremonial.

     City managers hold office by virtue of contracts signed with the
     municipality, rather than by virtue of electoral victories. They are
     never subject to direct review by the electorate. However, their
     appointments are subject to approval by elected city councils. If
     they wish to ensure the support of a majority among the council,
     their programs must appeal to a wide range of community interests.


                                    — 11   —
managers, is similar to that found in the literature of political

science. As mayors chosen by direct election must build constituencies

of scope analogous to those required by city managers, this charac-

terization is a broad description of their behavior, as well. However,

city managers and mayors chosen by direct election will exercise their

influence over the details of municipal government in different ways.

They must, by the nature of their offices, differ in their attention to

professional and to political considerations.




   For example, city managers will principally regard municipal

employees as inputs into production functions for municipal services.

Mayors chosen through direct elections will recognize that municipal

employees are en important political force, as well. City managers will

require municipal employees to provide more hours of work than they

would in the employment of cities which lack managers. Mayors, who value

the electoral support of their subordinates, will not alter the standard

work year. City managers will offer compensation packages to their

employees which emphasize incentives for enhanced productivity -- pen-

sion, medical and educational plans. Mayors will offer compensation

packages in which wages and paid time not worked -- components which

lend themselves to immediate consumption, and to the employee's im-

mediate gratification --   are   predominant.




   Municipal executive officials ensure their political success through

the maintenance of general satisfaction among the electorate. Municipal

legislative officials may achieve the same ends more efficiently through

the exploitation of differences between interest groups within the



                                     -   12
electorate. Officials of both types must have their tenure confirmed

regularly by municipal voters, if they are to remain in office. However,

in contrast to independent mayors, city councillors can frequently win

elections on the strength of support from relatively narrow con-
               8
stituencies.       Furthermore, individual councillors are rarely threatened

with responsibility for the legislative performance of their entire

council. If councillors successfully promote the interests of those

constituencies to which they owe their elections, they may safely ignore

the attitudes of other city residents. In comparison to unitary execu-

tive officials, city councillors devote greater effort to obtaining

allocations of municipal services and municipal tax burdens which are

favorable to their particular constituencies, less effort to ensuring

efficient production and equitable assessment.




   Most municipal reform advocates and contemporary political scientists

assert that city councillors are particularly susceptible to the in-

fluence of special interests, when their offices are won in partisan and

ward elections. They believe that this susceptibility should be reduced

under systems of nonpartisan and at-large elections (Lineberry/Fowler).

However, when electorates are segmented into special interests, sitting

and aspiring city councillors who wish to efficiently build and maintain

constituencies will inevitably seek to exploit these divisions (Beard).

If nonpartisan and at-large elections do not, of themselves, engender




    The electorate for city couricillors elected from wards is, by
    definition, a subset of the entire municipal electorate. Under most
    systems of at-large balloting -- systems in which each citizen may
    cast as many votes as there are council seats to be filled -- can-
    didates can gain office through the loyalty of interest groups which
    themselves do not constitute an electoral majority.


                                    - 13 -
consensus in the electorate, they will not discourage political appeals

to interest groups.




   Perversely, nonpartisan and at-large elections encourage councillors

and councillor candidates to manipulate municipal policy for the benefit

of those interest groups whose support they value. Councillors cannot

rely upon electoral support from citizens with whom they share neighbor-

hood and political affiliations under these reforms as they can under

the traditional institutions these reforms replace. They must, there-

fore, rely more heavily on support won through the promise or provision

of preferential treatment. If anything, city councillors chosen in at-

large or nonpartisan elections will be more preoccupied with obtaining

distributions of which their supporters approve, and less interested in

efficiency, than will be those chosen in traditional elections. At-large

elections may be responsible for the greater part of these distortions;

the neighborhood affiliations they suppress are typically more impor—

tent, in local elections, than are the national party affiliations

disallowed under nonpartisanship.




   City councillors elected under the auspices of reform institutions

will be particularly sensitive to the political context of municipal

labor practices. Municipal employees are often a powerful interest group

in their own right. In addition, municipal employment serves as

patronage rewards for loyal constituents. At-large and nonpartisan city

councillors will allocate more municipal resources to municipal

employees, and more municipal employment to other supporters, than will

ward and partisan councillors. Municipalities which have adopted legis-



                                    -   14   -
lative reforms will have larger work forces, and higher compensation

levels, than municipalities which have not. Compensation packages in

these municipalities will emphasize components whose value to the

employee is immediate and obvious; wages and paid time not worked.




   The extent of institutional variation among American municipal

governments provides an unusual opportunity to explore the economic

effects of such variations. American municipalities also demonstrate

wide variations in the duration of their current institutions. This

variation provides an additional opportunity; to explore the economic

significance of institutional aging. The economic behavior of municipal

governments will change as they mature. Governments of recent vintage

will be especially productive, both because they have been chosen to

respond to contemporary demands, and because they may enjoy the 'Haw-

thorne effects' attributable to improvements in worker motivation

(Sayles). Institutions which were efficient in production of the serv-

ices required when they were first adopted will function less effec-

tively as service requirements evolve. They will require greater levels

of inputs than will newer iunicipal institutions in order to produce

similar service levels. Municipal employment levels should increase with

the duration of municipal institutions.




   The characterization of municipal economic behavior presented here

predicts significant economic effects attributable to the form and age

of municipal government institutions. These predictions both extend arid

contradict those presented in preceding studies. Empirical tests in the

succeeding section confirm the wealth of implications to which this



                                 -   15 -
characterization gives rise




1i     c.4p4 Govmat Structure,          Eap1oyat   !n4 pJy Co.peiisat joe




In a large sample of American cities, different institutions of

municipal government demonstrate the differences in labor market be-

havior discussed in the preceding section.    Neasures of manhours of

municipal employment per capita, municipal employment per capita, annual

work hours per municipal employee, total compensation expenditures per

hour worked, wage expenditures per hour worked, expenditures for paid

time not worked per hour worked, expenditures for medical benefits per

hour worked, expenditures for pension benefits per hour worked, and

expenditures for miscellaneous benefits per hour worked for police,

fire, sanitation and an aggregate of all other noneducational depart-

ments thoroughly describe labor market conditions in each of these

cities.. City managers, mayors chosen through direct election, city

councillors chosen through nonpartisan ballots, and councillors chosen

in at-large elections alter levels of these measures in consistent

response to the incentives and opportunities presented by the charac-

teristics of their offices. Employment levels increase with institu-



     The sample analyzed here contains observations from 839 cities, in a
     pooled cross-section time-series. Variables for each city are drawn
     from surveys conducted by the International City ilanagement Associa—
     tion, the Census of Governments and the Census of Population. The
     Appendix describes the sample in greater detail, and provides
     specifications of the regression equations reported here.


                                  -   16 -
tional maturity.




     Executive officials who bear sole responsibility for the performance

of their municipalities exercise important influence over outcomes in

municipal labor markets. Both city managers and mayors chosen through

direct elections appear to hire more efficient, more highly skilled

employees. They significantly reduce municipal employment levels and

increase the levels and sophistication of employee compensation, in the

absence of controls for employee productivity. 10 The responsibilities

common to both offices are more important to the officials who hold

them, in the management of municipal labor relations, than are the

obvious differences in political context. However, mayors chosen through

direct elections are more sensitive to the electoral power of municipal

employees. If both offices coexist, officeholders may compete for

employees' allegiances.




  Table 1 presents coefficients which indicate that city managers

reduce manhours of municipal service by more than 4000 and mayors chosen

through direct elections by nearly 3000 manhours per 10,000 capita.

These reductions are substantial, as well as significant; that as-

sociated with city managers represents       and that associated with




10
     Employee productivity cannot be captured by explicit measures,
     because output cannot be measured satisfactorily and personal
     characteristics of municipal employees are unknown.

     The presence of city managers and the practice of direct mayoral
     elections are represented by values of one, the absence of either by
     values of zero for the respective dummy variables.


                                  -   17 -
  = _—====__ = = = __========== = = = = _—====_— = _—===_— = = = = = = = = = = = —_====— = = —_===—_ = = = = = = = = ]


                                                     Table 1.

                            OLS Coefficients for City Managers arid
                                2! c2!              I2!t RL!                    !2!
      P!2at     Y21!
      Manhours Per 10,000
                                                  Presence of

                                                    -4095.
                                                                                     9        Direct

                                                                                          -2965.
        Capita                                         (2.77)                                (2.66)
      Employees Per 10,000                             -2.41                                 -1.47
        Capita                                         (3.02)                                (2.45)
      Annual Work Hours Per                               25.1                               -7.60
        Employee                                          (2.06)                              (.829)
      Total Compensation Per                                .417                                 .280
        Hour Worked                                       (4.40)                               (3.91)
      Pay for Time Worked Per                               .244                                 .174
        Hour Worked                                       (4.03)                               (3.80)
      Pay for Time Not Worked                               .00196                               .0492
        Per Hour Worked                                    (.0684)                              (2.27)
      Medical Benefits Per                                   .0352                               - .0146
        Hour Worked                                       (2.51)                                (1.37)
      Pension Benefits Per                                   .106                                 .0648
        Hour Worked                                       (3.44)                                (2.80)
      Miscellaneous Benefits                                 .0301.                               .00656
                                                          (5.21)                                (1 .50)


      Notes: T-statistics in parentheses.

(============================================================== ========)


mayors chosen through direct elections represents                                         of average
            12
levels.          In addition, both offices increase total compensation for

municipal employees; city managers by $.42 per hour worked, and mayors

chosen through direct elections by $.28 . Again, both increases are

large; the effect of manager-s represents 5.4? of mean total compensa-

tion, that of mayors chosen through direct election represents




      Both offices promote more sophisticated compensation packages by


 12
      The Appendix contains a table of average values and standard devia-
      tions for the dependent variables.


                                                      -   18 -
distributing increases in   total   compensation disproportionately in favor

of nonwage compensation. City managers increase mean wage expenditures

by only 4.4k, but increase medical expenditures by 9.9?, pension expen-

ditures by 13.9k and expenditures on miscellaneous benefits by 28.4?.

Mayors chosen through direct elections increase wage expenditures by

only 3.6t, but increase expenditures on pay for time not worked by

and pension expenditures by 8.5?.




   F-tests demonstrate the extent of similarity between the effects of

these two offices. Hypotheses of identical coefficients for the two

offices cannot be rejected in equations predicting manhours and

employees per 10,000 capita, total compensation, wage, and pension

expenditures per hour worked. These similarities are not universal.

Coefficients are different, with 5 confidence, in equations for annual

work hours per employee, expenditures for medical and miscellaneous

benefits. These differences demonstrate that mayors chosen through

direct elections, are reluctant to impose upon municipal employees the

full burden of improved efficiency.




   Mayors chosen through direct elections reduce manhours solely through

reductions in employment of 5.3'. They do not significantly alter work

hours for the employees they retain. In contrast, city managers both

deny employment to many who would obtain it in their absence, and in-

crease work hours for those they employ. They reduce employment by

but require an additional 25 hours, or three days, of work per year.




  Analogously, mayors chosen through direct elections offer compensa-


                                    -   19
tion packages which, in comparison to those offered by city managers,

emphasize current payments rather than benefits which enhance career

productivity. They allocate a substantial portion of compensation in-

creases to increases in pay for time not worked. Nanagers prefer compen-

sation components which embody investments in human capital. They do not

increase pay for time not worked, increase medical benefits and greatly

increase miscellaneous benefits.




      Twenty-six percent of cities in the United States (Sanders) and 48"

of the cities in the sample analyzed here include both offices among
                                 14
their municipal institutions.         Unfortunately, an interaction term

representing the joint presence of city managers arid mayors chosen

through direct elections is strongly collinear, in this data, with the

variables representing the individual presence of either. In conse-

quence, this sample can only offer suggestions as to the relationship

between the two offices.




      This interaction term is significant at 1O' in the equation predict-

ing employment per capita, and at 5 in the equation predicting expendi-

tures on medical benefits, when added to the specifications presented

above. It is insignificant when added to the equations predicting all




      Educational programs and uniform expenditures represent the bulk of
      miscellaneous benefits. Coefficients in the equation for paid time
      not worked are different at 12.
 14
      This sample, because it is based upon surveys conducted by the
      International City Management Association, contains a higher propor-
      tion of cities with managers than does the population of cities in
      the United States. Refer to the Appendix for further description of
      the sample.


                                      -   20   -
other employment and compensation levels. 15 For these characteristics

of municipal labor markets, this test does not reject the hypothesis

that effects of city managers and mayors chosen directly are simply

additive.




   However, the interaction term provides only one test of the relation-

ship between mayors and managers. In its presence, the combined effects

of city managers and mayors chosen through direct elections are repre-

sented by its sum with the two individual coefficients. These combined

effects indicate that, in cities where they coincide, managers and

mayors may conflict so as to prevent either from improving the ef-

ficiency of municipal work forces. Municipal employees profit most

noticeably from the consequences of this conflict.




   F-tests indicate that workforces in municipalities which have both

city managers arid mayors chosen through direct elections are not statis-

tically distinguishable from workforces in municipalities which have

neither, though those of municipalities with either alone would be

substantially smaller. Point estimates of these effects, and those on

annual work hours per employee, are numerically small, as well as insig-

nificant.




   At the same time, F-tests re,ect the hypothesis that managers and

mayors have no )oint effect on expenditures for total compensation,

wages. medical and pension benefits at      and on miscellaneous benefits



    These equations are available from the author.


                                 -   21 -
at        Point estimates of these combined effects imply that compenss-

tion levels increase under the )oint authority of managers and mayors by

far more than the sum of their li-idependent effects would suggest. In

municipalities with both, expenditures for total compensation per nour

worked exceed those in cities with neither by $1.22, or 16 of average

values. Expenditures on wages are increased by        medical benefits by

50", pension benefits by 45 and miscellaneous benefits by




     These results imply that, together, city managers and mayors chosen

through direct elections offer their employees unusual increases in

compensation, but do not require compensating reductions in employment.

When both offices are present, executive authority must unavoidably be

fragmented. Neither office may retain power sufficient to insist upon

efficient employment practices in confrontation with employee interests.

Further, managers and mayors may compete for effective control of execu-

tive powers. They may prefer the support of favored municipal employees

in this competition to the approval of constituents satisfied by reduc-

tions in municipal expenditures on labor services.




     The results above demonstrate that both city managers and mayors

chosen through direct elections exercise powerful influence over

municipal economic activity. The conduct of municipal labor relations

most successfully enhances the political careers of officials in these

offices when its primary effect is to create and maintain efficient

municipal labor forces. Elected executives can obtain further benefits

by ensuring that, without excessive violence to the requirements of

efficiency, municipal employment and compensation policies appeal to



                                   -   22   -
municipal employees. Both managers and mayors may resort to these ap-

peals in municipalities where they must share executive authority.




     Reform legislative institutions, as well as the executive reform of

city managers, exercise important influence over outcomes in municipal

labor markets. But city councillors elected under these reforms are more

likely to curry favor among their employees than to promote efficiency.

In contrast to their treatment under city managers, both municipal

employees and aspirants to municipal employment benefit unambiguously

from the conduct of at-large or nonpartisan city council elections.

Nunicipalities which have adopted either reform have larger workforces,

higher levels of compensation, and disproportionate shares of current

consumption in compensation packages.




     The coefficients presented in Table 2 demonstrate the generosity of

reform city councillors. 16 Nonpartisan city council ballots increase

manhours of municipal service by nearly 3000 annual hours per 10,000

capita, or 5.5c of average levels. This increase is accomplished en-

tirely through an increase of         in average municipal employment per

capita. Nonpartisanship increases expenditures for wages per hour by

       largely through 12.3k reductions in expenditures for pension

benefits, and 9.8k reductions in those for miscellaneous benefits.




16
     The conduct of nonpartisan city council ballots is represented by a
     dummy variable whose value is one in cities which have adopted this
     reform. At-large city councillora are represented by the fraction of
     all city council seats contested in at-large elections. This vari-
     able has a minimum value of zero, and a meximum value of one.


                                  -   23   -
                                                          Table 2.


                                                              N22 !2!!
                                        OLS Coefficients for At-Large


                                                                   Practice of                   Proportion of
                                                                   Nonpartisan                  City Councillors

    Manhours Per 10,000                                                 2834.                        2607.
      Capita                                                             (2.11)                           (2.13)
    Employees Per 10,000                                                  1.53                             1.69
      Capita                                                             (2.11)                           (2.56)
    Annual Work Hours Per                                                 3.23                         -13.4
      Employee                                                            (.292)                          (1.33)
    Total Compensation Per                                                    .0903                          .227
      Hour Worked                                                        (1.05)                           (2.89)
    Pay for Time Worked Per                                                .163                            .166
      Hour Worked                                                        (2.95)                          (3.31)
    Pay for Time Not Worked                                                .0296                           .0678
      Per Hour Worked                                                    (1.14)                          (2.85)
    Medical Benefits Per                                                   .00205                          - .0204
      Hour Worked                                                         (.161)                          (1.75)
    Pension Benefits Per                                                  - .0938                            .00637
      Hour Worked                                                        (3.37)                            (.250)
    Miscellaneous Benefits                                                -   .0104                        .00723
      Per Hour Worked                                                    (1.99)                          (1.51)

    Notes: T-statistics in parentheses.

t —=====—— = = = = —=========—— = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = = =




    At-large         elections match nonpartisan ballots in their employment

effects; city councils in which all members are elected at-large in-

crease per capita manhours of municipal service by                                                   and per capita

municipal workIorces by 6.1 over average levels in cities whose coun-

cillors are all elected from wards. These elections exceed nonpartisan

ballots in their effects upon municipal employee compensation. They

improve upon average levels of municipal employee total compensation by

          That increase is devoted entirely to increases of                                                  in wages

and of 7•3 in pay for time not worked.




                                                          -   24    -
     These estimates offer weak evidence that the political support of

municipal employees is more valuable in the absence of neighborhood than

in the absence of national party affiliations. At-large councils in-

crease municipal employment to the same extent as do nonpartisan coun-

cils. They also increase total employee compensation, while nonpartisan

councils merely reallocate existing compensation levels in favor of

current consumption. However, these contrasts are not strong. Coeff i-

dents on at-large and on nonpartisan elections differ with 95 con-

fidence in only equations estimating levels of pension and miscellaneous

expenditures. Coefficients on total compensation differ with only 8O'

confidence.




     Fifty-six percent of the cities in the sample under study here elect

all city councillors to at-large seats, and conduct nonpartisan ballots.
17
     These cities limit moat severely the range of constituencies to which

city council candidates may appeal. Under these limitations, councillors

may compete for the favor of municipal employees with special vigor.

While the )oint effects of these two legislative reforms are, in some

cases, less than the sum of their individual effects, municipal employ-

ment and compensation levels are substantially higher in these

municipalities than in those with either reform, alone.




     A dummy variable indicating the simultaneous conduct of nonpartisan

ballots and at-large city council elections is significant in equations



17
     Sanders reports that 67' of cities in the United States elect all
     councillors to at-large seats, and that 7O of cities conduct non-
     partisan ballots. He does not report the proportion of cities with
     both. The correlation between these reforms is probably positive.


                                   -   25   -
                                                                   18
for expenditures on wages,   medical    and pension benefits.           In all three

cases, the interaction term reduces the joint effects of the two

reforms, but does not cancel them. For example, the estimated effects of

nonpartisanship and at-large elections on wages are increased to $.32

and $.36 per hour worked, respectively, in this specification. Their

interaction reduces wages by $25 .       In       equations estimating expenditures

for medical and pension benefits, the interaction mitigates significant

reductions which would be otherwise imposed.




      Though the joint impact of both legislative reforms is less than the

sum of their individual effects for some components of compensation, F-

tests demonstrate that their joint effect is significantly different

from zero, at 5, for all dependent variables with the exceptions of

annual hours of work and expenditures on miscellaneous benefits. Point

estimates of these effects for manhours and employment per capita,

expenditures for total compensation and paid time not worked are nearly

identical to the sum of individual effects given in Table 2. Point

estimates of these effects for wages, medical and pension expenditures

demonstrate heightened emphasis on current consumption in compensation

packages. Together, nonpartisan ballots and at-large elections increase

wages by $43 per hour worked. Nearly half of that increase is achieved

through reductions of $.05 in medical and of $.13 in pension expendi-

tures.




      The coefficients in Table 2 demonstrate that city councillors treat




 18
      These equations are available from the author.


                                    -   26    -
municipal employees with exaggerated solicitousness under Municipal

legislative reforms. City councillors can gain and retain their offices

with the support of relatively small constituencies. Their offices do

not require them to take individual responsibility for council activity.

They are, therefore, eager to acquire the political support of city

employees when they cannot rely upon the support of their neighbors or

their fellow partisans. Equations which include an interaction term

demonstrate that this eagerness is compounded when neither constituency

is available.




     The economic effects of municipal executive and legislative institu-

tions demonstrate that these institutions exercise influence over

economic activity, independently of the preferences associated with the

populations they serve. The influence of institutional age on employment

levels emphasizes the importance of institutional characteristics. 19

Levels of municipal employment and manhours of municipal service per

capita increase with increased duration of council-manager governments.




19
     The age of municipal government institutions and the economic 'age'
     of a city are distinct concepts. Institutional age is measured as
     the difference between the year of observation and the year in which
     the municipality adopted the mayor-council, council-manager, commis-
     sion or town meeting form through which it is currently governed.
     Economic 'age' cannot be defined with similar precision. Most of the
     important aspects of this concept are captured by variables for one—
     unit structures as a percentage of all dwelling units in 1970,
     increases and decreases in population in both the decade 1960-70 and
     the decade 1970-80, and dummy variables for geographic region in the
     regression equations from which reported coefficients are drawn.
     Simple correlations between the duration of government and all
     thirteen 'age' variables are smaller than .17 in absolute value.


                                  -   27   -
                                                                         ==

                                    Table     3.

                           OLS Coefficients for Age of
                           c9!
                                                      Age of
                                                   Q2!!!!!1 E2!
   Manhours Per 10,000                                83.4
     Capita                                           (4.01)
   Employees Per 10,000                                  .0435
     Capita                                           (3.88)

   Notes: T-statistics in parentheses.




   Council-manager and mayor-council governments 'age' differently. The

relationship between duration and form of government, as represented by

two variables interacting duration with presence and absence of city

managers, demonstrates that council-manager governments increase employ-
                                                                    20
merit levels with duration, but mayor-council governments do not.




   The coefficients presented in Table 3 demonstrate that council-

manager governments provide an additional 83 manhours of municipal

service per 10,000 capita with each additional year of government dura-
        21
tion.        This increase is entirely attributable to increases of .04 in

employment per 10,000 capita. These increases represent only .16" of




 20
      The principle distinction between mayor-council and council-manager
      forms of municipal government is given by the absence or presence of
      the city manager's office.
 21
      Equations in which duration is interacted with type of government
      are available from the author. In addition to the coefficients
      reported in Table 3, these equations reveal that mayor-council
      governments provide significantly fewer medical expenditures with
      age.


                                     -   28   -
 average manhour and employment levels. However, the mean duration of

 council-manager governments in this sample is 31.7 years. These effects

 imply that employment in new council-manager governments should be 5.1k

less than in municipalities of average duration. In contrast, employment

levels in cities with nayor-council governments do not change with

duration of government. Coefficients for their duration are small,

insignificant and significantly different from those for council-manager

governments in both equations.




   The comparison between employment effects in council—manager and

mayor-council governments suggests that they are attributable to dif-

ferences in technology rather than to differences in employee motiva-

tion. City managers should be more aware of improvements in municipal

production techniques, and more committed to their implementation, than

would be political officials. Council-manager cities are likely to

acquire contemporary technology when they first establish the city

manager. Cities which have adopted that form more recently would acquire

more capital-intensive technology.




   The empirical results presented in this section demonstrate that.

variations in institutions of municipal government yield predictable

variations in municipal labor market outcomes. The important variations

are in specific characteristics of legislative and executive offices.

Gross distinctions, such as that between reform and traditional




                                 -   29   -
                                                 22
structures, conceal more than they reveal.            In particular, specific

characteristics must be examined in order to demonstrate the two most

important principles of municipal political behavior: Officials who

share responsibility for the performance of their duties --        city   coun-

cillors, or city managers and mayors chosen through direct election in

cities where both are present -- are more likely to promote the inter-

ests of supportive constituencies, such as municipal employees, than of

the entire community. When the range of constituencies open to municipal

politicians is restricted - -   through   nonpartisanship and at-large elec-

tions --   they   pursue available constituencies, such as municipal

employees, with increased vigor.




                                III Cunclusiafi




The analysis presented in this paper demonstrates that institutions of

municipal government exercise important, systematic influence over

municipal economic behavior. City managers alter municipal production

techniques, employment and compensation practices in the service of

greater efficiency. Mayors chosen through direct elections serve many of



22
     Institutional variation is shown to be important in equations which
     replace all measures of government structure by a single dummy
     variable representing the presence or absence of a reform govern-
     ment, but estimated effects confound very different effects at-
     tributable to different municipal offices. Reform governments in-
     crease employment per capita by 3.9 of average levels, expenditures
     on total compensation by 2.3?, on wages by       on paid time not
     worked by 4.8, and on miscellaneous benefits by 5.5? at 5' sig-
     nificance levels. They increase manhours per capita by 3.6', at lO
     significance.


                                    -   30   -
the same purposes, but do so with more respect for the comfort of

municipal employees. Nonpartisan and at-large city councils provide

favorable employment conditions to municipal employees in order to

secure their political support.




   These results confirm the economists' intuition that city managers

are an important characteristic of American city government, but

demonstrate that other characteristics are equally powerful. They con-

firm the political scientists' intuition that city managers promote

reform ob)ectives, but demonstrate that legislative reforms subvert the

reform program. Most importantly, they confirm the basic premise of

earlier work; the economic behavior of municipal governments depends

upon the institutions of municipal government.




   These results demonstrate that political concerns cannot be purged

from the conduct of municipal government through institutional reform.

They also demonstrate that efficiency is a more compelling virtue in

institutions which vest a single official with all responsibility.

Officials are more sensitive to political considerations when respon-

sibility is shared within their office, or with other offices. The

inefficiencies which result may be one price of representativeness in

local government.




                                  - 31 -
                                  IV. Apeodjz



                         !22! 2

The   municipal   labor market measures analyzed here are drawn from three

identical surveys of municipal employment and compensation, conducted in

1975, 1977 end 1979 (Friend and Pike, Friend and Bencivenga, Friend and

Lufkin). These surveys report numbers of full-time employees, standard

work schedules, paid time not worked, and fifteen categories of compen-

sation expenditures for employees in police, fire, sanitation, and all

other noneducetional departments. Eight hundred and thirty nine cities

provide complete records for at least one function in one year.




      The observations in this study consist of labor market outcomes in

one function, in one year These observations are pooled across the

three survey years, and across the four functions. The sample which

results contains 5472 function-years.




      Several sources provide the variables which appear in this analysis.

                  X92}5 2Z (ICMA) reports government structure for
each of the cities in this sample. Censuses of Population and Housing,

1970 and 1980, publish characteristics of city residents and city hous-

ing stock. Data from these sources are specific to individual cities,

but do not vary over functions or years. Annual Surveys of Government

record the characteristics of municipal labor relations. Three of these



                                     -   32   -
measures are specific to each city in each year. Five are observed in

each function, in each of the three years.




                                   Table 4.

                       Means and Standard Deviations of
                            2i P2
                                                            Standard
   Labor Market Measure                           Mean      Deviation
   Manhours Per 10,000 Capita                   51966.      49626.
   Employees Per 10,000 Capita                     27.5       27.3
   Annual Work Hours Per Employee                1930.       326.
   Total Compensation Per Hour Worked              $7.75       3.18
   Pay for Time Worked Per Hour Worked             $5.56       2.03
   Pay for Not Time Worked Per Hour Worked          $.966        .744
   Medical Benefits Per Hour Worked                 $.357        .362
   Pension Benefits Per Hour Worked                 $.761        .791
   Miscellaneous Benefits Per Hour Worked           $.106        .145




   The complete sample yields three dependent measures of municipal

employment levels, six dependent measures of municipal compensation

levels and 47 independent variables. The employment measures are man-

hours and employees per capita, and annual work hours per employee. By

definition, the first variable is the product of the second and the

third. The compensation measures are total compensation, wage payments,

payments for time not worked, expenditures on medical benefits, expendi-

tures on pension benefits, and expenditures on miscellaneous benefits

per hour worked. By definition, the five component measures sum to the

total. Table 4 presents mean values and standard deviations for all nine

dependent variables.




                                   -   33   -
  Compensation i measured      municipi expenditures rather than

employee income. This distinction is important with regard to nonwage

compensation components. In particular, the relationship between pension

expenditures and pension liabilities is not reported.




                                 -   34   -
                                                    arours of Eiovmerit           E1oyees Per            r,nu WorM Hours
                                                     Per 10,000 Cacita            :0,000 Caoita            Per Eiiüoyee


 R—Square                                                .5765                      .5948                     .3380
 Degrees of Freedom                                       5425                       5425                      5425
 Mean Square Error                                  1051766192                      305.3                     71090




 Intercept
 1970 Population, in 1,000
                                                    2!f1 ti12
                                                       129467.6
                                                       9.403035
                                                                      1—



                                                                    10.5088
                                                                     2.9030
                                                                                   ft tt flict ic
                                                                                 70.738131
                                                                               0.005545887
                                                                                              10.6575
                                                                                               3.1781
                                                                                                           1838. 721
                                                                                                          —0.015770
                                                                                                                       18.0746
                                                                                                                       —0.5922
 1960—70 % Increase, population                       —4.899142     —1.5029    —0.00276868    —1.5764      0.023413     0.8136
 1960—70% Decrease, population                      —233.967450     —1.6053      —0.124890    —1.5906      0.223124     0.1862
 1970—80% Increase, population                        22.796900      1.2319       0.016378     1.6427     —0.151885    —0.9983
 1970—80% Decrease, population                        77.534851      0.6068       0.046473     0.6751     —0.168217    —0.1601
 1969 % Families below poverty level                 865.284137      4.5442       0.431702     4.2082      1.999555     1.2773
1969 Median family income,         in   $1,000          1645.88      2.6458       0.902681     2.6934     —3.120373    —0.6101
 1970 Median value, own—oco, in $1,000               —68.961043     —0.3567      —0.051674    —0.4961      0.793408     0.4991
1970 % Units in one—unit      structures            -122.796521     —2.2808      -0.062754    —2.1635     —0.325063    —0.7344
1970 % Black population                              205.904772      3.6839       0.124676     4.1403     —8.706249    —1.5369
1970 % Spanish population                           —212.608797     —3.0887      —0.106803    —2.8800     —0.036455    —0.0544
1970 % Population (18 years of age                    44.656356      0.3451      —0.021032    —0.3017      2.847402     2.6762
1970 % Population )E5 years of age                   783.026071      3.9727       0.412221     3.8819      2. 124986    1.3113
1970 Median year of school                            59.717678      0.0612       0.153854     0.2925     —9.536639    —1.1879
1970 Male operative med      earnings $1,000           —3199.02     —4.5571      —1.534331    —4.0570     —9.144400    -1.5845
1970 Nonworker/worker      ratio                       —10780.8     —3.5877      —5.380695    —3.3236    —28.324422    —1. 1465
1970 %   Persons }23 with )3 years        h.   s.    —77. 157269    —0. 7306     —0. 049170   —0. 8642     1.059590     1.2204
1980 Median age                                       20.034056      0.1116      —0.012445    —0.1287     —0.136138    —0.0923
1970 % in White collar     occupations               -53.771619     —0.5910      —0.022608    —0.4612     —0.465785    -0.6227
1970 % Foreign stock                                —131.943942     —1.6926      —0.053234    —1.2676     —1.316737    —2.0546
Middle atlantic division                               —7244.19     —2.5618      —4.764646    —3.1275     45.576959     1.9605
East north    central division                         —2734.82     —1.0453      —3.821185    —2.7110    155.771374     7.2421
West north central division                            —2387.39     —0.8688      —3.382647    —2.2849    132.248834     5.8539
South atlantic division                                9194.385      3.0074       2.671693     1.6220    131.112365     5.2163
East south central division                          239.877642      0.0670      —1.739526    —0.9017     87.972314     2.9884
West south central    division                         2326.332      0.7383      -0.466201    —0.2748     89.851596     3.4713
Mountain division                                      7947. 307     2.3768       2.654928     1. 4738   108. 643500    3.9520
Pacific coast division                                 —2898.31     —1.0459      —3.996560    —2.6769    i5i.4748i6     6.6486
Presence of city manager                               —4094.96     —2. 7731     —2.406421    —3.0248     25.056172     2.0639
Partisanship on election ballot                        2834.463      2. 1107      1.525516     2.1086      3.225238     0.2921
% of Councilmen elected at—large                       2607.366      2.1260       1.692811     2.5619    —13.434868    —1.3324
Duration of government fore                           57.575487      3.4461       0.030826     3.4246      0.216194     1.5739
Mayor chosen through direct elections                  —2965.22     —2.6570      —1.470797    —2.4462     —7.604803    -0.8289
Percent organized                                     11.248602      0.6505    0.004192991     0.4501     —0.098763    —0.6947
Presence of bargaining units                           —3604.51     —2.0081     —1.322838     —1.3679    —40.096439    —2.7171
Number of bargaining units                             4041.199      9.23%       2.327851      9.8788      3.340876     0.9291
Labor relations policy, no     berg. units             —3815.81    —2.4319      —1.738757     —2.0569    —26.317034    —2.0401
Presence of supervisors in       barg.    units      —39.370508    —0.0286      —0.0818%      —0.1105      7.038977     0.6224
Number of    contracts in effect                    206. 153695     0.7554       0.059216      0.4708    —0.785192     —0.3500
Number of memoranda of understanding                 39.060135       0. 1428     0.038436      0.2607    —3.256635  -1. 4477
% Employees covered by contracts                     22.854054      0.7897       0.013732      0.8807      0.073128 0.3073
Police department                                        —70101 —54.8441       —38.509457 —55.9218        17.830637  1.5368
Fire department                                        -71046.5    -51.6519    —42.442561 —57.2734       419.995047 37. 1400
Sanitation department                                  -87949.6 —55.9273       —47.958034 —56.6057         7.687310  0.5346
Observation from 1975                                  —4877.76    —4. 3790     —2.918204     —4. 8627    28.548090 3. 1173
Observation from    1977                               -3444.65    —3.2398      —1.870561     —3.2655      1.833969  0.2098
                                           Total Compersat ion        Pay For Time Worked  Pay For Time Not
                                             Per Hour Workec            Per Hour Worked Worked Per Hour Worked

                                                .5745                     .5741                        .2903
Decrees of reecom                                5425                      5425                         5425
ear Square Error                                 4.33                      1.77                          .396


                                                           1—                          T—
1nde2ent arabie                            Coefficient   statistic Coefficient      statistic    Coefficient    statistic
Intercept                                     3.746761    4.7375        2.922912     5.7808     0.533289          2.2306
1970 Population,    in   1,000            0.0006438438    3.0964     0.000692666     5.2106 0.0001455748          2.3160
1960—70 % Increase, population            0.0001022618    0.4887    -0. 000033939   —0. 2537     3. 49465e—08     0.0006
1960—70% Decrease, population                 0.011151    1.1919        0.010062      1.6822     0.004512121     1.5954
1970—80 X increase, population             —0.00136039   —1.1451     —0.00042373    —0.5579     —.0000138285    —0.0385
1970—80 % Decrease, population               —0.036704   —4.4749       —0.020463 —3. 9023        —0.00607295    —2.4492
1969 % amiiies below poverty level           —0.029859   —2.4427       -0.016693    —2.1360      -0.00630241    —1.7056
1969 Macian family income, in 41,000          0.028520    0.7142        0.010922     0.4278         0.018114      1.5005
1970 Median value,   own—occ, in 41.000       0.043887    3.5358        0.023478     2.9587     —0.000721502    —0.1923
1970 % Units in one—unit structures        0.001384717    0.4007      —0.0023046    -1.0430     —0.000455533    —0.4360
1970% Black population                        0.015761    4.3927     0.009559312     4.1673     0.003632918       3.3494
1970 % Spanisi population                     0.010428    2.3599     0.003922818     1.3886      0.002677002      2.0041
1970 % Population (18 years of ace           —0.022600   —2.7203     —0.00401032  -0.7551          —0.013883    —5.5281
1970 % Population >65 years of ace         0.004417709    0.3491     0.003021673   0.3735          —0.010646    —2.7833
1970 Median year of school                  0.00786795    0. 1255       —0.012128  0.3026           0.017921     0.9458
970 Male onerative med earnincs 41,000       0.337553     7.4906        0.233749     8.1134         0.050469      3. 7048
1970 Nonworker/worker ratio                  —0.485048   —2.5145       —0.335288    —2.7187         0.020512     0.3517
1970% Persons >23 witn >3 years h.s.      0.0009056295    0.1336     0.004148251     0.9571      -0.00289824    -1.4142
1980 Median ace                            -0.00955971   —0.8298     -0.00533102    —0.7238     —0.000846415    —0.2431
1970 % in White collar occupations           —0.010094   —1.7282     -0.00365933    —0.9800     —0.000727036    —0.4118
1970 % Foreipn stock                         0.032878     6.5700        0.019908     6.2227     0.005108157      3.3767
Middle atlantic division                     0.835191     4.6009        0.332578     2.8657      0.00500943      0.0913
East north central division                   1.334124    7.9436        0.645810     6.0146         0.049859     0.9820
West north central division                  0. 813837    4. 6136       0. 287877    2. 5526        0.037723     0. 7074
South atlantic division                      0.480480     2.4482        0. 198921    1.5854         0.029607     0.4990
East south central division                  0.203307     0. 8845      —0.140806    —0.9582         0.059577     0. 8574
West south central division                  0.371572     1.8385        0.028682     0.2220         0.071814     1.1754
Mountain division                             1.530761    7. 1313       0.652340     4.7536         0.312368     4.8139
Pacific coast ivision                        2.137685    12.0165        1.241122    10.9126        0, 170106     3. 1631
Presence of city manacer                     0.416918     4.3981        0.244055     4.0270     0.001960295      0.0684
Partisanship on election     ballot          0.090269     1.0471        0.162845     2.9547        0.029646      1. 1376
% of Councilmen elected at—large             0.227366     2. 8879       0.166378     3.3054        0. 067808     2. 8491
Duration of government form               -0.00105884    —0.9872    0.0002179059     0.3178 —0.000328067 —1.0118
Mayor chosen tnrough direct elections        0. 279935    3.9074       0.173973      3. 7984        0. 049165    2. 2702
Percent oraani:ed                         0.004319032     3.8909    0.002495754      3.5168 0.0008676073         2.5856
Presence of bargainin units                  0.564443     4.8985        0.223420     3.0328     0.185101         5.3140
Number of baraining units                 0. 002194815    0. 0782       0.018565     1.0342     —0.00438992     —0.5172
Labor relations policy, no barfl. units      0.288882     2.8580        0.119482     1.8554        0.110501      3.6291
0resence of suoervisors in bar. units     —0.00302504    —0.0343    0.0081484570.1443           —0.00554533     —0.2077
Number of contracts in effect                0.065830     3.7577       0.0375433.3521           —0.00163778     —0.3093
umber of memoranda of understandino          0.019262     1.0966 0. 001422231  0.1267           0.004480332      0. 8438
N Employees covered by contracts          —0.00156747    —0.8437 0.0004301423  0.3621           .00004975263     0.0886
Police department                            2. 159786   25. 3218    1.393088 26.5562              0.208478      8.4049
 ire department                              0.584020     6.6141    —0.301842 —5.3469              0.627042     23.4912
Sanitation department                       —0.110352    —1.0931       —0.225140    —3.4884        0.027973      0.9166
Observation from 1975                       —2.936660 —41.0681         —1.667067 —36.4658         —0.367767 —17.0134
Observation from 1977                       -1.734344 —25.4104         —0.845089 —19.3669         —0.217226 —10.5282
                                                   Medical Benefits           Pension Benefits         Miscellaneous Benefits
                                                   Per Hour Worked             Per Hour Worked           Per Hour Workeu

R-Sq uare                                             •   2792                      2817                       .2391
Degrees of Freedou                                        5425                      5425                        5425
Meat Square    Error                                  • 0950                         453                       .0161

                                                                   1•—                        1—                         1—


Intercept                                           0.471950      4.0299       —0.302611    —1.1831        0.121211     2.5138
1970 Population, in 1,000                       —0.000141778     —4.6046    —.0000013924    -0.0207    —.0000512261    —4.0408
1960—70 % Increase, population                  0.0001235217      3.9860 .00001509161        0.2230    -.0000024474    —0.1918
      % Decrease, population
1960—70                                          -0.00116206     —0.8388     —0.00244552    —0.8082    0.0001846669     0.3237
1970—80 % Increase, population                  .00008685926      0.4937     —0.00113884    —2.9640    0.0001291427     1.7830
1970—80 % Decrease, population                   —0. 00436492    -3.5937     —0.00600904    —2.2652    0.0002056201     0.4112
1969 % Families below poverty level              -0.00489373     —2.7036    —0.000635615    -0. 1608    —0.00133429    —1.7904
1969    Median family   income,   in   $1,000    -0.00453921     -0.7676     0.005242481     0.4059     —0.00121892    —0.5006
1970 Median value, own—occ,        in $1,000     0.005064067      2.7552     0.016435        4.0940 -0.000368535       —0.4870
1970 S    Units in   one—unit structures         0.002414862      4.7185 0.0009964427        0.8914 0.0007335412        3.4812
1970 % Black population                         0.0006919473      1.3023  0.001785081        1.5383 .00009189857        0.4201
1970 5 Spanish    population                    • 00002270879     0.0347   0.00413678        2.8946 -0.000331499       —1.2305
1970 5 Population (18 years of age               -0.00335443 —2. 7267        0.001554036     0.5784     —0.00290582    —5.7370
1970 5 Population >65 years of age               -0.00042326 —0.2259            0.015388     3. 7602    -0.00292264    —3.7886
1970 Median year of school                          -0.019847 —2.1381           0.032210     1.5888       —0.010288    —2.6920
1970 Male operative med earninns $1,000             0.013002      1.9484        0.036002     2.4702     0.004331256     1.5765
1970 Nonworker/worker ratio                         0.038842      1.35%        —0.245176    —3.9298        0.036062     3.0663
1970 5 Persons >23 with >3 years         h.s.    0.002002597      1.9948     —0.00267233    —1.2188    0. @003253542    0.7871
1980 Median age                                  —0.00088971     —0.5215     -0.00280427    —0.7527    0.0003116951     0.4438
1970    5 in White collar occupations            —0.00334145     —3. 8634    —0.00275849    —1.4603    0.0003926183     1. 1026
1970 5 Foreign stock                            0. 002338173      3.1553     0. 004538892    2.8044    0.0003839931     3.2252
Middle atlantic division                            0.077823      2.8951        0.422490     7. 1962    —0.00270925    —0.2448
East north central division                         0. 081023     3. 2578       0.550726    10.1388     0.006704584     0.6548
West north central division                         0.051824      1.9839        0.440494     7.7209     —0.00408024    —0.3794
South atlantic division                           -0.051501      —1.7721        0.306372     4.8266     —0.00291948    —0.2440
East south central civision                      -0.0058672      -0.1724        0.299835    4. 0332     -0.00943216 -0.6730
West south central division                        —0.025345     —0.8468        0.308731     4.7231       —0.012309    —0.9989
Mountain   division                                0.082755       2.6035        0.473749    6.8241      0.009549145     0.7297
Pacific    coast division                          0.154396       5.8509        0.560647    9.7444         0.011414     i.0524
Presence of city manager                           0.035237       2. 5102       0.105562    3.4431         0. @30105    5. 2089
Partisansnip on election     ballot              0.00205483       0.1610       -0.093827 —3.3653      —0.010449        —1.9881
S of Councilmen elected at—large                  —0.020411      —1.7507     0.006366078  0.2500 0.007225348            1.5052
Duration of government form                     —0.000563378     -3.5472    -0.000359431 -1.0362 -.0000258746          —0.3957
Mayor chosen through     direct elections         —0.014573      —1.3737         0.064810 2.7971   0.006560112          1.5019
Percent organized                               0.0003988276      2.4263    0.0005942745  1.6553 -.0000374312          -0. 553i
Presence of oargaining units                       0. 011489     0. 6733        0. 130125   3.4917         0.014308     2.0366
Number of bargaining uniss                      0.001451668       0.3491       —0.012629    —1.3908     —0.00080271    —0.4689
Labor relations policy, no barg. units             0.015444       1.0354         0.044604    1.3692     —0.00114834    —0.1870
Presence of supervisors in arg. units             -0.010573 -0.8086         -0.000762332    -0.0267   0.00570721        1.0601
Number of contracts in effect                   0.003151126       1.2147         0.026019    4.5922 0.0007544783        0.7064
Nurøuer of   memoranda o understanding             0.012951       4.9795     —0.00144967    —0.2552     0.001857543     1.7346
S Employees  covered by contracts               —0.000169955     —0.6177     —0.00162871    —2.7105    —0.000248701    —2.1956
Police deDartmert                                  0.073722       6.2320        0.333175    12. 5548       0.149323    29.8489
Fire department                                    0.012371       0, 9461       0.177562    6.2176         0.068886    12.7958
Sanitation ceartmen                                0.069984       4.6815     -0.00709134    —0.2172        0.033922     3.8867
Observat ion from 1975                            —0. 297045 —28.0525          —0.560596 —24.2399         —0.044186 —10. 1353
Observation from 1977                             —0.220206 —21.7874           —0.414261 —18.7664         —0.037562    —9.0265
                                 References



    Baker, David G. and David C. Colby, "The Politics of Municipal
Employment Policy: A Comparative Study of U. S. Cities", American Jour-
rial of Economics and Sociology, Vol. 40, No. 3, July, 1981, pgs. 249-
263.

   Beard, Charles   A., "Political Parties in City Government: A Recon-
sideration of Old   Viewpoints", National Nunici2al Review, Vol. 6, No. 2,
March, 1917, pgs.   201-206. Reprinted in Urban Government, Edward C.
Banfield, editor,   The Free Press, New York, 1969.

   Bryant, Stephen, "The Dimensions of Reformism in Urban Policy
Analysis", Urban Affairs Quarterly, Vol. 12, No. 1, September, 1976,
pgs. 117-124.

   Bucoveteky, Sam, "Inequality in the Local Public Sector", Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 90, No. 1, February, 1982, pgs. 128-145.

   Bureau of the Census, Dept. of Commerce, Annual Survey of Govern-
!!!' 2Z 2Z and1978,         Washington, D. C.

   Bureau of the Census, Dept. of Commerce, ce      of   Population and
ll2g, 12Z2 and      1980, Washington, D. C.

   Clark, Terry N., "Urban Typologies and Political Outputs: Causal
Models Using Discrete Variables and Orthogonal Factors, or Precise
Distortion Versus Model Muddling", Social Science Information, Vol. 9,
No. 6, December, 1970, pgs. 7-33.

   Cole, Richard L., "The Urban Policy Process: A Note on Structural and
Regional Influences", Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 52, No. 3, Decem-
ber, 1971, pgs. 646-655.

   Edwards, Linda N. and Franklin R. Edwards. "Public Unions, Local
Government Structure and the Compensation of Municipal Sanitation
Workers", Economic Inguiry, Vol. XX, July 1982, pgs. 405-425.

   Ehrenberg, Ronald G., "Municipal Government Structure, Unionization,
and the Wages of Fire Fighters", Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
October, 1973, pga. 36-48.


Wage Determination", Journal 2
1975, pga. 222-245.
                                            c22!
   Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Gerald Goldstein, "A Model of Public Sector
                                                Vol. 2, No. 3, July,


   Friend, Edward H. and Albert Pike III, Third National Survey 2
                    19 !U111!!!! ?!913!1        f                   Labor-
Management Relations Service of the United States Conference of Mayors,
Washington, D.C., 1977.


                                   -   38   -
g!2gY!   fl!
   Friend, Edward H. and David F. Bencivenga, Fourth National Survey of
                      EYJd-I!!!   !2!!1   of U.S. Nunicialities, Labor
Management Relations Service of the United States Conference of Mayors,
Washington, D.C., 1979.


                      Efl-Ii!
Management Relations Service of
                                  E!ge1 2f      .
   Friend, Edward H. and Lorraine A. Lufkin, Fifth National

                                  the United States
                                                                       gf
                                                                      Labor-
                                                      Conference of Mayors,
Washington, D.C., 1982.

   Goldstein, Gerald S. and Leon N. Noses, "A Survey of Urban
Economics", Journal of Economic Literature, Vol, 11, No. 2, June, 1973,
pga. 471-516.

   Hirschman, Albert, Exit, Voice and Loyalty, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1970.

   Ichniowaki, Casey, "Economic Effects of the Firefighter's Union",
Induatrial end Labor Relationa Review, January, 1980, pga. 198-211.

   International City Management Association, Munici2al Yearbook 19Z8,
Washington, D.C. 1979.

   Lineberry, Robert L. and   Edmund P. Fowler, "Reformism arid Public
Policies in American Cities   , American Political Science Review, Vol
41, No. 3, September, 1967,   pgs. 701-716. Reprinted in urban Government,
Edward C. Banfield, editor,   The Free Press, New York, 1969.

   Lyons, William, "Reform and Response in American Cities: Structure
and Policy Reconsidered", Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 59, No. 1,
June, 1978, pgs. 118-132.

   Morgan. David R. and John P. Pelissero, "Urban Policy: Does Political
Structure Matter?", The American Political Science Review, Vol. 74, No.
4, December, 1980, pgs. 999-1005.

   Sanders, Heywood T., "The Government of American Cities: Continuity
and Change in Structure", Th Munici2al Yearbook 1982, International
City Management Association, Washington, D. C.., 1983.

   Sayles, Leonard R.., "Industrial Relations: Human Relations", Interna-
t2!!! yi22!i! t               2ci Sciencea,  Vol. 7, The Macmillan Com-
pany and the Free Press, 1968, pgs.240-247.

   Tucker, Sharon, "The Organizational Dynamics of Service Provision in
a Machine and a Reform County Agency", Human Relationa, Vol. 35, No. 11,
November, 1982, pgs. 1015-1042.




                                   -   39   -
