                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     PRODUCTION CHAINS

                                          David K. Levine

                                        Working Paper 16571
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16571


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




I would like to thank Michele Boldrin, Carlos Garriga, Christopher Neely, Adrian Peralta-Alva, Yongseok
Shin, the Washington University Economic Theory Reading Group, and most especially the Research
Seminar at the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank for helpful comments. NSF grant SES-0851315 provided
financial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by David K. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Production Chains
David K. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 16571
December 2010
JEL No. A1,A10,D00,E00,E01

                                             ABSTRACT

More advanced technologies demand higher degrees of specialization – and longer chains of production
connecting raw inputs to final outputs. Longer production chains are subject to a “weakest link” effect:
they are more fragile and more prone to failure. Optimal chain length is determined by the trade-off
between the gains to specialization and the higher failure rate associated with longer chain length.
There is a kind of reverse “Keynesian multiplier” that magnifies the effect of real shocks. Consequently,
more advanced economies should have higher unemployment rates and be more prone to crisis. The
implications of the theory both for measurement and government policy are examined.


David K. Levine
Washington University
Department of Economics
Campus Box 1208
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
david@dklevine.com
                                              1



1. Introduction
       Since Adam Smith there has been little doubt that the wealth of nations is driven
by the degree of specialization. The amount of specialization in a modern economy is
remarkable – Seabright’s [2004] description of the number of ingredients and countries
involved in the production of an item so humble as a shirt is a beautiful illustration of this
point. It is illustrated as well by the number of parts in a modern good: according to
Boeing, for example, there are over 6,000,000 parts in a 747.
       Specialization in turn implies many stages of production, an aspect of the
production function not present in most economic models. The goal of this paper is to
give a simple account of how the number of stages of production are determined – the
determinants of the degree of specialization – and the implications for growth and
development.
       The key motivating idea is that long “chains” of production are vulnerable to
failure of a single link. Hence while long chains permit a high degree of specialization
and so a large quantity of output, they are also more prone to failure. Consequently,
production chains form a natural basis for an economy in which there are low risk low
reward projects and high risk high reward projects, a common notion in the study of
financial market imperfections.
       This idea that failure of a single link may cause a “cascade” of failures is not a
new one. It is implicit in the idea of a Keynesian multiplier – employing or unemploying
a single person reverberates through the economy much as the unemployment of a single
person in a production chain unravels the entire chain. Similarly, Leijonhufvud’s [1976]
notion of the vulnerability of long chains of credit to a single bankruptcy has a flavor
similar to the disruption of a long chain of production by the failure of a single producer.
Moreover the spirit of the model here is similar to that of Becker and Murphy [1992] who
also argue that the degree of specialization is limited to a large extent by the problem that
long chains of production are more inclined to failure.
       The notion of stages of production is not new either. In industrial organization
short production chains have been studied in the context of vertical versus horizontal
integration, such as, for example, in Grossman and Hart [1986], but the issue of chain
fragility is not addressed. The macroeconomics literature has studied economies made up
                                              2


of a single broad production chain. Such models have been used in international trade,
for example by Dixit and Grossman [1982] and to study how the pricing consequences of
monetary policy feed down the supply chain, for example by Huang and Liu [2001].
        More relevant is the multi-sectoral work of Horvath [1998, 2000] who shows how
independent shocks across sectors can be magnified by linkages across sectors. However,
unlike the model here where there are many narrow parallel chains, the issue of fragility
does not arise with a single broad chain. Horvath’s work has been recently generalized by
Acemoglu, Ozdaglar and Tahbaz-Salehi [2010] who examine many interacting sectors,
addressing the question of when shocks spread across many sectors tend to average out as
opposed to creating aggregate fluctuations.
        The issue of fragility is the key idea in Kremer’s [1993] o-ring theory of
development, but he focuses on assortive matching of workers in the presence of
complementaries.
        The role of complementarities in intermediate goods production is addressed more
directly by Jones [2010] whose work is the closest to the work here. Jones studies a broad
intermediate goods sector producing many different kinds of inputs all used in
intermediate goods production with a one-period lag. The distribution of productivity
across sectors and the level of complementarities determine the multiplier effect of
resource misallocation across sectors. It acts much like the parameter determining the
correlation of shocks across chains does in this model. In a sense the model here is Jones’
extreme case of Leontief production, but while Jones, like Horvath, Acemoglu, Ozdaglar
and Tahbaz-Salehi, and Kremer, considers broad but shallow chains, like them he does
not address the depth of chains or the determination of the degree of specialization. By
way of contrast, Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg [2008] appear to have long chains of
fixed length in their study of off-shoring. Their production technology is difficult to infer
from their paper, and their focus in any case is on the location of chains links, not the
fragility of chains.
        In a sense the central question addressed by this paper is “Are capitalist
economies prone to crises?” There is a long history of conjecture that this might be the
case, running from Marx to Keynes. What the alternative to a “capitalist economy” is and
whether this is an empirical fact have not to my knowledge been resolved. However, the
notion of production chains leads to a more specific and testable conjecture – capitalist
                                              3


economies by virtue of being efficient employ longer and more specialized production
chains than more poorly organized economies. This raises output, welfare and utility, but
it also leads to more “crises” than shorter less efficient production chains in the sense that
output is more volatile. One might summarize by saying: capitalist economies are more
subject to crises than less efficient economies – and this is a good thing.
          The model has several related implications. First, suppose the measure of the size
of a real shock is the number of links that fail. The consequence of such a shock depends
heavily on how the failures are distributed. If they are concentrated in particular chains,
the resulting unemployment and output loss is small. If they are spread across many
chains, the resulting unemployment and output loss is large. So the model is consistent
with the idea that a small real shock may have either large or small consequences – the
magnitude of a shock is not properly measured by the number of links that fail, but rather
by the number of chains that fail.
          We are also interested in the role of financial markets. We model a simple
financial market imperfection where insurance is limited by repayment constraints as in
Kehoe and Levine [1993]. Better insurance markets mean that the second best will have
longer chains, and higher output and welfare. We examine also the role of government
policy.

2. The Technology
          There is an infinite sequence of different intermediate goods j = 1,2, … and one
final good 0 . There is a continuum of individuals. Each individual is endowed with one
unit of labor. Anyone can use x units of labor to produce βx units of any type of
intermediate good or the final good.
          Anybody can choose to be a specialist of any type. A specialist of type j
produces λj x units of j − 1 from x units of j where λj ≥ 1 and j ≥ 1 . Utility is only
for consumption c of the final good, and is represented by a strictly increasing, strictly
concave function and smooth function u(c) .
          A k -production chain for k ≥ 1 consists of one generalist and specialists
j = 1, …k − 1 . The generalist produces intermediate good k − 1 . The labor of the chain
must be used exclusively within the chain, and the output of the chain is equally divided
                                                 4


among chain members. Consequently, the per capita output of the chain is
             −1
f (k ) = Πkj =1λj β if k > 1 , and f (1) = β .

       After a chain is formed and specialties chosen, there is a probability 0 ≤ p ≤ 1
that each individual “fails.” Any chain with one or more failed individuals is unable to
produce any output. We imagine that the producer may be sick, be involved in an
accident, have a specialized machine that breaks, go bankrupt, or otherwise be
unavailable. The critical feature of the model is that if a chain has one failure then the
entire chain cannot produce.
       Critical to the analysis is the correlation of failures across chains. It may be that
failures are independent across individuals. It may also be that the probability of failure is
higher if another individual in the same chain fails: that is, shocks may be more likely to
occur to individuals working in the same chain. Moreover, it may be possible to swap
individuals between chains. If specialist j in one chain fails, it is natural to try to obtain a
j specialist from another chain.
       It is tempting here to think in terms of large mass markets forgetting social
feasibility constraints. That is, if I am a car manufacturer and my tire supplier fails, I just
go to another supplier to get tires. But in general equilibrium, the other supplier was
supplying tires to someone – and if I get those tires, some other automobile manufacturer
does not. However: if another automobile making chain has a piston maker who has
failed, then the tire manufacturer in that chain is unemployed and happy to provide me
with tires. Hence when there are failures, some reduction in output must be accepted, but
it is best to try to concentrate the failures all in the same chain. A simple example with
three chains of length three and three failures makes the point.
       Suppose there are three chains producing cars: Jaguars, BMWs, and Toyotas.
Each chain has three links: tires, pistons, and unspecialized. Suppose there are three
failures. Consider three different patterns of failure: labeled good, intermediate and bad.
                                               5


Type of shock                         Jaguar             BMW                 Toyota
good               Tires              x
                   Pistons            x
                   Unspecialized      x


intermediate       Tires              x
                   Pistons                               x
                   Unspecialized                                             x


bad                Tires              x                  x                   x
                   Pistons
                   Unspecialized


In the good case only the Jaguar chain fails. This is the best outcome – with three
failures, at most two chains can produce output. In the bad case all the tire producers fail:
in this case it is impossible to produce any cars. Finally, in the intermediate case one link
of each type fails. If it is possible to reorganize the chains to move all the failures to one
chain, then two chains can produce output. Whether this is possible depends on market
organization, the availability of information, the quality of business connections, and the
degree of substitutability between specialists. With a high degree of substitutability and
good market organization, two chains may be able to produce. With poor substitutability
or poor market organization, none of the chains will be able to produce.
       We can think of the situation in terms of the reliability of a chain R(k ) , that is,
the probability a chain of length k succeeds, as well as the per capita output y = f (k ) of
a chain of length k . If shocks are highly correlated, then R(k ) falls slowly with chain
length. If shocks are largely independent, then R(k ) falls rapidly with chain length.
Expected output is given by R(k )f (k ) . Notice that it is easy to construct models in which
expected output is maximized as k → ∞ : if, for example, if f (k ) → ∞ much more
quickly than R(k ) → 0 , or if R(k ) is bounded away from zero and f (k ) is not bounded
away from infinity. However, such models predict that chains produce very rarely – that
they have very high failure probabilities – but on those rare occasions when they do
produce, they produce gigantic amounts. As we do not observe such technologies being
                                                     6


used,1 our goal in designing a model will be to choose functional forms for which this is
not the case.
           There are two simple models that capture a positive correlation of failures. One is
to assume that there is a positive probability that an individual is in a chain consisting
entirely of successes. This leads to a model in which the probability of failure is bounded
away from zero independent of k , and as we observed, this leads to the implausible
prediction that there is rarely any output, but occasionally there are bursts of
exceptionally large levels of output. In addition, it seems unlikely that intermediate goods
are perfect substitutes: while final goods, such as Jaguar automobiles and BMW
automobiles may be good substitutes, the pistons for their engines are not.
           Here we make the opposite assumption: we assume that there is a positive
probability that an individual is in a chain consisting entirely of failures. Specifically, we
assume that there is a probability r ≤ p that an individual is in such a chain; with
probability 1 − r she is in a chain in which each individual has an independent
(1 − p)/(1 − r ) probability of success. The overall probability of failure for an individual
is then r + (1 − r )(1 − (1 − p)/(1 − r )) = p , as desired. The resulting probability a
chain succeeds is R(k ) = (1 − r )((1 − p)/(1 − r ))k .
           Next, consider the production process. What happens if λj is constant? In this
case as the length of the chain increases the probability of success goes to zero
exponentially, and the output of the chain increases exponentially. Unless the exponential
rates are exactly the same, the optimal chain length is either one or infinity. The former
case is neither interesting nor empirically relevant. The latter case is the one we have just
argued is also empirically irrelevant. Hence we seek technologies in which the return to
specialization is less than exponential. It is convenient to work directly with the function
f (k ) , with the corresponding specialization coefficients given by:
                                                    f ( j + 1)
                                             λj =              .
                                                       f (j )

           To state our assumption on               f (k ) , notice that the reliability function
R(k ) = (1 − r )((1 − p)/(1 − r ))k is strictly increasing in k and for R ≤ 1 − r can be
inverted as


1
    Invention of pharmaceuticals and movies would seem to come the closest.
                                              7

                                       log(1 − r ) − log R
                               k =                            .
                                     log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p)

This enables us to write expected output as a function of the reliability rate:
                                        log(1 − r ) − log R 
                       Y = F (R) = Rf                            .
                                        log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) 

Although in principle R is restricted to the grid induced by discrete values of k it will
often be convenient to treat it as a continuous variable, which we will do without further
comment.
       Our basic assumption is

Assumption 1: F (R) is continuous, strictly concave and F (0) = 0 .

       To better understand assumption 1, consider the family of technologies
f (k ) = (b + k )α where α > 0 , b ≥ 0 and β = (b + 1 )α . Notice that is an increasing
function and that α measures the return to specialization. In addition it is apparent that
F (R) is continuous and F (0) = 0 . We also have

Lemma 2: F (R) is strictly concave if and only if either α ≤ 1 or

                                              1−α
                                b≥
                                     log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p)

Remark 1: In the case α ≤ 1 we have f (k ) concave, which we refer to as diminishing
returns to specialization. When there are increasing returns to specialization, the gains to
increasing the length of small chains may be so great that F (R) fails to be concave.
However, this is not the case if we choose b sufficiently large.
Proof: Define λ = log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) > 0 . We may compute the second derivative
             α     log(1 − r ) − log R α −1      1−α      log(1 − r ) − log R −1 
  FRR (R) = − b +                                 +        +                           
                                         
                                                  1         b
             λ             λ                          λ              λ            

Since the second factor is increasing in R , F (R) will be strictly concave if and only if
FRR (R) is non-negative at the upper bound R = 1 − r , that is to say
                                          1 − α −1
                                     1+        b ≥ 0.
                                            λ

                                                                                              
                                                    8


Remark 2: Note that R = 1 − p corresponds to a 1-chain k = 1 . Since F (0) = 0 and
F (1 − p) > 0 there is some R such that for all smaller R we have F (R) < F (1 − p) ,
that is, a 1-chain yields higher expected output – as well as greater reliability – than any
chain of length greater than k (R) .
        We can characterize the concavity of F (R) by a bound on the derivatives of the
primitive f (k ) with a Lemma proven in the Appendix.

Lemma 2: F (R) is strictly concave if and only if

                                 fkk (k )
                                          ≤ log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) .
                                  fk (k )

In particular it is sufficient that f (k ) be concave.
        For some results we will also need to insure that f (k ) not be too concave.

Definition 3: We say that f (k ) is moderately concavity if

                                        fkk (k )   f (k )
                                                 ≥ k      − k −1
                                         fk (k )   f (k )

This is satisfied for the class f (k ) = (b + k )α with b ≥ 0, α > 0 , in which case
        fkk (k )/ fk (k ) = (fk (k )/ f (k )) − (b + k )−1 ≥ ( fk (k )/ f (k )) − k −1 .

3. An Example
        We start by studying the relationship between expected output and the length of a
chain k in the simple case f (k ) = k α . In this case expected output is
                                       log(1 − r ) − log R α
                               Y = R                           
                                       log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) 

        As indicated, we will allow R to be a continuous variable, so we can maximize
expected output using calculus. The derivative is
                  log(1 − r ) − log R α           ( log(1 − r ) − log R )α−1
             Y =                            − α
                  log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p)      ( log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) )α
                      ( log(1 − r ) − log R )α−1
                =                                 [ log(1 − r ) − log R − α ]
                    ( log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) )α
                                                    9


The sign of the derivative is determined by the term in square brackets, which is
decreasing in R . This implies that F (R) is single peaked2 even for α > 1 and has a
maximum that is determined by a unique solution to the first order condition
                                            ˆ = (1 − r )e −α .
                                            R

From this the optimal chain length is
                                                       α
                                   kˆ =                             .
                                           log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p)

        This simple formula shows how the optimal degree of specialization is
determined by the trade off between the increased output of longer chains, and the
increased failure rate. A greater return to chain length as measured by α means longer
chains; higher probability of failure as measured by p means shorter chains; and higher
correlation of shocks as measured by r means longer chains. Notice also that the optimal
reliability rate R̂ is independent of the failure rate p . It is decreasing in both α and r ,
so that as correlation increases, chain length increases so much that unemployment goes
up.
        We may summarize this as

Proposition 4: Greater returns to specialization α , lower failure probability p , or
higher correlation of shocks r and expected output maximization imply higher expected
output Y , more specialization k and no less unemployment U . Greater returns to
specialization and higher correlation of shocks strictly increase unemployment U , which
is independent of the failure probability. Optimal chain length is

                                                       α
                                    kˆ =
                                           log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p)

and optimal unemployment is Uˆ = 1 − (1 − r )e −α .


4. An Economy of Chains
        We now consider a continuum economy. The shocks to chains and individuals are
taken to be independent, which we interpret as meaning that a certain fraction of chains

2
  If k is restricted to the natural numbers, this means that the expected output maximizing choice of chain
length must be at one of the grid points adjoining the point kˆ that maximizes expected output over the
positive real numbers
                                              10


and individuals fail. That is, we assume that there is no aggregate uncertainty caused by
the failure of individuals or chains. We index the production function by α , so that
y = f (k, α) .
          The sole friction in the economy is an insurance market imperfection. Following
Kehoe and Levine [1993], we assume that only a fraction γ of output can be used to
make insurance payments. If γ = 1 we are in a frictionless full insurance world. If
γ = 0 no insurance is possible. The economy has several stages:


   Complete contingent insurance markets
   Determination of chain length.
   Realization of an aggregate shock (α, p, r , γ ) ∈ S , where S is a finite set.
   Realization of individual shocks
   Output produced and insurance claims paid


          This is a public information economy and our notion of equilibrium will be that of
constrained efficiency – that is maximization of the welfare of the ex ante identical
individuals in this economy. Note, however, that this is equivalent to a competitive
equilibrium – that is, the first and second welfare theorems hold in this economy. To see
this, observe that there are only finitely many relevant production technologies k : as we
observed production technologies for which k > max(α, p,r , γ )∈S k (α, p, r ) are dominated
by 1-chains. Second, observe that the insurance market friction may be equivalently
modeled by a physical production technology. That is, we may imagine that the input x
jointly produces two kinds of output: γ f (k )x units of tradable output, and (1 − γ )f (k )x
of untradable output. This economy is completely a classical continuum general
equilibrium economy, and so satisfies the welfare theorems – the second welfare theorem
being trivial, as everyone is ex ante identical. Notice, however, that it may be efficient to
put fractions of the population in different length chains; implicitly we are assuming that
individual can be allocated to chains by means of lotteries, and that these lotteries are
traded or that sunspot contingencies are available as in Kehoe, Levine and Prescott
[2002].
                                              11


5. No Aggregate Shock
          We consider the case of an economy with no aggregate shock, so just a single
aggregate state. We first show that it is not optimal to use lotteries or sunspot contingent
chain lengths – there is an optimal chain length. Second, we examine when the
comparative statics of output maximizing chain length in Proposition 1 extend to the
general case. Throughout we assume that the length of chains are not restricted to integer
values.
          As remarked above we can have an economy consisting of chains of many
different lengths, with individuals assigned to chains by lottery. Specifically, we can have
a probability measure µ over a space Ω , with a measurable function k (ω) describing the
corresponding length of chain. We may equally well describe the lottery by a measurable
function R(ω) rather than k (ω) .
          If a chain at ω is successful it produces F (R(ω))/ R(ω ) . It consumes what is left
over after all seizable output is seized plus an insurance payment z1(ω ) , receiving in total
( z1(ω ) + (1 − γ )F (R(ω))/ R(ω ) ) . If it is unsuccessful, it consumes just an insurance
payment z 0 (ω ) . Feasibility for insurance payments requires that z1(ω ), z 0 (ω) ≥ 0 and
that the aggregate amount of insurance payments can be no greater than the seizable
fraction of expected output

               ∫ [ R(ω)z1(ω) + (1 − R(ω))z 0(ω) ] µ(d ω) ≤ γ ∫ F (R(ω))µ(d ω) .
Proposition 5: The optimal lottery µ is degenerate and places weight one on a single
value of k .

The proofs of the Propositions in this section can be found in the Appendix.
          The utility function u(c) induces preferences over expected output and reliability.
We can round-out our picture of the economy be describing these preferences. Let Y be
the expected per capita output of the common optimal chain. If the largest possible
transfer is made from the successful to unsuccessful chains, then a successful chain gets
(1 − γ )Y / R , and a failed chain gets ( γY / R )( R /(1 − R) ) = γY /(1 − R) . If it is
feasible for the failed chain to get more output than a successful chain
(1 − γ )(1 − R) ≤ γ R then it is optimal to provide full insurance. Equivalently, we may
                                               12


write this as R ≥ 1 − γ . For these values of R only specialized output matters, and
indifference curves are horizontal.
        We now consider what happens when there is only partial insurance R < 1 − γ .
The welfare function – expected utility – is
                W (R,Y ) = Ru ( (1 − γ )Y / R ) + (1 − R)u ( γY /(1 − R) ) .

We observe that Ru((1 − γ )Y / R) is homogeneous of degree one, and since u is
concave it is also concave. The same is true of (1 − R)u(γY /(1 − R)) . As W is the sum
of these two functions, it is also concave.

Proposition 6: The welfare function is concave in R,Y and strictly increasing in Y .
Indifference curves are for R ≤ 1 − γ smooth and downward sloping, and for
R ≥ 1 − γ horizontal. Indifference curves are differentiable including at R = 1 − γ .


Comparative Statics
        In order to do comparative statics, we will need more assumptions about
functional form. For the given utility function u(c) we may define as usual the
coefficient of relative risk aversion ρ(c) .

Definition 7: We say that risk aversion is moderate if (ρ(c)/ c)[1 − ρ(c)] + ρ '(c) ≥ 0 .

In the CRRA aversion case, this is true if and only if ρ ≤ 1 , that is, there is no more risk
aversion than exhibited by the logarithm. In this case the utility function is c1−ρ and
which we describe as a moderate CRRA.
        Under moderate risk aversion we can establish the effect of better insurance

Proposition 8: With moderate risk aversion, if there is partial insurance then increasing
γ lowers reliability R , raises unemployment U = 1 − R and increases welfare,
specialization and chain length k .

        What determines financial sector efficiency γ ? This is a static model – to
properly study insurance requires a dynamic setting since savings, portfolio balancing
and borrowing along with bankruptcy and traditional unemployment insurance all form
part of the overall insurance against unemployment. We can identify improved γ broadly
with an improved financial sector. As we would expect, a better financial sector raises
welfare. It does so by encouraging investment in riskier projects – that is to say, it
                                              13


encourages greater specialization by spreading the risk of failure. The striking fact is that
by doing so it also raises the risk of failure: we should expect to find higher
unemployment associated with better financial markets.
        Bankruptcy may perhaps be overlooked as a form of insurance in this context –
but one of the major causes of bankruptcy is job loss, and the ability to repudiate debt is
an important form of insurance. You may recall that before the current crisis bankruptcy
laws in the U.S. were tightened making it harder to go bankrupt. This lowers γ by
making it more difficult to transfer resources from the employed – the lenders – to the
unemployed, and of course lowers welfare. Why would anyone lobby for the government
to take actions that lower γ ? The thing to bear in mind is that when the law was changed
there was already a great deal of outstanding debt that was made more difficult to
discharge. Hence there was a one-time transfer from borrowers who might like to default
to lenders. Clearly the credit companies – the lenders – took the view that their short-term
gain more than offset the long-term loss caused by the fact that less debt – and insurance
– would be acquired in the future. Hence the pursuit of a one-time transfer payment led to
a decreased efficiency of the economy.
        As our last result on the economy without shocks, we extend can extend the
comparative statics of the example in Proposition 3.           We      parametrize       the
production function, considering f (k, α) .

Definition 9: We say that α increases returns to specialization if yα (k ) > 0 and

                                  d (fk (k, α)/ f (k, α))
                                                          >0
                                             dα

This says output increases but that the marginal product of specialization is increased
more.

Proposition 10: Suppose that preferences are a moderate CRRA. (i) If α increases
returns to specialization then higher α leads to higher expected output Y more
specialization k and more unemployment U . (ii) Under moderate concavity of the
production function a lower failure probability p or a higher correlation of shocks r
leads to higher expected output Y more specialization k and no less unemployment U ;
higher correlation of shocks leads to strictly more unemployment.
                                               14


       Optimal reliability under full insurance given by the unique solution R̂ to

                                                        log(1 − r ) − log Rˆ 
                                                   fk                            
                     log(1 − r ) − log Rˆ            log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) 
            ˆ
        FR (R) = f                            −                                    =0
                    log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p)    [ log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) ]

If Rˆ ≥ 1 − γ there is full insurance. Otherwise there is partial insurance and optimal
reliability is determined as the unique solution to

 ρR                         ˆ)ρ −1 γ 1−ρ  + (1 − ρ)  R
   ˆ ρ −1(1 − γ )1−ρ − ρ(1 − R                          ˆρ       1−ρ        ˆ)ρ γ 1−ρ  (FR (R
                                                                                             ˆ)/ F (Rˆ))
                                                   (1 − γ )    + (1 − R         
=0


Notice that the optimal reliability is a strictly decreasing function of chain length, so the
optimal chain length is given by
                                         log(1 − r ) − log Rˆ
                                kˆ =
                                       log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p)

and optimal unemployment by Uˆ = 1 − R
                                     ˆ.
       One question is whether there is any empirical sense to the idea that poor
countries have lower unemployment rates than rich countries. Using data from the CIA
World Factbook, and eliminating tiny countries such as Monaco, and oil-producing
countries such as Qatar, the countries with lowest unemployment are


                                Uzbekistan               1.1%
                                Thailand                 1.5%
                                Cuba                     1.7%
                                Papua New Guinea         1.8%
                                Bermuda                  2.1%
                                Tajikistan               2.2%
                                Laos                     2.5%
                                Mongolia                 2.8%


which are not only poor countries, but include a large number of communist or formerly
communist countries, a point we will return to. However, the countries with the highest
                                              15


unemployment are also very poor: Zimbabwe with 95% unemployment and Liberia with
85% unemployment being the extreme cases. However, in those cases unemployment
seems to have less to do with specialization than with the absence of functioning political
systems – which is to say, real unemployment and economic success is not explained
only by long production chains, but the absence of civil wars and other civil disruptions
also play a crucial role.

7. A Low Probability Negative Shock
        We now turn to the impact of a shock. We examine the simplest case of a single
negative shock. The crucial fact is that the shock hits after chain length has been
determined. Our main goal is to establish how longer chains and lower correlation
function as multipliers increasing the impact of a particular shock.
        We will parametrize the production function, taking α as a parameter that
increases output y . We consider the situation where there is a low probability of a
negative shock. Specifically, we suppose that there is a baseline shock (α0 ,1 − p0, r0, γ 0 )
with probability 1 − π and a negative shock (α,1 − p, r, γ ) ≤ (α0 ,1 − p0, r0, γ 0 ) with
probability π . We suppose that the probability of the negative shock is sufficiently small
that the optimal chain length kˆ is approximately what it would be when π = 0 .
        Fixing the chain length k what is the impact of a negative shock on welfare,
aggregate output, total factor productivity (TFP) and unemployment?

Production Function Shocks
        A reduction in the benefits of the specialization technology α lowers welfare and
aggregate output and has no effect on unemployment. Since the same amount of
employment produces less aggregate output, TFP falls. Since the condition for full
insurance is R ≥ 1 − γ and R is not changed, with a fixed chain length k and a change
only in α , the financial constraint will be binding if and only if it was binding in the base
state. Notice that the impact of α on aggregate output is fα . This is increasing in k if
fk α > 0 ; in particular this is the case if α increases the returns to specialization.

Failure Rate Shocks
        An increase in the failure rate p lowers welfare, lowers aggregate output and
either raises unemployment or leaves it unchanged. It has no effect on TFP since the
                                               16


output per employed worker does not change. Since R declines, a financial constraint
that does not bind in the base state may bind in the bad state further lowering welfare.
Recall that reliability is given by

                                                       (   1− p
                                                                  )
                                                                  k
                                      R = (1 − r )
                                                           1−r

from which we may find the quantitative impact of a shock to p

                                         (         )
                                                   k −1
                                              1
                               Rp = k                      (1 − p)k −1 .
                                             1−r

The longer is the chain k and the higher is the correlation r the more sensitive is
reliability and unemployment to changes in p . This is a kind of “reverse Keynesian
multiplier” where the impact of a shock is greatly increased by the fragility of the chains
that make up the economy. Notice that there is kind of a double-impact of the base level
of correlation. If base correlation is high then this implies that the optimal choice of k is
large, so that Rp will be very large indeed.
        Since the production function f and chain length k do not change in response to
a failure rate shock, as we observed, TFP does not change. That is, decreased output is
due entirely to decreased hours worked. It is less apparent that measured TFP will be
unchanged. Specifically, in the model everyone working for an unproductive chain is
counted as “unemployed.” In practice this is neither the definition of unemployment used
in collecting statistics, nor practically what it measures. That is, one specialized firm in a
failed chain may close down laying off workers who become “unemployed” while
another specialized firm in the same or a different failed chain may simply work hard
while failing to produce any useful output. The economic consequences are the same in
both cases, yet in one case the firm contributes unemployment and a reduction of hours
worked, while in the other the firm contributes no unemployment or reduction in hours
worked.
        Specifically, suppose that unemployment U in the model translates as a fraction
of workers who are measured as unemployed ηU and a fraction who are measured as
employed but unproductive (1 − η)U . In this case an increase in the underlying variable
U raises unemployment, but it also reduces the hours worked less than the reduction in
output, that, TFP is output divided by hours worked
                                                17

                                     (1 − U )f (k )
                                                    < f (k )
                                       (1 − ηU )

and so measured TFP falls, although actual TFP does not. This should be a warning
against paying too much attention to measures such as unemployment or TFP: measured
employment and hours worked do not distinguish between individuals who play cards at
home because they have been laid off, and those who play cards at work because their
production line has been shut down by a shortage of parts. From the overall viewpoint of
the economy, however, both are equally unproductive.

Correlation Shocks
       A decrease in the correlation r lowers welfare, lowers aggregate output and raises
unemployment. Like a shock to the failure rate, it has no effect on TFP although it may
reduce measured TFP. Since R declines, a financial constraint that does not bind in the
base state may bind in the bad state further lowering welfare. The quantitative impact of a
shock to r is

                                            (         )
                                                       k −2
                                                 1
                             Rr = (k − 1)                     (1 − p)k .
                                                1−r

which exhibits the same kind of sensitivity to long chains and a high underlying
correlation rate as does shocks to the failure rate.
       A key issue is the correlation of p and r . That is, when we measure the size of a
shock, we are likely to measure the change in p . Consider, for example, a shock to a
resource prices. Suppose we measure the size of shock by the increase in the cost to
economy of continuing the same level of resource usage as in the base state. This is a
measure of p : the fraction of the economy that will fail due to these increased costs we
imagine is roughly proportion to the increase in cost. However, the overall impact of the
shock is measured by the number of chains that fail, not the number of individuals that
fail, and this depends on the correlation. Different shocks of the same size p may have
different correlations r . For example, crude oil shocks may have a very low r because
the failures they cause are spread across chains, while linseed oil shocks may have a very
high r because they fall primarily in a single chain, and there are easy substitutes. Hence
a shock to the price of crude oil and a shock to the price of linseed oil that have the same
                                               18


overall economic cost as measured by change in price times sales will have very different
economic consequences.

Dynamic Shocks
        Next, consider the temporal dimension of the shock. The shock here is assumed to
take place after chain length is determined. When we studied the comparative statics of
chains without a shock, implicitly we were examining what happens to chain length that
is determined after a shock. To make this formal, consider three periods. There are no
temporal connections between the periods – no savings or investment. However we allow
for a correlation structure in the shocks. In particular, if last period was the base state, the
probability of the bad state in the current period is small: π . However, if last period was
the bad state, then in the current period the probability of the base state is also π . That is,
we assume a high degree of serial correlation in the states. The initial condition is the
base shock.
        Consider a shock to either p or r or both. In the first base period output and TFP
are high and unemployment is low. In the second period unexpectedly a shock hits. This
lowers output and possibly TFP and raises unemployment. In the third period it is now
very likely that the negative state will remain. This implies a lower optimal chain length,
further lowering output and definitely lowering TFP. However: it also lowers
unemployment – below even what it was in the base state as we know from Proposition
10. In other words, output and TFP fall continually, while unemployment spikes up then
drops back down.

Financial Shocks
        A reduction in the efficiency of the financial sector γ can lower welfare, but has
no effect on measurable variables such as aggregate output, TFP or unemployment. In
order to have an impact, the financial constraint must bind in the bad state. Notice that if
it binds in the good state, it necessarily binds in the bad state.
        An important consideration is whether γ is accurately known. Take the case
where in the base economy the insurance constraint is not binding – there is full
insurance. The value of γ will only matter when the negative shock hits; this is
infrequent so wrong beliefs will be slow to be corrected. This can be viewed as a kind of
                                             19


“quasi” self-confirming equilibrium. Self-confirming equilibrium allows wrong beliefs
about events that are not observed. However, wrong beliefs about events that are rare can
persist for a long period of time, so are not that different from events that are not
observed at all. Moreover, the financial sector – which profits by selling more
“insurance” has a strong incentive to exaggerate the efficacy of that insurance – as was in
fact done in recent years by issuing numerous loan guarantees not backed by any
resources that could be used to honor the guarantees. Hence the promised γ may be
larger than the actual γ . This will only be discovered after the negative shock hits, at
which point there will be a “crisis” in the sense of the existence of many promises
impossible of fulfillment. At which point there will be a fight over who gets
shortchanged, and Lloyd Blankfein gets on the phone to Hank Paulson and says “It
shouldn’t be us – grab 800 billion from the Treasury.”
       The key point is: regardless of who winds up bearing the burden of unfulfillable
promises there will be a strong temptation to say “This should never happen again” and
tighten up financial regulation – and by doing so reduce the value of γ . This of course
will reduce welfare, and in the future when chain length can adjust, lead to a long-term
reduction in output and welfare. Japan and the United States seem to have been especially
proficient at responding to crises by strangling their financial sectors: Both countries have
allowed large failed banks to pretend to be solvent by holding treasury securities rather
than lending to the private sector. By way of contrast Chile and Sweden responded to
crises by explicitly failing their banks, and creating new banks that could carry on a
normal banking business.

Short Chains
       Efficient economies with large values of γ, α,r and 1 − p will have long chains.
As we observed, long chains are vulnerable chains, and output and welfare will decline
more in response to shocks – possibly substantially more. This can of course be avoided.
For example, the capitalist economy can be replaced by a government planned economy,
and the government may (and probably will) choose the length of chain k lower than the
optimal level kˆ . This reduces welfare, but also reduces volatility. It also reduces
unemployment, both in the base state and following a shock. All of which suggests that
measures to reduce unemployment should be viewed with a degree of skepticism. If the
                                               20


model of production chains is correct, then high volatility is the price we must pay for
high welfare.
        Notice also that choosing short chains while it may reduce unemployment
following a shock, does not necessarily increase welfare even ex post following the
negative shock. Take the case of a chain of length 1. This exhibits the least volatility, but
also the least aggregate output in any state. If γ is high, there can be full insurance even
in the bad state: in this case it is better to be unemployed in the bad state at kˆ than to be
employed in the “socialist paradise”. Indeed, we may well ask: is it better to be employed
in Cuba or unemployed in the United States? In fact weekly pay in Cuba is about $187,3
while unemployment benefits in the United States are about $300.4
        This analysis suggests a natural experiment. From the end of the Second World
War until it entered the oil market in a large way in the 1970s, the Soviet bloc was a
closed and planned economy. Did it have shorter production chains than the West? Did it
have lower unemployment and less volatility? Can this be accounted for by the different
length of production chains? The first step in applying this type of theory is to develop
some effective measure both of the length of chains, and the correlation r . Unfortunately
there may not be reliable data on the old Soviet block – economic statistics from that
period consist mostly of lies, but insofar as reliable data can be found, it seems a good
place to look. Even the very crude examination of unemployment statistics above shows
the lowest unemployment rates dominated by communist and former communist
countries.

International Trade Considerations
        We have considered a closed economy. What about trade between countries? Two
considerations come to mind. First, chains can overlap countries. There may be many
chains in a large country, only a few of which extend to a smaller country. Shocks that
impact the sector that overlaps will have a large impact on the small country, but only a
small impact on the large country: when the United States coughs, Mexico catches cold.
        The other application is Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). FDI has a
disproportionately beneficial effect on developing countries. These small countries with

3
  The CIA World Factbook reports annual per capital income in Cuba of 9700 PPP adjusted 2009 U.S.
dollars.
4
  U.S. Department of Labor.
                                            21


poorly developed financial sectors and few ties to outside suppliers will find it optimal to
choose short production chains. A large multinational can create a chain that lies mostly
outside the country, and has access and connections to supplier worldwide. Hence it has
an incentive to create longer and more productive chains. After a time, knowledge of
outside suppliers and business connections will spread to other producers in the
developing country – effectively increasing their r and making it efficient for domestic
producers to create longer and more productive chains. It is widely understood that the
spread of knowledge is the likely suspect for the disproportionate effect of FDI. The
model of production chains suggest a possible mechanism through which this acts.

8. Conclusion
        At the heart of this paper is the importance of understanding whether fluctuations
are efficient or not. Are they the price we pay for wealth? If so, far from being a problem,
they are a solution – and policies to mitigate them can be counterproductive. This can be
seen by the possibility of creating inefficiently short changes in order to mitigate
volatility.
        The model of chains also helps understand the consequences of technological
change. For example, better communications – the internet – can potentially increase r .
This will lead to greater specialization, longer chains, more output, and higher welfare.
But it will also result in higher unemployment and greater volatility.
        In short – the capitalist economy may indeed be more prone to crisis – and this
may be a good thing.
                                           22



                                     References
Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar and A. Tahbaz-Salehi [2010] “Cascades in Networks and
       Aggregate Volatility,” NBER Working Paper 16516.
Becker, G.S. and K.M. Murphy [1992] “The Division of Labor, Coordination Costs and
       Knowledge,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 1137-1160.
Dixit, A.K. and G.M. Grossman [1982] “Trade and Protection with Multistage
       Production,” Review of Economic Studies 49: 583-594.
Grossman, G. and E. Rossi-Hansberg [2008] “Trading Tasks: A Simple Model of Off-
       shoring” American Economic Review 98: 1978-1997.
Grossman, S. J. and O. D. Hart [1986] “The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of
       vertical and lateral integration” Journal of Political Economy 4: 691-719.
Horvath, M. [1998] “Cyclicality and Sectoral Linkages: Aggregate Fluctuations from
       Independent Sectoral Shocks,” Review of Economic Dynamics 1: 781-808.
Horvath, M. [2000] “Sectoral Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics 45: 69-106.
Huang, K.X.D. and Z. Liu [2001] “Production Chains and General Equilibrium
       Aggregate Dynamics,” Journal of Monetary Economics 48: 437-462.
Jones, C. [2010] “Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic
       Development,” mimeo, Stanford GSB.
Kehoe, T. J. and D. K. Levine [1993] “Debt Constrained Asset Markets,” Review of
       Economic Studies 60: 865-888.
Kehoe, T. J., D. K. Levine and E. Prescott [2002] “Lotteries, Sunspots and Incentive
       Constraints,” Journal of Economic Theory 107: 39-69.
Kremer, M. [1993] “The O-Ring theory of economic development,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 108: 551-575.
Leijonhufvud, A. [1976] On Keynesian Economics and the Economics of Keynes Oxford
       University Press.
Seabright, P. [2004] The Company of Strangers: A Natural History of Economic Life
       Princeton University Press.
                                                 23



                                           Appendix
Define the constant λ = log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) > 0 .

Lemma 2: F (R) is strictly concave if and only if

       fkk (k )
                ≤ log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) .
        fk (k )
Proof: We compute the derivatives of F (R) :
                          log(1 − r ) − log R 
                F = Rf 
                                  λ            
                         log(1 − r ) − log R             log(1 − r ) − log R 
                FR = f                         − λ−1 fk                     
                                  λ                               λ
                FRR = −(λR)−1 fk + λ−2R−1 fkk

Hence, FRR (R) ≤ 0 if and only if −λ fk + fkk ≤ 0 , which is the desired condition.
                                                                                         

Proposition 5: The optimal lottery µ is degenerate and places weight one on a single
value of k .

Proof: Consider

                                 R(ω) = R ≡      ∫ R(ω)µ(d ω) .
and the insurance scheme z 0 (ω ) = z 0 (ω ) ,

                         z1(ω) = z1 ≡     ∫ R(ω)z1(ω)µ(d ω)/ R ≥ 0 .
We will show that this scheme does no worse than the original one, and if the original
one is non-degenerate, strictly better.
        Since Y (R) is strictly concave

                         Rz1 + ∫ [ (1 − R(ω))z 0 (ω) ] µ(d ω)

                         = ∫ [ R(ω)z1(ω) + (1 − R(ω))z 0(ω) ] µ(d ω)
                         ≤ γ ∫ F (R(ω))µ(d ω) < γ F (R)

so the proposed scheme satisfies the insurance feasibility constraint. Notice that under the
new scheme, there are exactly as many unemployed as under the old scheme, and that
                                             24


they get exactly the same insurance payments. The expected payment to an employed
person under the old scheme is

       c1 = ∫ R(ω)( z1(ω) + (1 − γ )Y (R(ω))/ R(ω) )µ(d ω)/ R
          = z1 + (1 − γ )∫ Y (R(ω))µ(d ω)
          < z1 + (1 − γ )Y (R)

where the inequality follows because Y (R) is strictly concave, and is strict if the original
lottery is non-degenerate. Under the old scheme the employed received utility.

      ∫ R(ω)u ( z1(ω) + (1 − γ )P(R(ω))/ R(ω) )µ(d ω)/ R ≤ u(c1) < u(z1 + P(R))
where the first inequality is Jensen’s inequality. This shows the new scheme is better.
                                                                                          

Proposition 7: The welfare function is concave in R,Y and strictly increasing in Y .
Indifference curves are for R ≤ 1 − γ smooth and downward sloping, and for
R ≥ 1 − γ horizontal. Indifference curves are differentiable including at R = 1 − γ .

Proof: We already observed in the text that W (R,Y ) is concave. To do the relevant
computations, set
                                   a0 = γ /(1 − R) ≤ 1
                                   a1 = (1 − γ )/ R ≥ 1

with exact equality if and only if R = 1 − γ . We then compute the partial derivatives of
the welfare function W (R,Y ) = Ru ( (1 − γ )Y / R ) + (1 − R)u ( γY /(1 − R) )
                WR = u((1 − γ )Y / R) − u(γY /(1 − R))
                       γu '(γY /(1 − R))Y (1 − γ )u '((1 − γ )Y / R)Y
                      +                      −
                               1−R                            R
                     = u(a1Y ) − u(a 0Y ) + a 0Yu '(a 0Y ) − a1Yu '(a1 )
                WY = (1 − γ )u '((1 − γ )Y / R) + γu '(γY /(1 − R))

We observe that WR vanishes at the full insurance line R = 1 − γ , and is negative to the
left since u is concave.
                                                                                          
                                                   25


Proposition 8: With moderate risk aversion, if there is partial insurance then increasing
γ lowers reliability R , raises unemployment U = 1 − R and increases specialization
and chain length k .

Proof: Notice that changes in γ do not change F (R) . In the proof of Proposition 5 we
computed the marginal utilities WR ,WY . Differentiating each with respect to γ we find
       WRγ = −Yu '(a1Y )/ R − Yu '(a0Y )/(1 − R) + Yu '(a0Y )/(1 − R) + Yu '(a1 )/ R
             +a0Y 2u ''(a0Y )/(1 − R) + a1Y 2u ''(a1 )/ R
            = a0Y 2u ''(a0Y )/(1 − R) + a1Y 2u ''(a1 )/ R < 0

         WY γ = u '(a 0Y ) − u '(a1Y ) + a 0Yu ''(a 0Y ) − a1Yu ''(a1Y )
A sufficient condition for WY γ > 0 is that u '(c) + cu ''(c) be decreasing in c . Observe
that
                          cu ''   −u '' u '− cu ''' u '+ c[u '']2
                Dρ = D          =
                           u'                 [u ']2
                          2u ''+ cu '''− u ''[1 − ρ ]    D(u '+ cu '') − u ''[1 − ρ ]
                     =−                               =−
                                      u'                             u'

Rearranging we find
                            D(u '+ cu '') = −u ' [ (ρ / c)[1 − ρ ] + ρ ' ]

which is negative from the condition of moderate risk aversion.
                                                                                             

Proposition 10: Suppose that preferences are a moderate CRRA. (i) If α increases
returns to specialization then higher α leads to higher expected output Y more
specialization k and more unemployment U . (ii) Under moderate concavity a lower
failure probability p or a higher correlation of shocks r leads to higher expected output
Y more specialization k and no less unemployment U ; higher correlation of shocks
leads to strictly more unemployment.

         Optimal reliability under full insurance given by the unique solution R̂ to

                                                          log(1 − r ) − log Rˆ 
                                                     fk                            
                       log(1 − r ) − log Rˆ            log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) 
              ˆ      
          FR (R) = f                             −                                    =0
                      log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p)    [ log(1 − r ) − log(1 − p) ]
                                                 26


If Rˆ ≥ 1 − γ there is full insurance. Otherwise there is partial insurance and optimal
reliability is determined as the unique solution to

 ρR                         ˆ)ρ −1 γ1−ρ  + (1 − ρ)  R
   ˆ ρ −1(1 − γ )1−ρ − ρ(1 − R                         ˆρ       1−ρ        ˆ)ρ γ 1−ρ  (FR (R
                                                                                            ˆ)/ F (R
                                                                                                   ˆ))
                                                  (1 − γ )    + (1 − R         
=0

Proof: In the case of full insurance, expected output must be maximized, and F (R) is
concave by assumption, so FR (R) = 0 . The value of FR (R) was computed in the proof
of Lemma 2. Notice that FR (R)/ F (R) has the same sign as FR (R) , so to prove
decreased reliability (or increased unemployment) it suffices to show that FR (R)/ F (R)
decreases at FR (R) = 0 .
        Now consider (1 − r )e−α < 1 − γ and partial insurance. We may substitute
F (R) into the utility function to find ex ante welfare as a function solely of reliability
                    w(R) = Rρ ( (1 − γ )F (R) )1−ρ + (1 − R)ρ ( γF (R) )1−ρ
                           = [ R ρ (1 − γ )1−ρ + (1 − R)ρ γ 1−ρ ] F (R)1−ρ

and we know that this function is concave. Computing the derivative
              wR (R) = [ ρR ρ −1(1 − γ )1−ρ − ρ(1 − R)ρ −1 γ 1−ρ ] F (R)1−ρ
                        +(1 − ρ)[ R ρ (1 − γ )1−ρ + (1 − R)ρ γ 1−ρ ] F (R)−ρ FR (R)

we then know that the unique optimum has wR (Rˆ) = 0 and that wRR (R) < 0 . So to sign
changes in R̂ , we need only determine whether wR (Rˆ) increases or decreases: the
optimal R̂ must move in the same direction. Equivalently we may divide through by
F (R)1−ρ since this is positive. This gives
        wR (R)/ F (R)1−ρ = [ ρR ρ −1(1 − γ )1−ρ − ρ(1 − R)ρ −1 γ 1−ρ ]
                             +(1 − ρ)[ R ρ (1 − γ )1−ρ + (1 − R)ρ γ 1−ρ ] FR (R)/ F (R)

This moves in the same direction as FR (R)/ F (R) , so as in the case of full insurance, it
suffices to determine the direction of change of FR (R)/ F (R) .
        Recall that
                                            log(1 − r ) − log R 
                               F (R) = Rf                         ,
                                                    λ           

so
                                                  27

                            log(1 − r ) − log R               log(1 − r ) − log R 
               FR (R) = f                        − (1/ λ)fk 
                                    λ                                  λ           

and
                                            log(1 − r ) − log R 
                                       fk 
                            FR (R)  1 1             λ           
                                   = −
                            F (R)   R λ  log(1 − r ) − log R 
                                                                
                                       f
                                                    λ

          The direction of movement of reliability is determined by the direction of
movement of FR (R)/ F (R) , and only the second term matters. In the case where α
increases the returns to specialization, the second term decreases by definition, so
specialization goes down. This forces a higher specialization rate k , and since the
production possibility frontier shifted up, higher expected output.
          Next observe that the direction of movement of FR (R)/ F (R) is the same as that
of
          L(R) ≡ − log((1/ R) − (FR (R)/ F (R)))
                                   log(1 − r ) − log R           log(1 − r ) − log R 
                = log λ − log fk                        + log f 
                                           λ                              λ           

Increasing p changes only λ and makes it larger. Differentiating with respect to λ we
get
                              Lλ = λ−1 + λ−1kfkk / fk − λ−1kfk / f

which is non-negative by the assumption of moderate concavity of f (k ) , so reliability
goes up. This is possible with higher p only if specialization decreases. Also since the
production possibility frontier moved down, higher reliability also implies less expected
output.
          Differentiating with respect to r and noticing that d λ / dr = −(1/(1 − r )) we
find
 Lr
       1         1                       1                  1                    1
 =−          −          kfkk / fk +            kfk / f +           fkk / fk −          f /f .
    λ(1 − r ) λ(1 − r )              λ(1 − r )           λ(1 − r )            λ(1 − r ) k
       1         1
 =−          −          ( (k − 1)fkk / fk − (k − 1)fk / y )
    λ(1 − r ) λ(1 − r )

This has the same sign as
                                             28

                               −(k − 1)−1 − fkk / fk + fk / y .

Moderate concavity says        0 ≤ k −1 + fkk / fk − fk / f , and since (k − 1)−1 > k −1 ,
we conclude that Lr is negative. Hence reliability falls, this requires more specialization
and also, since the production possibility frontier shifted up, expected output goes up.
                                                                                           
