                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE VOTE IS CAST:
       THE EFFECT OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE ON SHAREHOLDER VALUE

                                           Vicente Cuñat
                                            Mireia Gine
                                          Maria Guadalupe

                                        Working Paper 16574
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16574


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




We are grateful to Ashwini Agrawal, Ann Bartel, Ken Chay, Jeff Coles, Ray Fisman, Laurie Hodrick,
Marco Manacorda, Jan Eeckhout, Denis Gromb, Zacharias Sautner, David Yermack and seminar participants
at Brown University, Columbia Business School, the University of Edinburgh, Goethe University,
LeBow College of Business Conference on Corporate Governance, the London School of Economics,
University of Michigan, the New York University Paduano Seminar, and the University of Oregon
for their helpful comments and suggestions. Raymond Lim provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Vicente Cuñat, Mireia Gine, and Maria Guadalupe. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Vote is Cast: The Effect of Corporate Governance on Shareholder Value
Vicente Cuñat, Mireia Gine, and Maria Guadalupe
NBER Working Paper No. 16574
December 2010
JEL No. D21,G14,G34

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the effect of corporate governance provisions on shareholder value and long-term
outcomes in S&P1500 firms. We apply a regression discontinuity design to shareholder votes on governance
proposals in annual meetings. A close-call vote around the majority threshold is akin to a random outcome,
allowing us to deal with prior expectations and the endogeneity of internal governance rules. Passing
a corporate governance provision generates a 1.3% abnormal return on the day of the vote with an
implied market value per provision of 2.8%. We also find evidence of changes in investment behavior
and long-term performance improvements.


Vicente Cuñat                                       Maria Guadalupe
The London School of Economics                      Graduate School of Business
Houghton Street WC2A 2AE                            Columbia University
London – United Kingdom                             3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 624
v.cunat@lse.ac.uk                                   New York, NY 10027
                                                    and NBER
Mireia Gine                                         mg2341@columbia.edu
Wharton Research Data Services
The Wharton School at the
University of Pennsylvania
3451 Walnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
gine@wharton.upenn.edu
1         Introduction
The agency problem — the conflict created by the misalignment of incentives between owners and
managers — is at the heart of our understanding of how firms work (Berle and Means, 1932; Jensen
and Meckling, 1976); and the corporate governance structure of the firm should be designed to
minimize the costs created by that conflict. Yet, a critical element of corporate governance in
modern corporations are provisions that protect managers from the external discipline of takeovers
(such as poison pills, staggered boards or golden parachutes) and statutes that insulate them from
the monitoring and control of shareholders (Gompers, Ishii and Metrick, 2003; Bebchuck, Cohen
and Ferrell, 2004). It may be appropriate to protect managers in this way if excessive shareholder
oversight is disruptive or encourages them to focus on short-term gains at the expense of long-term
performance (Comment and Schwert, 1995; Stein, 1988). Some have argued, however, that boards
of directors are not suﬃciently independent from management and that shareholder activism may
have limited ability to bring about eﬀective control. As a result, current corporate governance
arrangements may not result from an optimal decision by shareholders; but rather they may reflect
imperfections in the firm’s political process and the excessive power of constituencies with other
goals (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001 and 2003; Perez-Gonzalez, 2006; Bennedsen et al., 2007).
        Establishing empirically how increasing shareholder rights aﬀects shareholder value, and what
type of shareholder rights have bigger eﬀects, is essential for our understanding of the internal
governance of firms. It also has clear implications for the debate on shareholder oversight and
regulatory reform of corporate governance. Prior research has shown that legislative changes that
aﬀect external governance measures, such as state-level anti-takeover legislation, increase managerial
slack and reduce performance (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003; Garvey and Hanka, 1999; Giroud
and Mueller, forthcoming). Internal governance arrangements, the ones developed by the firm
itself, have been the subject of much research, but the evidence provided in these papers is mixed
and, most importantly, based on correlations rather than causal estimates.1 This paper provides
a causal estimate of the eﬀect of changes in the firm’s internal corporate governance structure —
resulting from shareholder governance proposals at annual meetings —, on shareholder value and
managers’ behavior.
        In practice, it is generally diﬃcult to find a setting where a firm’s governance structure changes
    1
    See the surveys by Shleifer and Vishny (1997), and Becht, Bolton and Röell (2005). In their influential paper,
Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003) found that, in the 1990s, a trading strategy that bought firms with better gover-
nance and sold those with worse governance achieved an 8.5% annual excess return. However, others have questioned
whether there could be any systematic long-run excess returns since these should be incorporated immediately in
stock prices (Core, Guay and Rusticus, 2006).


                                                        2
exogenously such that we can estimate a causal eﬀect. We argue that a regression discontinuity
design on the outcomes of shareholder proposals in annual meetings provides us with this ideal
quasi-experimental setting (Cellini, Ferreira and Rothstein, 2010). It also allows us to overcome two
important limitations of any analysis based on a regression of stock-market returns on the presence of
governance provisions. First, the choice of governance structure and the type of provisions adopted
by firms is arguably endogenous and correlated with other firm characteristics; thus, comparing
the returns of firms with diﬀerent governance structures is likely to capture the eﬀect of those
unobserved characteristics, rather than the eﬀect of governance. Second, if investors know about
the superior performance of better-governed firms, their knowledge should be incorporated into
prices, and we should not observe any systematic diﬀerences in abnormal returns (as emphasized
by Core, et al., 2006). To overcome these limitations, we need a setting in which governance rules
are exogenously or "randomly" adopted and, at the same time, one in which their adoption is not
foreseen by the market and incorporated into returns.
    In their annual meetings, shareholders propose and vote on a large number of governance-
related provisions.2 Our approach is to use a regression discontinuity design that compares the
reaction of the stock market to shareholder-sponsored governance proposals that pass by a small
margin to the reaction to those that fail by a small margin. We show that, even though these
proposals are not binding, passing a proposal by a small margin discretely increases its probability
of implementation. For these close-call proposals, passing is akin to an independent random event
(it is "locally" exogenous) and, therefore, uncorrelated with firm characteristics. This approach is
immune, by construction, to any observed or unobserved confounding factors as long as their eﬀect
is continuous around the threshold. We show that indeed, for votes around the majority threshold,
passing is uncorrelated with observed firm and meeting characteristics, such that by focusing on
these proposals we can estimate a causal eﬀect. In addition, it is precisely for these close-call
proposals that the vote contains substantial information —switching from an unpredictable outcome
to either pass or fail— that is not already fully incorporated in prices. We present an analytical
framework that shows how stock prices should react for each observed vote outcome; this allows us
to recover the value of passing a provision from the outcome of votes around the majority threshold.
We also discuss how the observed reaction varies with the probability of implementing a proposal and
other information that may be contained in the vote outcome. This is, in a nutshell, the regression
discontinuity design that provides us with causal estimates of the eﬀect of shareholder-sponsored
   2
     These include provisions that lower takeover barriers, regulate the independence of the board from management,
define the voting rules in annual meetings, and decide on executive and board compensation.


                                                        3
proposals.
       Our dataset includes all shareholder-sponsored governance proposals voted on in U.S. firms in
the S&P 1500 (plus another 500 widely held firms) between 1997 and 2007. We restrict ourselves
to these proposals given that (unlike management-sponsored ones) shareholder proposals cannot be
removed strategically by the management of the firm, and their vote distribution is not aﬀected
by selective withdrawal around the discontinuity (see Listokin, 2008 and section 4).3 Given the
structure of our data, we adopt the empirical dynamic regression discontinuity model proposed
by Cellini, Ferreira and Rothstein (2010), and we allow the result of the vote in any given annual
meeting to aﬀect future outcomes and the votes in future meetings. We also adapt this methodology
to deal with multiple votes in one meeting.
       The results show that, on the day of the vote, a shareholder governance proposal that passes
yields an abnormal return of 1.3% relative to one that fails; there are no significant additional
returns on subsequent days. This price reaction is more pronounced for the set of anti-takeover
provisions included in the G-index developed by Gompers et al. (2003), suggesting that these
are important for governance (since Jensen, 1986, it has been argued that takeover threats are an
important form of managerial discipline).4 In particular, the eﬀect is largely driven by proposals
to eliminate classified boards and poison pills, which represent 68% of G-Index proposals that fall
around the majority threshold. We also find that other proposals, such as those increasing board
independence, have a positive, but weaker, eﬀect on returns. Finally, we find that the eﬀect is
stronger among firms with concentrated ownership, for those with a large number of anti-takeover
provisions in place, and for those with high R&D expenditures.
       Since the outcome of these votes is not binding, the price reaction is likely to underestimate the
full value of implementing these proposals. In addition, passing a proposal may aﬀect the probability
that other provisions are submitted and passed in the future. To estimate the value of implementing
a proposal, we need to take this information into account. We estimate that passing a proposal
around the discontinuity leads to a discrete 31% increase in the probability of implementation (we
measure implementation as the change in the number of anti-takeover provisions the firm has in
place) and to an increase in the probability of proposing and passing proposals in future meetings.
Using these probabilities, we calculate that, for the S&P 1500 firms in our sample, adopting a
   3
      This yields almost 4,000 proposals. We restrict ourselves to these shareholder-sponsored proposals given that
(unlike management-sponsored ones) shareholder proposals cannot be removed by the management of the firm, and
their vote distribution is not aﬀected by strategic withdrawal around the discontinuity (see Listokin, 2008 and section
4).
    4
      The G-index is the number of anti-takeover provisions the firm has in place.



                                                          4
governance proposal increases shareholder value by 2.8%. This is a non-negligible eﬀect.
        The estimated stock-price reaction may reflect the expectation of changes in performance from
governance improvements, as well as the implied reduction in agency costs, but it may also reflect
a pure takeover premium (if a takeover is more likely under the new governance arrangement). To
explore these two possible explanations, we examine the real eﬀects beyond the stock-price reaction
on the day of the vote. The regression discontinuity design allows us to study the eﬀect of the new
governance arrangements on variables such as acquisitions and capital expenditures, which have
been used as proxies for empire building and potentially ineﬃcient behavior (e.g., Gompers et al.,
2003; Bertrand and Mullainathan 2003). We find that acquisitions and capital expenditures fall
as a result of passing corporate governance proposals. We also find evidence that firm value —as
reflected by Tobin’s Q, book-to-market value of the firm— increases in the years following the vote.
We interpret these results as evidence that firms are operated diﬀerently as a result of their improved
corporate governance structure, reflecting changes in managers’ behavior. Finally, the eﬀect that
we identify is, by definition, only for firms that have observations around the discontinuity, and this
determines how much one can extrapolate the results of our analysis to other firms. However, we
show that firms that have observations falling around the threshold are not very diﬀerent from other
firms that are targets, and that 35% of the G-index proposals fall within ten percentage points of
the majority threshold. This suggests that our results can be directly generalizable to a sizeable set
of firms, though not to all.
        The next section describes the data and presents an analytical framework of how the informa-
tion on the stock-price reaction to the outcome of governance votes that fall around the majority
threshold allows us to recover the eﬀect of governance proposals. Section III presents the empirical
model used to identify this eﬀect. Section IV provides evidence on the regression discontinuity in
shareholder votes as a quasi-experiment. Section V presents the results, and Section VI concludes.



2         Shareholder votes and abnormal returns

2.1        Data description

To estimate the value of governance proposals, we use data collected by Riskmetrics on shareholders’
proposals from 1997 until 2007.5 Our sample includes all 3,984 shareholder proposals Riskmetrics
    5
    Rule 14a-8 permits shareholders to submit proposals requesting that certain corporate matters be put to a vote
at the company’s next annual meeting. To be eligible to submit a proposal, a shareholder must be a beneficial owner
of at least 1% or $2,000 in market value of securities entitled to vote, have owned these securities for at least one


                                                         5
classifies as governance-related and that are included in the proxy statement for all S&P 1,500
companies plus an additional 500 firms that are widely held (Appendix A shows the full list of
proposals and how frequently each of them appears in the data). Riskmetrics provides data on the
company name, the date of the annual meeting, the percentage of votes in favor of the proposal, the
description of the type of proposal, and the proponent.6 Most shareholder proposals are presented
as a recommendation to the board of directors —that is, the outcome of the vote is non-binding.
Ertimur, Ferri and Stubben (forthcoming) show that 31.1% of the shareholder proposals that pass
are implemented, while only 3.2% of those not approved are implemented.
    Riskmetrics classifies the proposals into 72 distinct types. While the eﬀect of the diﬀerent types
of proposals is probably heterogeneous, we bundle them into broader categories due to the lim-
ited number of observations in each group. For descriptive purposes, we group these governance
proposals into six categories widely used in the literature: anti-takeover proposals (G-index), com-
pensation, voting, auditors, board structure and other (see Appendix A). Panel A of Table 1 displays
the frequency of governance proposals, the percent approved and the average support over time.
From 2003 onwards, there is a significant increase in the number of proposals, over 400 cases per
year, and around 30% of those are approved. Panel B also shows that G-index proposals obtained
the highest levels of shareholder support and were approved in 53% of the cases. Compensation
proposals were approved only in 4.2% of the cases, board structure in 8.8% and voting proposals
in 3.3%. For the empirical analysis, the diﬀerence in approval rates means that we have very few
observations on compensation, board structure or voting around the discontinuity, so we will have to
further pool all those proposals and analyze them together. Appendix A shows the number of pro-
posals of each type falling around the majority threshold. Among the 523 G-Index proposals within
5 percentage points of the discontinuity, 219 (42 percent) are proposals to repeal classified boards,
and 132 (25 percent) are proposals to eliminate poison pills. Among the 387 Other (non-Gindex)
kinds of proposals around the discontinuity, 115 (or 30 percent) are proposals to elect directors
through a majority vote, and 68 (18 percent) are proposals to expense stock options. Throughout
the paper, we analyze two sets of proposals (G-index vs. Other) both pooled and separately.
    For the 948 firms that constitute our final sample, we obtained additional information from a
year, and continue to own them through the date of the meeting.
    6
      We checked that all the proposals go in the direction of increasing shareholder rights and control, or improving
alignment. We also used a second Riskmetrics dataset with information on whether majority is computed out of
votes cast or outstanding, and on the majority threshold. Most proposals have a 50% majority threshold, three had
a 66.7% threshold, three had a 70% threshold and four had an 80% threshold. We also used this dataset to check
that the vote was correctly recorded. In the cases where we found discrepancies between the two datasets, we looked
at the company statements.



                                                          6
number of diﬀerent sources: security prices from CRSP; financial information from Compustat; data
on acquisitions from the SDC database; and institutional ownership characteristics from Thomson
Financial.7 Table 2 displays the characteristics of the firms in our sample.


2.2       Identifying shareholder returns from votes on governance proposals


In this section, we present an analytical framework that shows how to recover the value of a
governance provision by focusing on close votes in shareholder-sponsored governance proposals.
Figure 1 provides an illustration. Denote v as the vote share in favor of passing a proposal, and
W (v) as the value to the firm of a particular vote outcome. For simplicity, we assume throughout
this illustration that the outcome of the vote is always binding, that the majority threshold for
a vote to be approved is v > 50%, and that the value of the proposal to the firm is fixed (i.e.,
independent of v), such that W (v) = W if v > 50% and zero otherwise. Figure 1 represents W (v)
and shows the change in the underlying value of the firm after the vote. The objective of the
empirical analysis is to estimate W , the value of implementing a governance proposal, which is not
directly observable. As the day of the vote approaches, investors use all the available information
to form an expectation of the probability that the proposal will succeed, and this expectation is
incorporated in stock prices. Therefore, the price reaction —the abnormal return— that we observe
when the outcome of the vote is known is the diﬀerence between the actual value of the proposal to
the firm W (v) (which is either W or 0, depending on whether it passes or not) and its expected value
before the vote (the average price that the market had formed for a given observed vote outcome),
E(W |v).8 E(W |v) is represented by a dashed line in Figure 1. The intuition behind E(W |v) is that
for votes that have a vote share v close to zero, the market had already assigned a low probability
that they would pass, and, therefore, E(W |v) is close to zero. Similarly, for votes around 100%,
the market assigned a high probability of passing and E(W |v) is close to W . In contrast, around
the threshold, the market had assigned a roughly 50% probability that the vote would pass and
E(W |v) is close to 12 W.
       Since E(W |v) is a continuous function of v, but W (v) is discontinuous at the majority threshold,
the abnormal return that one observes when the outcome of the vote is known is also discontinuous
   7
      Most of these datasets are recorded at the end of the fiscal year. To determine what is the first observation after
a vote, we require that the end of the fiscal year is at least six months after the meeting where the vote is recorded.
If it is less than six months, then we use the following year available as the first year after the meeting.
    8
      See supplemental Appendix for details on how to derive E(W |v) analytically.



                                                           7
at the majority threshold. In fact, the diﬀerence in abnormal returns at the majority threshold —Z
in Figure 1— between a vote that barely fails and one that barely passes is exactly the value of the
proposal. Under the set of assumptions outlined earlier: Z = (W − E(W |v)) − (0 − E(W |v)) = W .
Therefore, one can recover the value of the proposal from the diﬀerence in abnormal returns of
close-call votes or, in other words, at the discontinuity.
      The earlier example made a number of assumptions that may not necessarily hold in reality.
In practice, shareholder proposals are typically not binding. A proposal may pass but not be
implemented; thus W (v) will be below the eﬀective value of the proposal to the right of the threshold,
and the market reaction to proposals that pass by a close margin will be less positive than if the vote
were binding. Similarly, if management feels that a proposal that fails to pass by a few votes should
still be implemented, W (v) will be slightly positive to the left of the threshold and the market
reaction will be less negative. Furthermore, W (v) may incorporate the probability that the current
vote will trigger another proposal in the future that, in turn, may or may not pass. As a result,
E(W |v) and abnormal returns are not necessarily symmetric around the threshold, as in our simple
example in Figure 1. Still, provided E(W |v) is continuous and the probability of implementation
discontinuous around the threshold, then Z can be used to measure the value of the proposal to the
firm. In this case, the value estimated at the discontinuity, Z, is not equal to W , as in the previous
example (Supplemental Appendix Figure SA5 illustrates this case). In order to recover the value of
W from our estimate Z, we need to consider that, around the discontinuity, the market is updating
both the probability of implementation and the chances of proposing and passing future proposals.
      Note that our identification strategy does not require proposals to be binding. As discussed in
Lee and Lemieux (forthcoming), the identification strategy is still valid as long as there is a discrete
jump in the probability of implementation at the majority threshold (this is the "fuzzy" regression
discontinuity setting).9
      We can define pI as the diﬀerence in the probability of implementation of a proposal that passes
by a short margin relative to one that fails by a short margin. Similarly, we can define ppt+i as the
endogenous change in the probability of passing and subsequently implementing another proposal
i periods from now (as a result of the current proposal passing at the discontinuity). Assuming a
discount rate of δ i , the market reaction at the threshold Z can, therefore, be written as the sum
of two elements: the value associated with the current proposal being implemented, (pI W f ), plus
  9
    In Ertimur, Ferri and Stubben (forthcoming), the change in the probability of implementation at the major-
ity threshold can be inferred to be around of 20.7%; and in section 5.1.3, we estimate a discrete change in the
implementation probability of 30.1% within two years for the subset of proposals that aﬀect the G-index .



                                                      8
the present discounted value of future proposals being passed and implemented as a result of the
                          X∞
current proposal passing (       δ i ppt+i W f ). So, once we obtain estimates pI , ppt+i from the data,
                                    i=1
the value of the proposal can be recovered as:

                                                             Z
                                            Wf =            X∞                    .                                 (1)
                                                     pI +             δ i ppt+i
                                                                i=1

    One important question that arises when trying to infer the value of a proposal from the abnormal
returns at the discontinuity is whether we should expect any eﬀect at all of votes that barely pass
or fail. Shareholder votes should reflect a value-maximizing decision. If all shareholders were trying
to maximize shareholder value, and in the absence of transaction costs, then they should all vote
in the same way, in favor of or against a proposal. If shareholders are identical but have diﬀerent
information on the value of a proposal, then some votes would fall around the discontinuity, and
those would correspond to proposals whose value to the firm is neutral or uncertain. However, when
the objective of some shareholders is not to maximize shareholder’s value (say, in the presence
of other private benefits), then the outcome of the vote will depend on the distribution of their
preferences. In this sense, it is well-documented that diﬀerent types of shareholders vote diﬀerently
because they are heterogeneous in their objectives, and may have other stakes in the firm. For
example, it has been shown that banks and insurance companies tend to side with management
by voting against the proposals, while mutual funds, unions, advisors and pension funds tend to
support the proposals (Brickley, Lease and Smith, 1988; Agrawal, 2008). The fact that we find
positive abnormal returns at the discontinuity suggests that there are decisions that maximize
shareholder value but are hard to implement given the ownership patterns of firms.


2.3     Abnormal returns as a function of the vote share: graphical evi-
        dence

Figure 2 shows the impact of passing a proposal on shareholder abnormal returns on the day of
the meeting. The daily abnormal returns were calculated from CRSP using the three Fama-French
factors and the momentum factor from Carhart (1997).10 It is the empirical counterpart of Figure
1, although note that since, in practice, vote outcomes are not binding and may trigger future
   10
      These three factors are standard in the literature and adjust for diﬀerent sources of risk that should aﬀect daily
returns, including the market factor (excess market return), a size factor, and a factor that accounts for the security
being a value or growth stock (using book to market). The estimation period starts two months prior to the event
date; the length of the estimation period is 200 trading days, and we impose at least 15 days with returns to make
it into the sample.


                                                            9
proposals, this can make the eﬀects non-symmetric around zero. The graph plots the average daily
abnormal return for the day of the meeting (t = 0) when the information of the vote is revealed. The
X-axis reflects the margin of victory (the vote share minus the threshold for that vote). On the day
of the vote, proposals that pass by a small margin have positive abnormal returns, and comparing
those to proposals that fail by a small margin gives us the eﬀect of passing a proposal on abnormal
returns. Notice that proposals that pass by more than a 5% margin display zero abnormal returns,
which is consistent with the fact that the market can forecast with some accuracy the probability
of passing a proposal, and this is incorporated in prices. Most firms disclose vote outcomes on the
same day of the annual meeting through a variety of channels (news wires and real-time broadcast).
Independently, institutional investors such as CALPERS provide news posts on voting results.
Additional information is released by the media covering these corporate events.
    Figure 2 is an intuitive representation of the main result of the paper: close-call governance
proposals that pass lead to positive abnormal returns on the day of the vote, while those that do
not pass lead to negative or negligible ones. Before showing regression results in section 5, over the
next two sections, we describe the methodology that uses all the data eﬃciently and we test the
validity and generality of our approach.



3     Methodology and identification strategy
This section describes how we can estimate the causal eﬀect of shareholder governance proposals
on shareholder returns and other outcomes using a regression discontinuity (RD) setting.


3.1     Regression discontinuity in shareholder votes

Suppose that shareholders of firm f vote on a shareholder proposal at time t, the meeting date,
and that this proposal gets a total vote share (percentage of votes in favor) vf t . If vf t is larger
than the majority threshold v ∗ , then this proposal passes and we code the indicator for pass as
Df t = 1( vf t > v ∗ ).
    We are interested in the eﬀect that passing a certain proposal has on an outcome variable yf t .
Then, we can write:


                                        yf t = κ + Df t θ + uf t ,                                (2)

where the coeﬃcient θ we are interested in is the eﬀect of passing a proposal in a shareholder

                                                   10
meeting on the outcome variable yf t —say, abnormal returns, or the probability of future proposals
passing— and uf t represents all other determinants of the outcome (E(uf t ) = 0). The problem with
estimating a regression such as (2) directly is that the passage of a proposal is a highly endogenous
outcome, and Df t is unlikely to be independent of the error term [E(Df t , uf t ) 6= 0], such that the
estimate of b
            θ will be biased.
       To get a consistent estimate, we would ideally want "passing" a proposal to be a randomly
assigned variable. The regression discontinuity framework that exploits the vote shares helps us
approximate this ideal setup because in an arbitrarily small interval around the discontinuity (the
threshold v ∗ ), whether the proposal passed or failed is random (e.g., whether a proposal passes
by 50.1% or fails by 49.9% is random). Lee (2008) formally shows that, as long as there is a
random component to the vote, the assignment into "treatment" (pass and Df t = 1) and "control"
groups (fails and Df t = 0) is random around the threshold.11 This implies that our estimate of b
                                                                                                θ
using the regression discontinuity design is immune to bias from omitted variables —such as firm
announcements— even if they are correlated with the vote, as long as their eﬀect is continuous
around the threshold. Therefore, by comparing the outcome yf t of votes that barely passed to the
outcome of votes that barely failed, we get a consistent estimate of the value of a new governance
rule.
       In order to use all our data and improve eﬃciency, we follow the standard approach (see Lee and
Lemieux, forthcoming) and assume that we can approximate the underlying relationship between
yf t and vf t , with a polynomial in the vote share. This polynomial flexibly captures the underlying
relationship between the vote share and the outcome variable, such that any discontinuous jump at
the threshold is captured by θ. Allowing for a diﬀerent polynomial for observations on the right-hand
side of the threshold Pr (vf t , γ r ) and on the left-hand side of the threshold Pl (vf t , γ l ) gives:


                                yf t = Df t θ + Pr (vf t , γ r ) + Pl (vf t , γ l ) + uf t .                (3)

       This estimate, b
                      θ, is precisely the estimate of Z from section 2.2 (Figure 1). Therefore, when yf t
are abnormal returns, the regression discontinuity model yields a consistent estimate of Z.
  11
    This random component contains all kinds of random events that aﬀect the voting outcome. It does not need to
be large for our purposes, given that we perform a local analysis.




                                                            11
3.2       Panel data, multiple votes and multiple shareholder meetings

Two issues emerge when trying to implement the standard RD model of equation (3) to analyze
the eﬀect of governance rules in our data. The first is that there is a dynamic component to our
data that implies that elections at time t will have an impact on outcomes at times t + 1, t + 2, etc.
The second is that for each firm and meeting date, shareholders may have to vote on more than one
governance issue (the average number of shareholder governance proposals voted on in a meeting
in our sample is 1.64), so we need to find a way to aggregate all votes by firm and meeting date.


3.2.1      Dynamics in the impact of the votes

We follow the empirical model in Cellini et al. (2010) to characterize the dynamic version of the
RD for a firm f that has a vote at time t, and we define the outcome τ periods later yf,t+τ as:


                              yf,t+τ = Df t θτ + Pr (vf t , γ rτ ) + Pl (vf t , γ lτ ) + uf t,t+τ .           (4)

       θτ estimates the causal eﬀect of passing a vote at time t on outcomes at t+τ . Estimating equation
(4) separately for each period t + τ , as noted by Cellini et al. (2010), is ineﬃcient because there is
an important component that is fixed within firms over time but varies across firms. We follow their
strategy, pooling data for multiple τ (including τ < 0) and including controls to absorb firm-level
heterogeneity. For each election in our data (f, t), we use observations for firm f in periods t − 2 to
t + T (T is up to seven days after the election for abnormal returns and four years after the election
for other outcomes). We then estimate:


                      yf,t+τ = Df t θτ + Pr (vf t , γ rτ ) + Pl (vf t , γ lτ ) + ατ + ηc + λf t + ef tτ .     (5)


       This follows equation (7) in Cellini et al. (2010) (see, also, more details for the sample construc-
tion in that paper).12 ατ , ηc and λf t are fixed eﬀects for time periods relative to the meeting date,
calendar years and focal elections, respectively. θτ , γ rτ and γ lτ are allowed to vary for τ > 0, and
constrained to zero for τ < 0, and standard errors are clustered by firm f. Here, θτ is the eﬀect
of passing a proposal at time t, on outcomes τ periods later, and we obtain separate estimates for
the contemporaneous eﬀect (τ = 0), one period later (τ = 1), etc. Notice that this dynamic model
  12
    This yields the Intent To Treat (ITT) estimator in Cellini et al. (2010). That paper also demonstrates how to
derive Treatment On the Treated (TOT) estimates in the dynamic regression discontinuity setting. For our daily
shareholder return regressions, ITT and TOT are identical since there is only one election per year and, hence, no
intervening elections between t and t + 7, when t is measured in days.



                                                              12
allows us to introduce focal meeting fixed eﬀects λf t , and those will absorb any characteristic of the
meeting that aﬀects outcomes in periods t + τ (e.g., characteristics of the firm that are constant
during the event window). Information is mostly released on the day of the vote, but, in any case,
this dynamic structure would capture any eﬀect in subsequent days.


3.3      Aggregating votes

Next, we need to find a way to aggregate all votes for a given firm and meeting date. To illustrate
how we do this, we first ignore dynamics and use the simple (non-dynamic) equation (3). Imagine
that the firm could vote on two issues, A and B, on any given date. Then, we would extend equation
(3) to allow for two diﬀerent kinds of votes to aﬀect yf t :




      yf t = DfAt θA + DfBt θB + PrA (vfAt , γ A,r ) + PrB (vfBt , γ B,r ) + PlA (vfAt , γ A,l ) + PlB (vfBt , γ B,l ) + uf t ,


and θA (θB ) would be the eﬀect of proposals of type A (B) on the outcome of interest. The problem
is that there are not just two types of governance proposals but 72 (see Appendix A). Given that
we identify eﬀects only around the discontinuity, the number of observations limits how much we
can separate out the eﬀects. However, under the assumption that for all A and B : θA = θB = θ;
PrA = PrB = Pr ; and PlA = PlB = Pl we can rewrite equation (3) as:

                                   X
                                   N                      X
                                                          N                             X
                                                                                        N
                          yf = θ         DfKt   + [Pr (       vfKt , γ K,r )   + Pl (       vfKt , γ K,l )] + uf t .              (6)
                                   K=1                K=1                           K=1


   And θ is the average causal eﬀect of a proposal. In order to allow for more flexibility than
this arguably restrictive but practical assumption allows, we will allow θ to vary by two relevant
groups of proposals (anti-takeover provisions vs. other proposals). We will also let the eﬀect of θ be
non-linear in the number of proposals passed and, as we will see, the eﬀect is approximately linear.
Unfortunately, the number of observations that are around the discontinuity limits how flexible
we can be in allowing for more disaggregated groups. When we restrict our analysis to meetings
where only one governance proposal is voted on (and, therefore, we do not need to aggregate across
proposals), we obtain results similar to those using multiple votes in a day; thus, equation (6)
appears to be a good way to summarize the data.
   When we put together equations (5) and (6), which recognize the dynamic structure of the data



                                                                   13
and the need to aggregate over N proposals, we obtain our estimating equation:

                           X
                           N                    X
                                                N                         X
                                                                          N
             yf,t+τ = θτ         Df t + [Pr (       vfKt , γ K,r
                                                             τ ) + Pl (       vfKt , γ K,l
                                                                                       τ )] + ατ + η c + λf t + ef tτ   (7)
                           K=1              K=1                       K=1


       Throughout the paper, we use a polynomial of order four on either side of the threshold (Supple-
mental Appendix, Table A shows that our results are robust to the use of higher-order polynomials).



4        Election votes as a quasi-experiment: vote distribution
         and pre-existing diﬀerences
The basic assumption of the regression discontinuity design is that around the threshold, passing a
proposal is as good as random assignment. Here, we provide a standard test of this assumption that
consists in evaluating whether the distribution of votes is continuous around the majority threshold.
Figure 3 shows the distribution of the vote share (the percentage of votes in favor) for all votes
in our sample. If there were sharp changes in that distribution around the threshold, this would
indicate that the probability of falling on either side of the threshold is discontinuous and that
the main identification assumption is likely not to hold (McCrary, 2008). Figures 4 and 5 show
the distribution of votes separately for proposals to remove anti-takeover provisions (those included
in the G-index), and Other proposals to increase shareholder control (including compensation,
board-related and auditor-related proposals). In these, we also see that the distribution is smooth
around the threshold.13 Listokin (2008) also reports a smooth distribution of shareholder-sponsored
proposals around the majority threshold as evidence of lack of strategic behavior. In contrast, he
shows that management proposals (which are excluded from our analysis) display a very sharp
discontinuity in the density of votes at the majority threshold; essentially, these rarely fail to pass,
as management strategically withdraws those proposals that are likely to fail.
       Figures 4 and 5 also show that anti-takeover proposals are more likely to fall around the dis-
continuity. Since our estimates are identified only from observations around the discontinuity, this
implies that most of the eﬀect we estimate comes from the passage of anti-takeover provisions. It
also limits the extent to which we can try to identify the eﬀects of diﬀerent subgroups since we do
not have enough observations around the threshold.
  13
    We performed the density test for smoothness of the vote share suggested in McCrary (2008) and could not
reject smoothness around the majority threshold. [See Supplemental Appendix Figures SA2 to SA4].



                                                                14
      A second standard test of the regression discontinuity design consists in evaluating whether
prior to the day of the vote, there were systematic diﬀerences in the characteristics of firms that
fall on either side of the threshold. If one found systematic diﬀerences in characteristics of firms
that just pass, relative to those that just fail to pass a proposal, then the main assumption of the
design is likely to be violated. The first column in each panel of Table 3 looks at firms where a
proposal passes and those where a proposal fails and evaluates whether there is a diﬀerence in a
number of firm characteristics in the period before the meeting. The regressions in column 1 do
not control for a polynomial in the vote share, so that they estimate the average pre-diﬀerence in
characteristics across all firms. The regressions in column 2 include the polynomials of order four
on either side of the threshold, so that they estimate the eﬀect at the discontinuity. We see that
there is no significant diﬀerence in abnormal returns on the day before the meeting (Panel A) or in
Tobin’s Q, capital expenditures, return on equity or R&D over assets in the year before the meeting
(Panel B). There is no diﬀerence in the growth rates of those variables, on average (column 3), and
most importantly for our identification, around the discontinuity (column 4), which indicates the
absence of pre-existing diﬀerences. Panel C examines two acquisitions variables (number and value
of acquisitions), and neither has significant diﬀerences around the threshold.
      Next, we examine diﬀerences in ownership concentration for institutional owners (Panel E). As
mentioned, the presence of institutional owners is likely to be a determinant of the outcome of
the vote. In column 1, Panel E, we find that, indeed, a proposal is more likely to pass in firms
with a high reported concentration of institutional owners (measured as the sum of institutional
ownership for the top five shareholders in the last fiscal quarter before the meeting) or with more
institutional owners that report to own at least 5% of shares outstanding.14 This confirms the fact
that one cannot directly compare firms with or without governance provisions in place since these
are diﬀerent kinds of firms. However, once we include the polynomial in the vote share in column 2
of Panel D, we see that there is no significant diﬀerence around the threshold, which lends support
to our identifying assumption.
      Similarly, one expects that firms with diﬀerent levels of shareholder rights, as measured by the
G-index, have diﬀerent propensities to pass shareholders’ governance proposals. Column 1 of Panel
E shows that firms with a higher G-index (more anti-takeover provisions in place) are more likely to
pass the shareholder proposals. However, firms around the vicinity of the discontinuity do not diﬀer
along this dimension, which further supports the paper’s basic identifying assumption. Finally,
 14
      These two variables are computed using SEC Form 13F quarterly filings, provided by Thomson Financial.



                                                       15
we also examine a number of additional meeting characteristics such as the number of proposals,
the number of withdrawn proposals prior to the annual meeting and the identity of the proponent
and find no evidence of pre-existing diﬀerences at the discontinuity (see Table B in Supplemental
Appendix).
    Overall, our results show that there is no evidence of selection into either side of the discontinuity,
based on observable variables.



5       Results

5.1     Market reaction to exogenous changes in governance

5.1.1    The eﬀect of governance proposals on abnormal returns

Table 4 shows estimates of the diﬀerence in abnormal returns between proposals that pass and
proposals that do not pass for increasingly small intervals around the election threshold on the day
of the vote (standard errors are clustered by firm). Column 1 estimates this on the whole sample,
and we find that, as expected, there is no diﬀerence, on average, between those passing and those
failing (a highly insignificant estimate of 0.0009) since the market incorporates the expectation in
the prices. Column 2 restricts the sample to within ten percentage points of the threshold, and
here we begin to see a higher estimate (0.002— i.e., 0.2% daily abnormal return) and a smaller
standard error. For votes within five percentage points of the threshold, the abnormal return is
0.76% higher for those that passed (and this is significant at 1%), and as we narrow the window even
further to two percentage points (column 4) and one percentage point (column 5), the abnormal
return of passing increases to 1.05% and 1.39%, respectively. These are still significant, even though
the number of observations falls as we narrow the window. Panels B and C of Table 4 show the
same set of regressions for anti-takeover provisions and all other proposals pooled, respectively.
We find a similar pattern, with most of the eﬀect being driven by anti-takeover provisions. This
is partly because there are more G-index proposals that fall around the discontinuity, so we can
estimate them more precisely. It also reflects the fact that G-index proposals are thought to have a
potentially more important impact in insulating managers to pursue their private goals. Within one
percentage point of the interval, passing an anti-takeover provision yields a 2.2% abnormal return
on the day of the vote.
    Finally, column 6 makes use of all the data in the sample (as described in section 3.1) and
introduces two polynomials of order four in the vote share, one on each side of the threshold (as in

                                                    16
equation (3) above). Using this model, we estimate that the eﬀect of passing a proposal is 1.3%,
which is very close to the results of the unrestricted models of the earlier columns.
   Figure 6 shows the day-by-day diﬀerence in abnormal returns between firms where a proposal
passes or fails within five percentage points on either side of the majority threshold. We observe a
clear peak in the diﬀerence in returns between firms that pass and firms that do not pass a proposal
on the day of the vote, t = 0 (this is the same as the coeﬃcient in column 3 of Table 4, Panel A).
For other days around the annual meeting, there are no clear spikes or discernible pattern. This
shows that the market incorporates the outcome of the vote on the day of the vote itself —when the
outcome is known— and not before. It also seems that there are no further additional returns on
the days after the vote.
   Table 4 is a simple and transparent representation of our data, but it does not take into account
that several proposals can be voted on in one day; that the eﬀect of the vote could potentially
persist over more than one day; or that the returns are likely to be correlated over time, given that
they respond to the same events. In order to incorporate these characteristics of the data, we use
the full model described in equation (7). The results are shown in Table 5. Column 1 displays
the eﬀect of passing a proposal on the meeting date (t), the day after (t + 1) and the cumulative
eﬀect from t + 2 to t + 7. We find that most of the eﬀect (1.3% abnormal return) is on the day
of the vote, when the surprise around the threshold occurs. The following days yield around 0.2%
daily abnormal returns, but these are insignificant. Column 2 shows similar results using a diﬀerent
model to compute the daily abnormal returns (a standard one-factor market model instead of the
three-factor Fama-French with momentum that we use in the rest of the analysis).
   Overall, we find that most of the eﬀect on prices occurs on the day of the vote. In column 3,
we explore further what happens on that day by allowing for a more flexible specification of the
eﬀect of the number of votes on daily returns (recall that the model in equation (7) sums over the
votes of the day to aggregate over all the diﬀerent outcomes). Here, we allow for diﬀerent dummy
variables for the number of proposals that passed, with a maximum of six proposals passing in a
given meeting day. We find that the eﬀect is monotonically increasing and approximately linear in
the number of proposals, such that the model in Section 3.3 is appropriate (the eﬀect of passing one
proposal is 1.3%, similar to our baseline estimate; passing two proposals yields a 2.2% abnormal
return; three and four proposals yield a total of 4.6% returns, etc.). Columns 4 and 5 allow for
a diﬀerent eﬀect of the two kinds of proposals: the set of anti-takeover provisions included in the
G-index and the set of Other proposals. Among these Other (non G-index) proposals, the ones that


                                                 17
fall more frequently around the discontinuity are proposals to increase board independence from
management and proposals to expense stock options (see Appendix A). We confirm that most of the
eﬀect is driven by anti-takeover proposals —in particular, by proposals to repeal a classified board
and to eliminate poison pills (see Appendix A). However, we also find positive, albeit somewhat
smaller and less precisely estimated eﬀects of other kinds of proposals, which have received less
attention in the literature.
       In sum, we find that there is a significant 1.3% average price reaction to proposals that pass
by a small margin relative to those that fail by a small margin.15 We argue that the regression
discontinuity design allows us to obtain a causal estimate, that is not driven by omitted variables,
unobserved firm characteristics or other events. The positive price reaction on the day of the vote
may reflect the idea that the governance improvement will lead to lower agency costs and higher
firm value; or it could also reflect a takeover premium. In Section 5.3 below, we study the long-term
eﬀects of these votes to assess the evidence on these diﬀerent possible explanations for the positive
price reaction.


5.1.2      Heterogeneous eﬀects of governance proposals

It is likely that firms with diﬀerent characteristics may have diﬀerent quantitative responses to
passing a governance proposal. To further investigate this potential heterogeneity in responses, we
study the eﬀect of governance proposals in diﬀerent subsets of the data. In particular, we analyze
the diﬀerential response in firms according to the level of concentration of the top five institutional
owners, the intensity of anti-takeover protection in place at the time of the meeting (G-index), and
whether the firms had high R&D expenditures.
       We find that firms with a higher concentration of large institutional owners respond more to
passing a provision than do firms with more-dispersed ownership. In particular, column 1 of Table
6, shows that passing a shareholder proposal in concentrated-ownership firms elicits a 2% abnormal
return on the day of the meeting, with a further cumulative 2.3% in the seven days after the meeting
(for G-index proposals —column 4— the cumulative return over seven days is 3.6% in concentrated-
ownership firms). This may reflect that these firms are more closely monitored and, therefore, the
proposal is more likely to be implemented, or that the value of these provisions is higher for these
firms —and that governance proposals and monitoring are complements in the governance structure.
We also find that firms with many anti-takeover provisions benefit more from the removal of takeover
  15
    This is a large and significant eﬀect in contrast with the generally small or insignificant results found when using
the mailing date as an event study (See Gillan and Starks, 2000; Thomas and Cotter, 2007).


                                                          18
barriers. In firms with more than ten (median) G-index provisions in place on the day of the meeting,
passing a G-index shareholder proposal yields a 1.9% abnormal return on the day of the vote and
a further 2.4% in the following seven days (column 5).
   The previous analysis shows that, on average, passing a proposal that improves shareholder
rights increases shareholder value. However, it is possible that having excessive shareholder rights
in place can be detrimental to firms if that leads managers to focus excessively on the short run at
the expense of the long run (Stein, 1988). If this were true, firms in which long-run investments
are important might respond negatively to these governance proposals. We proxy the long-term
nature of firms’ investment by their R&D expenditures. Columns 3 and 6 estimate our basic model
for firms with above-median R&D-to-assets ratio prior to the meeting. We find, in fact, that the
eﬀect for these firms (1.6%) is very similar to the result for the whole sample (1.3%), indicating
that there is no diﬀerent response, at least along this dimension of long-run investment needs, and
that the change in abnormal returns from changes in the governance structure is also positive for
these firms.
   Finally, the regression discontinuity estimate is, by construction, the weighted average eﬀect
across all firms and proposals, where more weight is given to those votes in which a close election was
expected (Lee and Lemieux, forthcoming). In our case, as mentioned, the elimination of staggered
boards and poison pills represent 68% of G-index proposals falling around the discontinuity, implying
that those have a bigger weight in the identification.
   In terms of how much one can extrapolate the results of our analysis to other firms, one must
take into account that, within listed firms, those that are larger, less profitable and have a higher
level of institutional ownership tend to be targeted by shareholder proposals more often (Karpoﬀ
et al., 1996; Romano, 2001). However, within the set of firms that are the target of a proposal, we
know from Section 4 that there are no systematic diﬀerences between firms on either side of the
threshold which means there is no evidence of selection into treatment. We also can see in Figure
4 that the mass of G-Index proposals actually is around the majority threshold. Still, firms with
votes around the threshold may be diﬀerent from other firms in our sample. In order to have a sense
of what kinds of firms have observations that fall around the discontinuity, we plot the distribution
of institutional ownership and of Tobin’s Q in the year before the meeting for (i) firms that have a
vote share lower than 45%; (ii) firms that have between 45% and 55% votes in favor—those falling
around the discontinuity; and (iii) firms with more than 55% of votes in favor. Figures 7 and 8
show that firms with vote shares around the discontinuity fall roughly in between firms in the other


                                                  19
two groups (e.g., the distribution of institutional ownership for proposals in the G-index is between
the other two groups, and so is the distribution of Tobin’s Q —Figure 7). Even though one cannot
immediately generalize our results to all firms, the evidence suggests that firms that fall around the
discontinuity are not "extreme" observations, but, rather, firms with average characteristics.


5.1.3   Implementation and the probability of passing future proposals

While we do not have information on whether each proposal in our data was implemented, we know
how the value of the G-index changes over time for most firms in our sample. The G-index is the
number of anti-takeover provisions in place at a point in time. We can evaluate how it responds to
the passage of a provision at the discontinuity. This serves as a proxy for implementation. Column 1
of Table 7 shows the eﬀect of passing a governance proposal on the G-index. The index is available
only every two years, so the first coeﬃcient is the eﬀect on the first year available after the focal
meeting (this can be between one and two years after the meeting, depending on when the vote
occurred relative to the G-index years), and the second coeﬃcient is two years later, etc. We find
that the probability of implementation increases discretely around the discontinuity; thus, proposals
that pass by a small margin are substantially more likely to be implemented relative to those that
fail. Passing a proposal reduces the G-index by 0.313, which we interpret as a 31.3% probability of
removing an anti-takeover provision within two years. That number grows in subsequent years, and
within four years, the probability is 50%. This indicates, in part that when a proposal is passed
but not implemented, shareholders are likely to propose it again. Our estimates are consistent with
the results in Ertimur et al. (forthcoming).
   Passing a governance proposal in a given meeting is also likely to aﬀect the probability of
submitting and passing other proposals in the future. Ex-ante, it is unclear whether it will increase,
decrease or have no eﬀect on those future probabilities. We assess these dynamic eﬀects in our data
using equation (8) and, as the dependent variable, the number of proposals that are submitted and
passed in each year. The variable is zero if there are no shareholder governance proposals, or if
these do not pass. Table 8 shows the results. Column 1 includes the polynomial in the vote share
and shows that, around the discontinuity, passing a G-index proposal leads to 0.325 more proposals
being passed the following year and 0.119 more two years later, and the positive eﬀect declines and
becomes insignificant after year four. The eﬀect for other proposals is generally insignificant, or
negative. The dependent variable in column 2 is the number of G-index proposals passed in each
year, and the results indicate that the eﬀect in column 1 is driven mainly by G-index proposals. This


                                                 20
is an important set of results that shows there is a substantial dynamic element to these proposals,
with passing G-index proposals making it more likely that other proposals will be passed in the
future.


5.2       The value of a governance proposal

In the previous section, we found that passing a provision increased shareholders’ returns on the
day of the vote by 1.3%. This is our estimate of Z, as defined in Section 2.2. However, we know that
the observed abnormal return is not the full expected increase in value from implementation. It is
an expectation that accounts for the probability that the proposal will be implemented, plus further
eﬀects of submitting and implementing governance proposals in the future. In order to recover the
actual value of a proposal, W , using equation (2), we need to know (i) the probability that the
provision is implemented if passed, and (ii) the probability that other proposals will be passed and
implemented in the future.
       We obtain estimates for these probabilities in two diﬀerent ways. The first is using the results
from Table 7 with the G-index as a proxy for implementation. In the previous section, we showed
that passing a proposal reduces the number of G-index provisions by 0.31. We also found that
two years later, the probability of implementation is 0.016 higher (0.329-0.313), and two years after
that, it is 0.174 higher (0.503-0.329), etc. With these probabilities in hand and assuming a discount
rate of 5%, we can use equation (1) to recover the value of a provision to the firm. We estimate
that to be a 2.8% increase in market value.
       As a second way to determine the value of a provision, we use diﬀerent sources for the estimated
probabilities that feed into equation (1). Ertimur et al. (forthcoming) find a 20.7% discrete change
in the probability of implementation at the threshold (pI ).16 The probability that a proposal will
be implemented in the future (ppt+i ) is equal to the probability that it will pass in the future times
the probability that it will be implemented conditional on passing. The average probability that a
proposal that passes will be implemented is 31.1% (Ertimur et al., forthcoming). And the estimated
probability of passing a proposal in the future, given that a proposal was passed this year, is shown
in column 2 of Table 8. Using these probabilities in equation (2), we estimate that the value of
implementing a provision leads to a 2.7% increase in market value.
       Therefore, in our data, adopting a governance provision increases shareholder value by between
  16
    They estimate that the probability of implementation from proposals that obtain 50% to 60% of the vote in
favor is 23.9%. The probability that a proposal that failed will be implemented is 3.2%. We obtain 20.7% as the
diﬀerence between the two. See Table 1, Panel D and footnote 9 in Ertimur et al. (forthcoming).


                                                      21
2.7% and 2.8%, depending on how we compute the estimate. This translates to an increase in
market value for the average firm in the sample of around US$600 million (average market value
is US$22,400 million in 1996 US$) per proposal. This is an economically sizeable eﬀect, especially
when we consider that firms often drop several provisions in subsequent meetings. Dropping 2.5
provisions (one standard deviation of the G-index in the sample) translates into a predicted increase
in market value of 7%, implying that the economic consequences of poor governance arrangements
are non-negligible.


5.3       Long-run eﬀects of governance

In this final section, we evaluate the eﬀect of passing a governance proposal on long-term firm
outcomes. Evaluating these real eﬀects is important for determining why the firm’s market value
increases following the improvement in shareholder rights and, in particular, following the removal
of anti-takeover provisions. The increase in market value could simply reflect that the increased
probability of a takeover may lead to a takeover premium. It could also result from an improvement
in internal governance and managerial discipline. This would be the case if weak shareholder rights
provided substantial protective power to standing managers (e.g., by insulating them from the
takeover market), causing additional agency costs in the form of ineﬃcient investments, reduced
operational eﬃciency, and/or private benefits.17
       All regressions in Table 9 use the empirical model in equation (7) to estimate the eﬀect of
passing a governance proposal on a number of long-term outcomes and, distinguish between the
eﬀect of anti-takeover and Other proposals.18 Since we are looking at eﬀects up to 4 years after
the vote, for proposals at the end of the sample we cannot estimate the long-run eﬀects. This is
particularly problematic for Other proposals because they are more frequent towards the end of the
sample (only 47 observations fall close to the discontinuity prior to 2004), so one should interpret
the long-run results for those with caution, especially at long durations. All regressions include
firm-meeting fixed eﬀects, and cluster standard errors by firm. In addition, our identification comes
from the diﬀerent response of a firm that passes a proposal by a small margin, relative to one that
  17
      Previous studies found that the presence of weak shareholders’ rights was correlated with higher levels of acqui-
sitions and capital expenditures (as proxies for agency costs), lower valuation (as measured by Tobin’s Q and book
to market) and mixed results regarding accounting returns (return on equity and return on assets) (e.g., Gompers
et al., 2003; Bebchuck et al., 2004; Core et al., 2006).
   18
      Financial ratios and other dependent variables used in Table 9 typically have significant outliers. To avoid the
eﬀect of influential observations, for each column of Table 9 we restrict the sample to firm/votes that do not have
any observation in the top or bottom 5% of the distribution of the dependent variable. The results are not sensitive
to this particular outlier cut-oﬀ, but are sensitive to the inclusion of outliers.



                                                          22
fails to pass a proposal by a small margin. This very demanding identification in terms of data
requirements is bound to yield larger standard errors.
       Columns 1 and 2 examine, respectively, whether the number and the value of acquisitions made
by a firm change significantly in the years following the improvement in shareholder rights. Column
3 evaluates the eﬀect on the growth of capital expenditures. Acquisitions may generate value, but
they have also been associated with empire-building incentives and excess of free cash-flow problems
that do not necessarily maximize shareholders’ value.19 Some also argue that management entrench-
ment can lead to overinvestment or increases in corporate slack (Garvey and Hanka, 1999; Bertrand
and Mullainathan, 2003; Giroud and Mueller, 2007). Therefore, one way in which improved gover-
nance can aﬀect performance is through the reduction in unnecessary acquisitions, investments and
capital-expenditures growth. We compute the number and value of firm acquisitions from the SDC
database, which records all transactions of at least 5% of market value. The number of acquisitions
is defined as the count of acquisitions made in a year, and the value is computed as the sum of all
acquisition prices paid, divided by the average market capitalization on the first and last day of the
year.20 We find that removing an anti-takeover provision reduces the number of acquisitions made
in the years following the vote (column 1). The number falls by 0.03 the year after the vote, 0.17
two years later and 0.18 three years later (only this last coeﬃcient is significant, though). We find
a similar pattern for the value of these acquisitions (column 2). Column 3 shows that the growth
of capital expenditures also seems to decline after a vote to eliminate G-index provisions. For other
types of provisions, the eﬀect is reversed, and capital expenditures actually increase a few years
after the vote, but this is subject to the limitations of the data for those proposals at long durations
mentioned earlier.
       Finally, we examine the long-term performance eﬀects of exogenous changes in governance. We
use Compustat to construct the firm’s Tobin’s Q, book-to-market ratio and return on equity as
measures of long-term valuation and performance. Column 4 of Table 9 shows that Tobin’s Q
increases significantly as a result of passing the governance proposals (both G-index and Other).
Similarly, column 5 shows a significant reduction in the book-to-market ratio.21 Again, the eﬀect
  19
     There is evidence on acquisitions often being associated with negative abnormal returns for the bidder on an-
nouncement, as well as long-term negative performance (see, for example, Rau and Vermaelen 1998).
  20
     We use the same measures as in Gompers et al. (2003).
  21
     Tobin’s Q is defined as the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets, where the market
value of assets is computed as book value of assets (Compustat item: AT) plus the market value of common stock
(Compustat item: mkvalt_f) minus the sum of the book value of common stock (Compustat item: CEQ) and balance
sheet Deferred Taxes and Investment Tax Credit (Compustat item: TXDITC). All book values for fiscal year t are
combined with the market value of common equity at the calendar end of year t. Book-to-market ratio is the ratio
of book value of common equity (previous fiscal year) to market value of common equity (end of previous calendar


                                                       23
is significant for both types of proposals. We also find evidence that return on equity (column 6)
increases, but this is not significant for the G-index proposals.22
    Overall, we find that, as a result of the removal of anti-takeover provisions, acquisitions and
capital expenditures fall, firm valuation increases in the long-run, but there is little eﬀect on earnings.
While some of these eﬀects are imprecisely estimated, taken as a whole, the above results indicate
that acquisitions and capital expenditures fall as a result of the removal of anti-takeover provisions,
and that firm valuation increases in the long run. This suggests that the abnormal returns that
we identified in earlier sections as a result of governance improvements lead to actual changes
in managers’ actions. Further, if one is willing to interpret the marginal acquisitions and capital
expenditures as value-destroying, and a way in which managers extract private benefits (e.g., though
empire-building), then our evidence suggests that corporate governance proposals that remove anti-
takeover provisions increases shareholder value through the disciplining of management and the
reduction in agency costs.



6     Conclusion
In this paper, we present novel evidence on the causal eﬀect of corporate governance provisions on
the firms’ market value and long-term performance. We use a regression discontinuity model on
the outcomes of votes on governance proposals in shareholder meetings. Firms that pass a proposal
by a close margin are ex-ante similar to those that reject it by a close margin, so that passing a
provision is "locally" exogenous, leading to a discrete increase in the probability of implementation.
Therefore, this approach provides a causal estimate and overcomes the endogeneity problems that
have aﬀected the literature thus far. Our empirical strategy allows us to recover an estimate of the
eﬀect of governance even if, prior to the vote, the market had already incorporated the probability
of passing the shareholder proposal into stock prices. This is because proposals that fell around
the majority threshold were ex-ante the most uncertain, such that investors could not perfectly
predict whether or not they would pass. It is for these proposals that we are able to observe a price
reaction.
    We show that, on average, the market reacts to the passage of a governance-related shareholder
proposal with positive abnormal returns around 1.3% on the day of the vote. This reflects an
year). Book value of common equity is the sum of book common equity and deferred taxes.
  22
     Return on Equity (ROE) is defined as net income (NI) divided by the book value of common stock (CEQ) plus
balance sheet deferred taxes and Investment tax credit (TXDITC).



                                                     24
increase in market value of between 2.7% and a 2.8% per implemented proposal. We identify some
heterogeneity of this reaction, with the eﬀect being more pronounced among firms with concentrated
ownership, high pre-existing anti-takeover provisions and high R&D expenditures. Firm behavior
also changes with the new governance structure: Dropping anti-takeover provisions leads to lower
investments and fewer acquisitions. Finally, the long-term performance of the firm, measured as
Tobin’s Q or book-to-market ratios, improves after two or three years when anti-takeover provisions
are dropped; but we find modest results with respect to the return on equity.
   As a whole, our results suggest that changing the internal corporate governance in targeted
firms is rewarded by the market —with more pronounced eﬀects for proposals to remove anti-takeover
provisions—, and yields performance improvements in the long run. Our results also suggest that the
channels behind these improvements include more conservative investment and acquisition policies.
   Overall, our results provide causal evidence that the costs of the agency problem for modern
corporations are non-negligible. A better understanding of the eﬀect of governance provisions, and
the magnitude of the agency problem is crucial to guiding the public debate on the adequacy of
implementing and regulating corporate governance. It is also important to understand the potential
role of shareholder activism in improving the governance of firms and creating value. Only causal
estimates can be used to infer the impact of changing internal governance structures, such as the
level of protection from takeover, compensation arrangements or board independence. This paper is
an important step towards a better understanding of the eﬀects of current governance arrangements.

   References
   Agrawal, Ashwini K. 2008. “Corporate Governance Objectives of Labor Union Shareholders:
Evidence from Proxy Voting.” New York University, Stern School of Business Working Paper FIN-
08-006.
   Bebchuck, Lucian A., Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell. 2004. “What Matters in Corporate
Governance?” Review of Financial Studies, 22(2): 783-827.
   Becht, Marco, Patrick Bolton and Ailsa Röell. 2005. “Corporate Governance and Control.”
European Corporate Governance Institute Working Paper.
   Bennedsen, Morten, Kasper M. Nielsen, Francisco Pérez-González, and Daniel Wolfenzon. 2007.
“Inside the Family Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122(2): 647-691.
   Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. "Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The
Ones Without Principals Are.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3): 901-932.


                                                25
   Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2003. “Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate
Governance and Managerial Preferences.” Journal of Political Economy, 111(5): 1043-1075.
   Berle, Adolf, and Gardiner Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New
York: Macmillian.
   Brickley, James, Ronald C. Lease, and Cliﬀord W. Smith Jr. 1988. "Ownership Structure and
Voting on Antitakeover Amendments.” Journal of Financial Economics, 20: 267—291.
   Carhart, Mark M. 1997. “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance.” Journal of Finance,
52(1).
   Cellini, Stephanie R., Fernando Ferreira, and Jesse Rothstein. 2010. “The Value of School Fa-
cility Investments: Evidence from a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 125(1): 215—261.
   Comment, Robert G., and William Schwert. 1995. "Poison or Placebo? Evidence on the
Deterrence and Wealth Eﬀects of Modern Antitakeover Measures." Journal of Financial Economics,
39(1): 3-43.
   Core, John E., Wayne R. Guay, and Tjomme O. Rusticus. 2006. “Does Weak Governance
Cause Weak Stock Returns? An Examination of Firm Operating Performance and Investors’ Ex-
pectations.” Journal of Finance, 61(2): 655-687.
   Ertimur, Yonca, Fabrizio Ferri, and Stephen Stubben. forthcoming. “Board of Directors’ Re-
sponsiveness to Shareholders: Evidence from Shareholder Proposals." Journal of Corporate Finance.
   Fama, Eugene, and Michael Jensen. 1983. “Separation of Ownership and Control.” Journal of
Law and Economics, 26: 301-325.
   Garvey, Gerald T., and Gordon Hanka. 1999. “Capital Structure and Corporate Control: The
Eﬀect of Antitakeover Statutes on Firm Leverage.” Journal of Finance, 54(2): 519-546.
   Gillan, Stuart L., and Laura T. Starks. 2000. “Corporate Governance Proposals and Shareholder
Activism: The Role of Institutional Investors.” Journal of Financial Economics, 57: 275—305.
   Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller. forthcoming. “Does Corporate Governance Matter in
Competitive Industries?” Journal of Financial Economics.
   Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii, and Andrew Metrick. 2003. “Corporate Governance and Equity
Prices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 107-155.
   Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling. 1976. "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure." Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4): 305-360.
   Jensen, Michael C. 1986. "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers".


                                               26
The American Economic Review, 76(2): 323-329.
   Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales. 1997. "Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide
Useful Measures of Financing Constraints." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 169-215.
   Karpoﬀ, Jonathan, Paul Malatesta, and Ralph Walkling. 1996. “Corporate Governance and
Shareholder Initiatives: Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 42: 365-395.
   Lee, David. 2008. "Randomized Experiments from Nonrandom Selection in U.S. House Elec-
tions." Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 675—97.
   Lee, David, and Thomas Lemieux. forthcoming. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Eco-
nomics.” Journal of Economic Literature.
   Listokin, Yair. 2008. "Management Always Wins the Close Ones." American Law and Eco-
nomics Review 2008 10(2):159-184.
   McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
Design: A Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 698-714.
   Pérez-González, Francisco. 2006. “Inherited Control and Firm Performance.” American Eco-
nomic Review, 96(5): 1559-1588.
   Rau, Raghavendra, and Theo Vermaelen. 1998. "Glamour, Value and the Post-acquisition
Performance of Acquiring Firms." Journal of Financial Economics, 49(2): 223-253.
   Romano, Roberta. 2001. “Less Is More: Making Shareholder Activism a Valuable Mechanism
of Corporate Governance,” Yale Journal on Regulation, 18: 174-251.
   Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. “A Survey of Corporate Governance.” Journal
of Finance, 52(2).
   Stein, Jeremy. 1988. "Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia." Journal of Political Economy,
96: 61-80.
   Thomas, Randall and James F. Cotter, 2007. "Shareholder Proposals in the New Millennium:
Shareholder Support, Board Response and Market Reaction.” Journal of Corporate Finance, 13,
368-391.




                                               27
7     Figures and Tables
                            Figure 1: Market Reaction to Vote Outcomes

                         Value

                           W                                                                                     W(v)


                                                                                   Market expectation, E(W|v)



                                                                                     Excess Return = W(v) – E(W|v)
                                                                       Z
                            0




                                 0                                  50                                    100
                                                                Vote share , v




Figure 2: Excess Returns by Vote Share on the Day of the Vote
Notes: Graph shows average excess return by the vote share in favor of the proposal. Proposals are grouped
into two percentage-point bins: Proposals that passed by between 0.001% and 2% are assigned to the 1
bin; those that failed by similar margins are assigned to the -1 bin. Excess returns are computed using the
Fama-French and momentum factors from Carhart (1997).
                                            .01
                                     Excess Returns
                                          .005
                                            0




                                                      -10    -5                  0                  5       10
                                                            Vote Share relative to threshold (2pp bins)




                                                                           28
Figure 3: Distribution of Vote Shares for all Shareholder Governance Proposals

Notes: Sample includes all shareholders’ governance proposals (N=3,984) from 1997 to 2007.




                                     .0 3
                                     .0 2
                          De nsity
                                     .0 1
                                     0




                                               0   20         40                60            80    100
                                                        Vote sha re in fa vor (2 pp b in s)




Figure 4: Distribution of Vote Shares for Shareholder Proposals to Remove Anti-Takeover
Provisions (in G-index)

Notes: Sample includes all G-Index shareholder proposals (N=1,558) from 1997 to 2007
                                       .0 25
                                       .0 2
                                      .0 15
                              D ensi ty
                                       .0 1
                                       .0 05
                                       0




                                               0   20         40                60            80   1 00
                                                        Vote sha re in favo r (2 pp bin s)




                                                                   29
Figure 5: Distribution of Vote Shares for Other Shareholder Governance Proposals

Notes: Sample includes all ’Other’ shareholder proposals (N=2,426) from 1997 to 2007




                                         .0 5
                                         .0 4
                                           .0 3
                                  D e nsi ty
                                         .0 2
                                         .0 1
                                         0




                                                    0                     20                 40                 60                      80                    10 0
                                                                                     V ote s ha re i n fav or (2 pp bi n s)




Figure 6: Day-by-Day Diﬀerence in Excess Returns, vote share in [-5;+5] interval

Notes: The Y axis measures the diﬀerence in daily excess returns between proposals that pass by a close
margin [up to to +5%] and proposals that are rejected by a close margin [up to -5%]. The X axis shows the diﬀerent
days before and after the vote (date 0 is the day when the vote is passed).

                          Differ. in               0.01
                          Excess
                          Returns
                                                  0.008

                                                                                                        Diff. in excess returns btw. Pass and Fail in [‐5;+5] interval
                                                  0.006


                                                  0.004


                                                  0.002


                                                        0
                                                            ‐11 ‐9   ‐7    ‐5   ‐3    ‐1   1    3   5    7     9    11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29
                                                  ‐0.002
                                                                                                                                    Day relative to meeting date

                                                  ‐0.004


                                                  ‐0.006




                                                                                                 30
Figure 7: Distribution of Institutional Ownership and of Tobin’s Q by Outcome of Shareholder
Vote —G-index proposals

Notes: The distribution of the percentage of institutional ownership and Tobin’s Q is shown for three diﬀer-
ent brackets of vote outcomes [0,45], [45,55], [55,100]. The graph includes all the proposals in the sample that are
included in the G index.

           Institutional Ownership Concentration                                                                     Tobin’s Q




                                                                                             1 .5
           .05
           .04




                                                                                             1
           .03
           .02




                                                                                             .5
           .01
           0




                                                                                             0
                   0        20                40                 60               80                0   1                  2                 3          4              5
                                    Instit. Owner Concent.                                                                     Tobi nQ
                           Vote Share: 45% to 55%               Vote Share <45                              Vote Share: 45% to 55%                Vote Share <45
                           Vote Share >55                                                                   Vote Share >55




Figure 8: Distribution of Institutional Ownership and of Tobin’s Q by Outcome of Shareholder
Vote —Other proposals

Notes: The distribution of the percentage of institutional ownership and Tobin’s Q is shown for three diﬀer-
ent brackets of vote outcomes [0,45], [45,55], [55,100]. The graph includes all the proposals in the sample that are
not included in the G index.

                 Institutional Ownership Concentration                                                              Tobin’s Q
                 .05




                                                                                             1
                 .04




                                                                                             .8
                 .03




                                                                                             .6
                 .02




                                                                                             .4
                 .01




                                                                                             .2
                 0




                                                                                             0




                       0   20            40             60            80          100               0   1              2                 3          4              5
                                      Instit. Ow ner Concent.                                                                  TobinQ
                            Vote Sha re: 45% to 55%              Vote Share <45                             Vote Share: 4 5% to 55%              Vote Sh are <45
                            Vote Sha re >55                                                                 Vote Share >55




                                                                                        31
                                           TABLE I
                            Shareholder Governance Proposals
Panel A displays the frequency, approval percentage and average support over time of
governance proposals. Data are collected by Riskmetrics on all shareholder governance
proposals from 1997 until 2007 for all S&P 1,500 companies plus an additional 500 widely-
held firms. The threshold for approval is 50% for all but ten observations. We take into
account the different threshold rules across proposals and firms for computing the
percentage of approved proposals.

Panel A Shareholder Proposal Summary Statistics
    Year        Shareholder     Approved        Percentage       Average      Std. Dev.
                 Proposals      Proposals       Approved           Vote         Vote
                                                Proposals        Outcome      Outcome
     1997            292            29             9.90%          23.13%        17.46
     1998            272            37            13.66%          26.29%        19.11
     1999            310            58            18.70%          28.60%        21.84
     2000            272            70            25.00%          30.95%         23
     2001            277            67            24.00%          30.03%        22.21
     2002            297           100            33.60%          36.61%        23.38
     2003            479           166            34.60%          37.50%        23.27
     2004            451           126            27.00%          33.12%        25.05
     2005            417           124            29.70%          37.17%        23.99
     2006            450           143            31.70%          40.87%        22.66
     2007            467           120            25.70%          37.31%        21.97
     Total          3,984           1,040           27.35%        36.16%




Panel B Type of Governance Proposals (Broad Classification) -- Summary Statistics
        Proposal Type            # Proposals    Mean Vote in    Percentage
                                                   Favor        Approved
          Auditors                    68            22.70%         4.40%
           Board                    1,061            22%           8.80%
        Compensation                 520            23.00%         4.20%
          G-Index                   1,558            51%            53%
           Voting                    421             14%           3.30%
           Other                     356            33.90%        21.00%




                                               32
                                                      TABLE II
                                                Descriptive Statistics
Our sample of 3,984 proposals corresponds to 2,205 firm-year observations. Abnormal Returns are computed
from CRSP. G-index is the number of anti-takeover provisions in place at the firm (Source: Riskmetrics). All
accounting variables are obtained from Compustat: Total assets (AT), Market Value (mkvalt_f), Capital expenses
(CAPX). Tobin's Q is defined as the market value of assets (AT+mkvalt_f-CEQ) divided by the book value of
assets (AT), and balance sheet Deferred Taxes and Investment Tax Credit (TXDITC). Book-to-market is the ratio
of book value of common equity (previous fiscal year) to market value of common equity (end of previous
calendar year). Ownership by Top 5 Shareholders is the sum of institutional ownership for the top five
shareholders in the last fiscal quarter before the meeting, and Institutional Shareholders that own at least 5% is
the number of shareholders that own at least 5% of the firm’s stock (Source: Thomson 13F Database).
Acquisitions Count is the number of acquisitions made in a year, Acquisitions Ratio is computed as the sum of all
acquisition prices paid divided by the average market capitalization on the first and last day of the year (Source:
SDC). All monetary values are in 1996 US$. Note that the number of observations may change due to missing
values in some of the variables.

                                                N              Mean         Std. dev.     10th Per.    90th Per.

Abnormal Return on meeting day                2,377            0.001          0.023        -0.020        0.023

G-index                                       2,050              9.5           2.5            6            13

Total Assets($mil)                            2,369           43,794.83     124,155        718.83      85,775.73

Market Value ($mil)                           2,011            22,431        44,477          485         62,404

EBITDA ($mil)                                 2,300           3,177.70        6,320         52,29        8,223

Capital Expenses ($mil)                       2,239            1,043          2,570          9.3         2,182

R&D/Assets                                    2,369            0.018          0.045           0          0.065

Ownership by Top 5 Shareholders (%)           2,301            0.245          0.095         0.136        0.367
Institutional Shareholders that own at
least 5%                                      1,787            2.170          1.230           1            4

Tobin Q                                       1,805            1.588          0.69           1.01         2.67

Book to Market                                1,805            0.528          0.300         0.180        0.960

Return on Equity                              1,778            0.107          0.100        -0.009        0.241

Growth of Capital Expenses                    1,908            0.059          0.300         -0.31         0.45

Acquisitions Ratio                            1,960            0.016          0.030           0          0.064

Acquisitions Count                            1,991             0.53          0.80            0           2.00




                                                         33
                                                      TABLE III
                   Pre-differences in Firm Characteristics as a Function of the Vote Outcome
Table 3 tests whether passing a vote on the meeting date is systematically related to firm characteristics prior to
the meeting. Note that in Panel A t refers to days, while for the rest, t refers to years. Each row corresponds to a
different dependent variable and each entry comes from a separate regression. Each entry in the table reports the
coefficient on whether a proposal passed. Columns 1 and 2 (3 and 4) report the estimated effect of passing a
vote on outcome variable levels (changes) the year before the annual meeting, t-1 (between t-2 and t-1). Columns
1 and 3 present estimates without controlling for a polynomial in the vote share and, therefore, estimate the
average effect of passing relative to not passing. Columns 2 and 4 include the polynomial in the vote share of
order 4 on each side of the threshold such that it effectively estimates the effect at the discontinuity. All columns
control for year fixed effects and standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the firm level. Significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are indicated by *, **, and *** respectively.

                                                    Before meeting (t-1)            Change, from (t-2) to (t-1)

                                                    (1)                 (2)             (3)                (4)
A.
Abnormal Return one day before Meeting,          -0.00002             -0.004           0.001             -0.001
Car (-1,-1)
                                                 (0.001)              (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.012)

B.
Tobin Q                                           -0.010               0.254           0.014             0.041
                                                 (0.068)              (0.191)         (0.029)           (0.101)

Capital Expenses/Assets                           -0.001             -3.88E-06         -0.002            0.003
                                                 (0.003)              (0.006)         (0.001)           (0.003)

Return on Equity                                   1.65                -0.83            1.63              -0.69
                                                  (1.63)               (1.2)           (1.68)            (1.21)

R&D/Assets                                        0.003                -0.002        -0.00002            0.002
                                                 (0.002)              (0.006)         (0.001)           (0.001)
C.
Acquisitions Ratio                                0.007                -0.04           -0.023            -0.021
                                                 (0.010)              (0.041)         (0.010)           (0.073)

Acquisitions Count                               -0.124*              0.193            -0.067            0.305
                                                 (0.070)              (0.21)          (0.064)           (0.267)
D.
Percentage Ownership by Top 5                   3.121***               -0.856          0.092             0.849
Shareholders                                     (0.616)              (1.255)         (0.217)            (0.83)

Institutional Shareholders that own at least    0.319***               -0.24           0.018              0.29
5%                                               (0.072)              (0.199)         (0.049)           (0.204)
E.
G-index                                         1.242***               -0.514          -0.078            -0.101
                                                 (0.180)              (0.391)         (0.051)           (0.173)
Polynomial in the vote share                        no                   yes             no                yes




                                                                34
                                              TABLE IV
                        Abnormal Returns around the Majority Threshold
This table presents regressions of the abnormal returns on the day of the meeting t=0, on whether
the proposal passed. Abnormal returns are computed using the Fama French and momentum
factors from Carhart (1997). Column 1 estimates are based on the whole sample. Column 2
restricts the sample to observations with a vote share within ten points of the threshold, column 3
to five points and so forth. Column 6 introduces polynomial in the vote share of order 4, one on
each side of the threshold, and uses the full sample. All columns control for year fixed effects;
standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are indicated by
*, **, and *** respectively.
                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
                                           A. All Shareholders Proposals

                 All votes      -10;+10         -5;+5         -2;+2        -1;+1      Full Model

          Pass    0.000922      0.00230      0.00761***    0.0105**      0.0139*       0.0131***
                 (0.000924)    (0.00163)      (0.00256)    (0.00502)    (0.00756)      (0.00494)

 Observations      3904           909            450          183            91          3904
   R-squared       0.000         0.002          0.024        0.032         0.039         0.014




                                    B. Anti-Takeover Proposals (In G-index)
                 All votes      -10;+10         -5;+5         -2;+2        -1;+1      Full Model

          Pass   -9.51e-05      0.00207      0.00940***    0.0162**      0.0221**      0.0169**
                 (0.00126)     (0.00224)      (0.00355)    (0.00719)     (0.0102)      (0.00656)

 Observations      1531           523            264          114            61          1531
   R-squared       0.000         0.002          0.027        0.053         0.070         0.033




                          C. Shareholder Proposals Excluding Anti-Takeover Proposals
                 All votes      -10;+10         -5;+5         -2;+2        -1;+1      Full Model

          Pass    0.00202       0.00149       0.00399*      0.00112      -0.00511       0.00529
                 (0.00190)     (0.00183)      (0.00237)    (0.00430)    (0.00494)      (0.00474)

 Observations      2373           386            186           69            30          2373
   R-squared       0.001         0.002          0.014        0.001         0.035         0.016




                                                    35
                                                 TABLE V
                          Abnormal Returns of Passing Governance Proposals
This table presents the effect of passing a proposal on abnormal returns on the meeting date (t), on the
day after (t+1) and the cumulative effect from t+2 to t+7. The dependent variable in columns 1, 3 and 4 is
abnormal returns computed using the Fama French and momentum factors (FFM) from Carhart (1997);
in columns 2 and 5, it is abnormal returns computed using the market model (MM). Column 3 allows for
6 different dummy variables to capture the number of proposals (1 to 6) that passed at the meeting.
Columns 4 and 5 allow for a separate effect of anti-takeover proposals (labeled as G-index proposals)
and 'Other' governance proposals. The specification in all columns is given by equation 8. All columns
control for year fixed effects, firm-meeting fixed effects and distance to the election effects; standard
errors in parentheses are clustered by firm. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are indicated by
*, **, and *** respectively.
                                     Abnormal Returns                         Abnormal Returns
                              FFM           MM             FFM                    FFM           MM
                               (1)          (2)             (3)                    (4)          (5)

Day of vote, t               0.013**      0.014***                   G-index     0.014**       0.013*
                             (0.005)       (0.005)                               (0.007)       (0.007)
One day later, t+1            0.002         0.004          0.002     G-index      -0.001        0.000
                             (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)                (0.006)       (0.006)
Days t+2 to t+7               0.010         0.007          0.010     G-index      0.011         0.010
                             (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.006)                (0.009)       (0.009)
Day of vote, t
            1 vote passed                                 0.013**
                                                           (0.005)
            2 votes passed                                0.022**
                                                           (0.010)
            3 votes passed                                0.046***
                                                           (0.017)
            4 votes passed                                0.046**
                                                           (0.022)
            5 votes passed                                0.071**
                                                           (0.030)
            6 votes passed                                0.115***
                                                           (0.031)
Day of vote, t                                                        Other       0.009       0.012**
                                                                                 (0.006)      (0.006)
One day later, t+1                                                   Other        0.007       0.011*
                                                                                 (0.005)      (0.005)
Days t+2 to t+7                                                       Other       0.004        -0.000
                                                                                 (0.008)      (0.010)
Observations                  11884        11884           11884                  11884        11884
R-squared                     0.002        0.005           0.002                  0.005        0.007
Number of firm-meeting         2377         2377            2377                   2377         2377




                                                     36
                                                          TABLE VI
                                         Abnormal Returns and Firm Heterogeneity
This table presents the effect of passing a proposal on abnormal returns on the meeting date (t), on the day after (t+1) and
the cumulative effect from t+2 to t+7 for different subsamples of firms. The dependent variables in all Columns are
abnormal returns computed using the Fama French and momentum factors from Carhart (1997) and the cumulative effect
from t+2 to t+7 for different firm subsamples. Columns 1 and 4 include firms with above-median ownership concentration
(percentage controlled by the top five institutional owners); Columns 2 and 5 include firms with ten or more anti-takeovers
provision (above-median G-index) before the meeting; Columns 3 and 6 include firms with above median R&D/Assets
ratio. Columns 4, 5 and 6 allow for a separate effect of anti-takeover proposals (labeled as G-index proposals) and Other
governance proposals. The specification in all columns is given by equation 8. All columns control for year fixed effects,
firm-meeting fixed effects and distance to the election effects; standard errors in parentheses are clustered by firm.
Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are indicated by *, **, and *** respectively.


                             All Shareholders Proposals                                      G-index vs. Other

                         High                                                      High
                      Ownership High G-index High R&D                           Ownership High G-index High R&D
                     Concentration                                             Concentration
                          (1)        (2)        (3)                                 (4)        (5)        (6)


Day of vote, t          0.020***         0.017**        0.016**     G-index        0.021**          0.019**        0.018*
                         (0.007)         (0.007)        (0.008)                    (0.010)          (0.009)        (0.010)
One day later, t+1        0.008            0.003         0.006      G-index         0.002            0.001          0.005
                         (0.005)          (0.006)       (0.008)                    (0.008)          (0.007)        (0.010)
Days t+2 to t+7          0.015**         0.020**         0.002      G-index        0.019*           0.023**         0.005
                         (0.008)         (0.009)        (0.011)                    (0.010)          (0.011)        (0.013)

Day of vote, t                                                        Other         0.009            0.010          0.008
                                                                                   (0.008)          (0.010)        (0.009)
One day later, t+1                                                    Other        0.012*            0.008          0.012
                                                                                   (0.007)          (0.011)        (0.008)
Days t+2 to t+7                                                       Other         0.004            0.008          -0.006
                                                                                   (0.011)          (0.015)        (0.012)
Observations              5919            5704           4320                       5919             5704           4320
R-squared                 0.007           0.008          0.007                      0.016            0.012          0.017
Number of firm-           1184            1141            864                       1184             1141            864
meeting




                                                              37
                                      TABLE VII
              Effect of Passing a Governance Proposal on the G-index
Column 1 shows the effect of passing a governance proposal on the number of anti-
takeover provisions in place at the firm (the G-index). The index is provided by
Riskmetrics every two years. The first coefficient (Year of vote, t) is the effect of
passing a proposal on the G-index for the first year available in Riskmetrics that is
at least six months after the meeting; the second coefficient is the effect two years
after that, etc. Column 2 allows for 6 different dummy variables to capture the
number of proposals (1 to 6) that passed at the meeting. The specification in all
columns is given by equation 8. All columns control for year fixed effects, firm-
meeting fixed effects and distance to the election effects; standard errors are
clustered by firm. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are indicated by *,
**, and *** respectively.

                                                              G-index
                                                      (1)                 (2)
 Year of vote, t                                  -0.313***
                                                   (0.102)
 Two years later, t+2                              -0.329**             -0.329**
                                                    (0.150)              (0.149)
 Four years later, t+4                             -0.503**             -0.505**
                                                    (0.229)              (0.228)
 Six years later, t+6                               -0.508               -0.511
                                                   (0.389)              (0.389)
 Year of vote, t
                          1 vote passed                               -0.336***
                                                                       (0.108)
                         2 votes passed                               -0.581***
                                                                       (0.217)
                         3 votes passed                                 -0.744**
                                                                         (0.318)
                         4 votes passed                               -1.828***
                                                                       (0.589)
                         5 votes passed                               -2.393***
                                                                       (0.562)

 Observations                                       9386                 9386
 R-squared                                          0.044                0.045
 Number of firm-meeting                             2198                 2198




                                             38
                                                 TABLE VIII
                 Effect of Passing a Governance Proposals on Passing Future Proposals
The dependent variable is the total number of proposals passed in a given year in column 1, the total
number of G-index proposals passed in column 2 and the total number of Other proposals passed in
column 3. It is equal to zero if a there were no proposals or no proposal was passed. All columns provide
separately the effect of G-index and other kinds of proposals on the dependent variable. This is estimated
using equation (8), and dropping the observation for t=0 the year of the meeting (where the effect is by
definition 1). All columns include a polynomial in the vote share and can be interpreted as the effect of
passing a proposal on the number of proposals passed in the future, at the discontinuity. All columns
control for year fixed effects, firm-meeting fixed effects and distance to the election effects; standard
errors are clustered by firm. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are indicated by *, **, and ***
respectively.
                                                           Number of Proposals Passed
                                        All Proposals       G-index Proposals        Other Proposals
                                             (1)                   (2)                     (3)
One Year later, t+1       G-index          0.325***              0.326***                  -0.001
                                            (0.111)               (0.109)                 (0.021)
Two years later, t+2      G-index          0.119**               0.096**                   0.023
                                            (0.059)               (0.042)                 (0.038)
Three years later, t+3    G-index          0.138***              0.103**                   0.036
                                            (0.048)               (0.043)                 (0.025)
Four years later, t+4     G-index            0.051                 0.059                   -0.008
                                            (0.045)               (0.043)                 (0.016)
Five years later, t+5     G-index            0.070                0.079*                   -0.008
                                            (0.045)               (0.043)                 (0.016)
Six years later, t+6      G-index            0.054                 0.062                   -0.008
                                            (0.049)               (0.047)                 (0.016)

One Year later, t+1       Other              -0.052                -0.003                  -0.049
                                            (0.139)               (0.110)                 (0.077)
Two years later, t+2      Other             -0.123*                -0.030                 -0.093*
                                            (0.074)               (0.040)                 (0.049)
Three years later, t+3    Other              -0.029                -0.003                  -0.026
                                            (0.078)               (0.040)                 (0.055)
Four years later, t+4     Other              -0.069                 0.002                  -0.070
                                            (0.070)               (0.040)                 (0.044)
Five years later, t+5     Other              -0.071                -0.001                  -0.070
                                            (0.070)               (0.039)                 (0.044)
Six years later, t+6      Other              -0.057                 0.013                  -0.070
                                            (0.071)               (0.042)                 (0.044)

Polynomial in the vote share                  yes                   yes                     yes


Observations                                19016                 19016                    19016
R-squared                                   0.058                 0.047                    0.040
Number of firm-meeting                       2377                  2377                     2377




                                                39
                                                                 TABLE IX
                                                Long-run Effects of Governance Proposals
This table presents the effect of passing a governance proposal on firm long-term outcomes. The specification in all columns is given by
equation 8. All columns allow for a separate effect of anti-takeover proposals (labeled as G-index proposals) and Other governance
proposals. The dependent variables are: the number of acquisitions in column 1; the acquisitions ratio--sum of all acquisition prices paid
divided by the average market capitalization on the first and last day of the year-- in column 2; the growth rate of capital expenditures in
column 3; Tobin Q in column 4 (defined as the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets, where the market value of
assets is computed as the book value of assets plus the market value of common stock minus the book value of common stock and
deferred taxes (Kaplan and Zingales (1997)); book-to-market value of the firm in column 5; returns on equity in 6. See notes to Table 2
for further sources and definitions. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by firm. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are
indicated by *, **, and *** respectively.
                                        Acquisitions Acquisitions            Capex                             Book-to-
                                                                                              TobinQ                             ROE
                                            Count            Ratio          Growth                              Market
                                              (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
Year of Meeting, t        G-index        -0.00141          -0.00143        -0.0797            -0.0127          -0.0172         0.00892
                                          (0.120)         (0.00624)       (0.0541)           (0.0470)         (0.0270)         (0.0181)
One Year later, t+1       G-index         -0.0309           0.00234       -0.117**             0.0596          -0.0255          0.0268
                                          (0.102)         (0.00619)       (0.0577)           (0.0612)         (0.0337)         (0.0183)
Two years later, t+2      G-index          -0.166         -0.000422        -0.0411             0.0978         -0.0648*          0.0189
                                          (0.109)         (0.00779)       (0.0664)           (0.0758)         (0.0342)         (0.0177)
Three years later, t+3    G-index         -0.181*        -0.0124***       -0.00389           0.222**        -0.0970***          0.0179
                                          (0.108)         (0.00468)       (0.0671)           (0.0903)         (0.0362)         (0.0181)
Four years later, t+4     G-index           0.166           0.00738        -0.0923           0.199**         -0.0941**         0.00336
                                          (0.134)         (0.00870)       (0.0648)           (0.0988)         (0.0419)         (0.0198)
Year of Meeting, t        Other            0.0385          -0.00433          0.114           0.156***        -0.0607**          0.0131
                                          (0.122)         (0.00514)       (0.0832)           (0.0459)         (0.0254)         (0.0165)
One Year later, t+1       Other             0.135          -0.00845         0.0161           0.229**          -0.107**        0.0435***
                                          (0.132)         (0.00705)        (0.106)           (0.0995)         (0.0436)         (0.0158)
Two years later, t+2      Other             0.316           0.00972          0.157           0.00230          0.00972         0.0829**
                                          (0.223)          (0.0111)        (0.103)            (0.197)         (0.0724)         (0.0399)
Three years later, t+3    Other             0.249          -0.00464       0.463***            -0.0232          -0.0266         0.112***
                                          (0.214)         (0.00843)        (0.144)            (0.164)         (0.0447)         (0.0426)
Four years later, t+4     Other           0.500**            0.0421        0.664**             -0.102          0.0444          0.121***
                                          (0.253)          (0.0312)        (0.257)            (0.307)          (0.101)         (0.0462)
Observations                               11384              9105           6501               9062            9120             8166
R-squared                                   0.022             0.008          0.027              0.030           0.024            0.028
Number of firm-meeting                      1797              1555           1524               1823            1817             1573

                                                                                40
Appendix A - Description of All Shareholders Proposals (Riskmetrics 1997-2007)                              Discont
         Type                      Description Proposal                      Obs         Mean Vote For   # -5,+5      # -10,10   Freq.
Audit           Limit consulting by auditors                                        59            20.1         2             5
                Shareholder approval of auditors                                     7            48.0         2             3
                Rotate Auditor                                                       2             5.3         0             0     68
Board           Separate chairman/CEO                                              224            28.2        15            33
                Majority independent directors                                      89            26.1         5             9
                Commit to/report on board diversity                                 60            16.7         0             1
                Limit director tenure                                               54             6.3         0             1
                Independent nominating committee                                    24            25.7         2             2
                Increase key committee independence                                 15            19.0         0             0
                Allow union/employee reps on the board                              11             7.7         0             0
                Increase compensation committee independence                        10            35.1         3             4
                Minimum director stock ownership                                     9             7.6         0             0
                Independent compensation committee                                   7            18.8         0             0
                Lead director                                                        6            24.4         0             1
                Shareholder advisory committee                                       4            10.2         0             0
                Increase audit committee Independence                                4            19.5         0             0
                Create nominating committee                                          3            24.7         0             0    520
Compensation    Link pay to performance/Recoup Bonuses                             371            16.0        12            21
                Award performance-based stock options                              114            23.6         6            17
                Expense stock options                                              112            50.1        39            68
                Link executive pay to social criteria                              109             8.2         0             0
                Disclose executive compensation                                     59            11.5         1             3
                Advisory vote on compensation                                       53            41.5        14            33
                Misc Compensation                                                   42            25.6         3            10
                Cap executive pay                                                   35             8.0         0             0
                Add performance criteria to equity-based awards                     31            34.4         6            12
                Restrict director compensation                                      29             9.6         0             0
                Approve/disclose/limit SERPs                                        24            35.6         5             7
                Pay directors in stock                                              23            11.8         0             0
                Restrict non-employee director pensions                             14            31.1         0             1
                Pension fund surplus reporting                                      14            33.6         0             4
                Require equity awards to be held                                    12            27.5         0             0
                No repricing underwater stock option                                11            31.6         3             4
                Approve Executive compensation                                       4            31.3         0             1
                Hire independent compensation consultant                             4            39.9         1             2   1061
G-Index
G_Delay         Repeal Classified Board                                            549            57.5      116           219
G_Other         Redeem or vote Poison Pill                                         355            57.7       77           132
G_Voting        Cumulative voting                                                  273            31.5       22            49
G_Protection    Vote on future golden parachutes                                   152            44.4       19            56
G_Voting        Eliminate supermajority provision                                  109            62.7       16            32
G_Other         Remove antitakeover provisions & Other                              42            41.4        2             8
G_Voting        Confidential voting                                                 39            52.7        7            16
G_Delay         Shareholders may call special meeting                               25            56.5        3             8
G_Protection    Compensation Plans                                                   6            18.7        0             0
G_Other         Adopt Antigreenmail                                                  3            30.7        0             1
G_Protection    Maximum director liability                                           3            15.5        0             0
G_Voting        Require only majority vote                                           2            50.1        0             2    1558
Other           Study Sell company                                                 162            15.8        2             7
                Misc                                                               138            14.5        3             6
                Double board nominees                                               43             8.1        0             0
                Change annual meeting location                                      20             6.0        0             0
                Reincorporate to U.S. state                                         15            25.5        0             2
                Change annual meeting date                                          12             4.4        0             0
                Affirm political nonpartisanship                                     8             7.2        0             0
                Vote on targeted share placement                                     4            42.4        0             3
                Issue post-meeting report                                            3             5.5        0             0
                Opt out of state takeover statute                                    3            46.6        0             1
                Disclose prior government service                                    2             3.2        0             0
                Improve post-meeting report                                          2             6.6        0             0
                Restore preemptive rights                                            1            27.5        0             0
                Nominee statement in proxy                                           1             9.1        0             0     416
Voting          Majority vote to elect directors                                   206            45.9       56           115
                Majority vote shareholder committee                                128            15.9        8             9
                No discretionary voting                                             11            14.8        0             0
                Counting shareholder votes                                           6            15.4        0             0
                Allow shareholder nominees i.e. Equal access to proxy                5            22.0        1             2     356




                                                                        41
    Supplemental Appendix
1     Derivation of the Price reaction on the day of the vote

In this Appendix we show how to calculate the average price expectation formed in the market prior
to observing a given vote outcome E(W |v). Note that an explicit calculation of this function is not
necessary for our identification strategy; we only need it to be a continuous function around the vote
threshold.
    The market reaction on the day of the vote, given that we observe a vote v, is the diﬀerence
between the market value of the firm after the vote and the average expected value before the vote
W (v) − E(W |v). If the market expected a vote x but the realized vote was v we can denote the
market expectation on that day as E(W |E(v) = x) and this event has a density probability function
f (v|E(v) = x). To calculate E(W |v) we need to take into account that a given realized vote outcome
v may correspond to diﬀerent prior expectations. Therefore E(W |v) should take into account all
the possible combinations of prior expectations that may have lead to v:


                                    Z   x=100
                                                                 f (v|E(v) = x)
                     E(W |v) =                  E(W |E(v) = x)                  g(x)dx
                                        x=0                           Φ(v)
                                    Z   x=100
                         Φ(v) =                 f (v|E(v) = x)g(x)
                                        x=0

    Where g(v) is the density function of all the possible prior expectations on v, and Φ is a rescaling
factor to ensure that we are computing an expectation.
    Regardless of the specific distributions of the priors of the market E(W |v) is the same in an
arbitrarily close interval around the threshold of 50% of the votes (E(W |v) is represented in Figure
1 by the dashed line).
    To illustrate the shape of the market reaction to the outcome of the vote with reasonable distri-
butions, we assume, that the value of the proposal W (v) = 0 if v < 50% and W (v) = 1 if v > 50%,
and that the market reaction is given by W (v) − E(W |v). In Figure SA1 we show W (v) − E(W |v)
for a particular example. We assume a population of firms with 100 shareholders each. Each share-
holder vote is distributed iid, voting in favor of the proposal with probability ρ and against with
probability (1 − ρ). We also assume that each firm has a fixed ρ, but that it can be diﬀerent across
firms. We assume all ρ are equally probable ex-ante so ρ is uniformly distributed between 0 and




                                                          42
100.
    Figure 1 shows the expected market reaction for each vote outcome, taking into account how
expections were formed prior to the vote. It reflects how votes that are far from the majority
threshold carry virtually no market reaction, as the outcome of the vote is almost fully incorporated
into prices before the meeting. The market reaction peaks at the majority threshold.

                                                 Figure SA1: Market Reaction to the Vote
                                           0,50

                                           0,40

                                           0,30

                                           0,20
                         Market Reaction




                                           0,10

                                           0,00
                                                   0    6   12   18    24   30   36   42   48   54   60   66   72   78   84   90    96
                                           -0,10

                                           -0,20

                                           -0,30

                                           -0,40

                                           -0,50
                                                                                      Votes in Favor




2      Figures for Density Tests on the Vote Share (McCrary,
       2008)
                        Figure SA2: All Shareholder Govenance Proposals
                                           .03
                                           .02
                                           .01
                                           0




                                                 -100                 -50                  0                   50                  100




                                                                                                43
Figure SA3: Shareholder Governance Proposals to Remove Anti-Takeover Provisions (G-Index)




                        .025
                        .02
                        .015
                        .01
                        .005
                        0




                               -100    -50    0        50      100




                  Figure SA4: Other Shareholder Proposals (nonG-index)
                        .05
                        .04
                        .03
                        .02
                        .01
                        0




                               -1 00   -5 0   0        50      100




                                                  44
Supplemental Appendix Table A
                                      Abnormal Returns around the Threshold
This table presents regressions of the abnormal returns on t=0 on whether the proposal passed, allowing for
polynomials of different order on the right hand side. Abnormal returns are computed using the Fama French and
momentum factors from Carhart (1997). Columns 1-6 use two polynomials of increasing order in the vote share, v,
one on each side of the threshold (right and left). Column 8 displays a unique polynomial of order 8. The specification
is equation 8. All columns control for year fixed effects, firm-meeting fixed effects and distance to the election
effects; standard errors in parentheses are clustered by firm. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are indicated
by *, **, and *** respectively.
Order of Polynomial:         Order 2         Order 3          Order 4         Order 5        Order 6          One poly
                                (1)             (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)              (7)
          Pass              0.00554**      0.00756**        0.0131***        0.0125**       0.0141**         0.00828**
                            (0.00268)       (0.00359)        (0.00490)      (0.00617)       (0.00702)        (0.00329)
        right V           1.00e-05        -0.000158       -0.000704       -0.000733       -0.000425
                         (0.000126)      (0.000286)      (0.000593)      (0.000940)       (0.00141)
       right V²           -6.31e-08       -8.49e-06       -5.61e-05       -5.99e-05       -4.98e-06
                         (2.37e-06)      (1.30e-05)      (4.57e-05)      (9.80e-05)      (0.000218)
       right V³                           -1.14e-07       -1.56e-06       -1.75e-06        2.17e-06
                                         (1.72e-07)      (1.30e-06)      (4.21e-06)      (1.47e-05)
       right V⁴                                           -1.43e-08       -1.82e-08        1.13e-07
                                                         (1.23e-08)      (7.92e-08)      (4.78e-07)
       right V⁵                                                               -0           2.03e-09
                                                                         (5.44e-10)      (7.34e-09)
       right V⁶                                                                                0
                                                                                              (0)
        left V          -0.000741**       -0.00113*      -0.00315***       -0.00264        -0.00469
                         (0.000322)      (0.000653)        (0.00115)      (0.00206)       (0.00333)
        left V²          1.74e-05**        4.06e-05      0.000254**       0.000171        0.000639
                         (8.74e-06)      (3.68e-05)       (9.99e-05)     (0.000269)      (0.000601)
        left V³                           -3.50e-07      -7.91e-06**      -2.94e-06       -4.48e-05
                                         (5.93e-07)       (3.31e-06)     (1.46e-05)      (4.78e-05)
        left V⁴                                           8.32e-08**      -4.01e-08        1.69e-06
                                                          (3.72e-08)     (3.42e-07)      (1.85e-06)
        left V⁵                                                            1.07e-09       -3.22e-08
                                                                         (2.87e-09)      (3.42e-08)
        left V⁶                                                                            2.39e-10
                                                                                         (2.40e-10)
          V                                                                                             -0.000621***
                                                                                                          (0.000234)
          V²                                                                                              -1.21e-05*
                                                                                                          (6.71e-06)
          V³                                                                                             1.32e-06**
                                                                                                          (5.16e-07)
          V⁴                                                                                               2.40e-08*
                                                                                                          (1.26e-08)
          V⁵                                                                                             -1.07e-09**
                                                                                                          (4.19e-10)
          V⁶                                                                                                  -0**
                                                                                                               (0)
          V⁷                                                                                                  0***
                                                                                                               (0)
          V⁸                                                                                                   0**
                                                                                                               (0)
    Observations            3904            3904              3904          3904            3904              3904
     R-squared              0.012           0.012             0.014         0.015           0.015            0.013


                                                         45
Supplemental Appendix Table B

                 Pre-differences in Meeting Characteristics as a Function of the Vote Outcome

This table tests whether passing a vote on the meeting date is systematically related to meeting characteristics. Each
row corresponds to a different dependent variable and each entry comes from a separate regression. Each entry in
the table reports the coefficient on whether a proposal passed. Columns 1 and 2 report the estimated effect of
passing a vote on outcome variable levels. Column 1 presents estimates without controlling for a polynomial in the
vote share and, therefore, estimates the average effect of passing relative to not passing. Column 2 includes the
polynomial in the vote share of order 4 on each side of the threshold such that it estimates the effect at the
discontinuity. All columns control for year fixed effects and standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the firm
level. Significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are indicated by *, **, and *** respectively.




                                                                        (1)               (2)
                A.
                Number of Proposals on the day of                    -0.645***           -0.055
                Meeting
                                                                      (0.122)            -0.294

                B.
                Number of Withdrawn Proposals                        -0.424***           0.098
                                                                      (0.130)           (0.223)
                C.
                Proponent is Activist Fund                             -0.018            -0.023
                                                                      (0.019)           (0.058)

                Proponent is Company                                   0.012             0.016
                                                                      (0.009)           (0.028)

                Proponent is Individual                               0.013*             -0.019
                                                                      (0.007)           (0.026)

                Proponent is Public Pension Fund                       -0.002            0.001
                                                                      (0.012)           (0.038)

                Proponent is Religious                                 0.002             0.000
                                                                      (0.007)           (0.019)

                Proponent is Union                                   -0.016***           -0.019
                                                                      (0.004)           (0.018)

                Polynomial in the vote share                            no                yes




                                                                46
