                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         INNOVATION AND FOREIGN OWNERSHIP

                                         Maria Guadalupe
                                          Olga Kuzmina
                                         Catherine Thomas

                                        Working Paper 16573
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16573


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




We would like to thank Rajeev Dehejia, Amit Khandelwal, Veronica Rappoport, Eric Verhoogen,
Jonathan Vogel, and seminar participants at Columbia University, Kellogg Graduate School of Management,
and the London School of Economics for very helpful comments and discussions. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Maria Guadalupe, Olga Kuzmina, and Catherine Thomas. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Innovation and Foreign Ownership
Maria Guadalupe, Olga Kuzmina, and Catherine Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 16573
December 2010
JEL No. D21,F23,O31

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper uses a rich panel dataset of Spanish manufacturing firms (1990-2006) and a propensity
score reweighting estimator to show that multinational firms acquire the most productive domestic
firms, which, on acquisition, conduct more product and process innovation (simultaneously adopting
new machines and organizational practices) and adopt foreign technologies, leading to higher productivity.
We propose a model of endogenous selection and innovation in heterogeneous firms that jointly explains
the observed selection process and the innovation decisions. Further, we show in the data that innovation
on acquisition is associated with the increased market scale provided by the parent firm.


Maria Guadalupe                                     Catherine Thomas
Graduate School of Business                         Graduate School of Business
Columbia University                                 Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 624                        3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 605B
New York, NY 10027                                  New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                            cmt2122@columbia.edu
mg2341@columbia.edu

Olga Kuzmina
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 6P
New York, NY 10027
okuzmina13@columbia.edu
1         Introduction
The pervasiveness of the large and persistent productivity advantages held by certain firms within
narrowly defined industries is a well-established fact that continues to intrigue researchers (see sur-
veys by Syverson, 2010; Ichniowski and Shaw, 2010). One salient example that has attracted much
attention in several diﬀerent fields is that multinational subsidiaries generally outperform domestic
firms.1 Many have argued that this is because multinationals transfer superior technologies and
organizational practices —in the form of new product and process innovation —to their foreign sub-
sidiaries.2 However, since the most prevalent form of multinational entry is through acquisition,
rather than through greenfield investment (89 percent in developed countries —Barba Navaretti
and Venables, 2004), their superior performance could be due to the selection of higher-performing
domestic firms. To date, little is known about the economic determinants driving the extent of
innovation and technology transfer upon acquisition or about which domestic firms are selected
to become foreign subsidiaries. In this paper, we use a unique panel dataset to analyze both the
selection and innovation decisions of multinational firms and propose a new mechanism explaining
how these decisions are jointly determined. We argue that one cannot fully understand the relation-
ship between foreign ownership and innovation without explicitly recognizing that the incentives for
innovation —to increase firm productivity —and the incentives for foreign acquisition are inherently
interdependent.
        The data used contain information on an array of internal technological and organizational
choices, as well as on foreign ownership and productivity, for around 1,800 Spanish manufacturing
firms between 1990 and 2006.3 The main distinguishing feature of our data is that we can directly
observe diﬀerent productivity-enhancing actions taken within the firm and, hence, do not have to
rely on arguably imperfect productivity estimates to show the impact of acquisition. We are able
to study precisely what types of innovation the acquired firms implement, such as whether they
undertake product or process innovation, assimilate foreign technologies, purchase new machinery or
introduce new organizational practices. We identify our eﬀects by looking at within-firm variation
    1
     Some examples in this literature are Caves (1974), Doms and Jensen (1998), Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004),
Baldwin and Gu, (2005), Ramondo (2009), Criscuolo and Martin (2009), and Arnold and Javorcik (2009).
   2
     Prominent examples include Teece (1977), Caves (1996), Bloom and Van Reenen (2010), and Branstetter, Fisman
and Foley (2006). See the survey of recent empirical literature in Stiebale and Reize (2010).
   3
     Spain has a substantial foreign multinationals presence. In 2005, 16.5% of the firms surveyed in our data were
foreign-owned, representing 43% of total sales in Spanish manufacturing. Chislett (2007) reports that in 2005, U.S.
firms made up the largest share of the stock of Spanish foreign direct investment (19.9%), followed by France (17.5%),
the U.K. (16.3%) and Germany (7.8%), consistent with the fact that over 75 percent of foreign direct investment is
between developed countries (Markusen, 2002).



                                                          2
in innovation, using the panel structure of the dataset. In addition, to control for time-varying
selection and other sources of endogeneity, we implement a propensity score reweighting estimator
to estimate the average treatment eﬀect of foreign acquisition on innovation (Imbens, 2004; Busso,
DiNardo and McCrary, 2009).
       We first analyze which domestic firms are more likely to be the target of acquisition, a largely
unexplored question in the international economics literature.4 Empirically, our data reveal clear
evidence of positive selection: foreign firms buy the most productive firms within industries, i.e.
they "cherry-pick." This contrasts with a large strand of the corporate finance merger literature,
which asserts that low-performing firms are the most likely to be acquired (Lichtenberg and Siegel,
1992; Jovanovic and Rousseau, 2002). Further, we find that accounting for the positive selection
leads to a labor productivity premium associated with foreign acquisition that is one third of the
cross-sectional estimate.5 Nonetheless, after accounting for selection, firm sales increase by 18
percent, labor productivity by 13 percent and total factor productivity by 16 percent following
acquisition.
       Next, we analyze the type of productivity-enhancing innovations acquired firms implement fol-
lowing acquisition. After controlling for selection using firm fixed eﬀects and the propensity score
reweighting estimator, we find that acquisition leads to improvements in firm technology: acquired
firms are more likely to engage in process innovation and product innovation.6 In addition, they
are more likely to assimilate new foreign technologies, which suggests that technology is being
transferred from the parent to the subsidiary. We are also able to explore a distinction that has
long been present in the literature about diﬀerent types of process innovation. Teece (1977) dis-
tinguishes between two types of technology transfer in his seminal study of 26 U.S. multinational
subsidiaries: The first is "hardware" such as tooling, equipment, and blue prints. The second is the
information that must be acquired if this hardware is to be used eﬀectively —the required methods
of organization.7 Our results indicate that firms do both simultaneously upon acquisition —i.e., they
   4
     Existing literature in international economics focuses on which parent firms will chose to engage in FDI (Helpman
et al. 2004; Burstein and Monge-Naranjo, 2009). Nocke and Yeaple (2007, 2008) model the mode of foreign entry
—greenfield or acquisition —as a function of parent firm characteristics. In contrast, we focus on which domestic firms
are acquired.
   5
     Relatedly, Criscuolo and Martin (2009) show that the observed U.S. multinational productivity advantage is
driven mainly by selection. Arnold and Javorcik (2009) and Ramondo (2009) also document positive selection in
Indonesia and Chile, respectively.
   6
     These findings are consistent with Arnold and Javorcik (2009), who establish that total investment and investment
in new machinery increases under foreign ownership for Indonesian firms. In contrast, Stiebale and Reize (2010) find
no evidence of foreign acquisition aﬀecting innovation activities in German firms.
   7
     In the literature on the market for corporate control, Jensen and Ruback (1980) argue that the potential syn-
ergies prompting eﬃcient mergers could occur through the adoption of more eﬃcient production or organizational
technology. More recently, Bloom and Van Reenen (2010) show that the subsidiaries of multinational firms exhibit


                                                          3
purchase new machines and adopt new methods of organizing production at the same time, rather
than doing either on its own. This is consistent with the finding that it is optimal for firms to
implement new information technology and organizational practices jointly, identified by a number
of authors (Black and Lynch, 2001; Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt, 2002; Brynjolfsson and Hitt,
2003; Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw, 2007).
    The observed positive selection and technology upgrading upon acquisition are consistent with
the predictions of a simple model in which the optimal amount of innovation upon acquisition
depends on the initial characteristics of the acquired subsidiary and the costs and benefits of the
innovation process; in turn, the returns to innovation following acquisition determine which firms
are acquired. We use the model to illustrate how the selection and innovation decisions are jointly
determined and to interpret the empirical results.
    In our model, there is a complementarity between the extent of innovation and the acquired firm’s
initial characteristics reflected in its initial productivity. This could arise for several reasons. For
example, a product upgrade is more valuable when the acquired firm is able to sell more units of the
good. Additionally, the benefits associated with a superior production process depend on the skill of
the operators, and, more generally, on the "absorptive capacity" of the acquired subsidiary (Cohen
and Levinthal, 1990). We show in the model that the complementarity between innovation and the
acquired firm’s initial productivity is amplified when the foreign parent brings lower innovation costs
or greater market access.8 A foreign firm could bring with it lower innovation costs if it has a lower
cost of capital (Desai, Foley and Hines, 2004) or access to proprietary technologies (Caves, 1996),
but it could also bring larger benefits of innovation. Multinational firms are known to provide access
to export markets for acquired subsidiaries (as shown by Hanson, Mataloni and Slaughter (2005)
for vertical and by Ekholm, Forslid and Markusen (2007) for horizontal foreign direct investment),
thereby increasing firm scale. With either lower innovation costs or greater market access, the model
explains both positive selection and increased innovation.
    We explore empirically the role of greater market scale granted by the foreign parent in driving
innovation decisions. We find that the higher levels of innovation by foreign subsidiaries are, in large
part, driven by firms that export through a foreign parent. This is consistent with foreign ownership
more sophisticated managerial practices than domestic firms across the U.S., Europe and Asia.
    8
      The complementarity between innovation and market scale is a major theme of the international economics
literature. For example, the promise of greater sales in export markets creates an incentive for a firm to invest in
productivity-enhancing technologies (Verhoogen, 2008; Bustos, 2010; Lileeva and Trefler, 2010; Aw, Roberts, and
Xu, 2010; Atkeson and Burstein, 2010).




                                                         4
facilitating access to larger markets and thereby creating incentives to invest in firm technology. We
are able to determine the role of the export channel, as distinct from export status, because firms in
our data are asked how they access export markets and, specifically, whether they export through
a foreign parent —either using the parent’s distribution channels or selling directly to another entity
within the multinational. Our findings provide strong evidence that multinationals enjoy greater
benefits from innovation due to their existing market scale and not just innovation costs that are
lower than domestic firms’. The fundamental link between foreign ownership —in particular, the
increase in market access that comes with foreign ownership —and innovation is absent from the
existing studies of trade and innovation, as well as from the literature on organizational structure
and productivity.
       Notice that our empirical results rule out an alternative view of the process of technology trans-
fer —namely, that multinational subsidiaries adopt the same technology level as the foreign par-
ent, independent of their initial productivity.9 If a multinational were able to transplant its own
productivity to any acquired firm, the value added through acquisition would be largest for low-
productivity firms, leading to negative selection, that is, multinationals would select to acquire the
least productive firms.
       Our empirical findings reflect a number of case studies of acquisitions. The instances of for-
eign multinationals entering the Spanish market by acquiring the most productive or largest firms
are very common. Some prominent examples in Spain are Volkswagen acquiring the Spanish car
manufacturer SEAT in 1986; Guinness acquiring the major beer manufacturer Cruzcampo in 1991;
Cemex acquiring the two main cement companies (Compañía Valenciana de Cementos and Sanson)
in 1992; and Allied Domecq acquiring Bodegas y Bebidas, the wine makers of the dominant brands
Campo Viejo and Marqués de Cáceres, in 2001. Upon acquisition, these firms underwent changes
to their technology and organization; they sometimes introduced new products, and their market
share and/or exports generally increased.10
       The results in this paper on positive selection and increased productivity upon acquisition have
direct implications for the relationship between multinational activity and the evolution of the
productivity distribution. For firms that become foreign-owned, the productivity distribution shifts
to the right. Since our results suggest that multinationals do not purchase a random selection of
   9
     This alternative view of technology transfer is consistent with an assumption made in McGrattan and Prescott
(2010), Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009) and Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare (2009) that all subsidiaries of a
multinational firm operate with the same productivity (up to a discount factor typically modeled as iceberg costs).
  10
     For example, Volkswagen retooled the SEAT production line based on the Volkswagen Polo platform, relaunching
the SEAT Ibiza that was subsequently sold throughout Europe.



                                                        5
firms but are likely to acquire the initially most productive firms, productivity diﬀerences across
firms in the economy can be amplified over time. Establishing the mechanism driving multinational
entry into a country and subsequent investment decisions is also key for welfare analysis. Intuitively,
if entering firms acquire the most productive firms in an industry, the increase in productivity
associated with any increase in inward FDI is likely to be lower than if foreign firms acquired
the least productive firms and brought them up to international productivity levels. Our paper,
therefore, informs the set of assumptions behind macroeconomic models of multinational production
and welfare.
       Finally, accounting for the links between the innovation and acquisition decisions can shed light
on why foreign multinationals acquire larger firms and on the long-standing puzzle of why some
firms innovate more than others. Our study suggests that both are determined by the variable costs
and benefits of technology transfer. When this is the case, our key insight is that diﬀerences in
market access alone, and not just in foreign firms’ innovation cost advantages, can explain these
phenomena. More generally, the fact that firms within an industry may have diﬀerential access to
markets provides a new rationale for why initial diﬀerences in productivity persist, and why not
all firms invest in technology and organizational upgrades, which are fundamental questions within
the organizational economics field among others (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007; Syverson, 2010).
       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 outlines a simple model illustrating the
relationship between acquisition and investment to frame the empirical analysis; Section 3 describes
the data; Section 4 presents the empirical strategy and results related to the acquisition decision;
Section 5 focuses on the innovation decision and explores the role of the market access mechanism
in driving our main results. Section 6 analyzes the eﬀect of foreign acquisition on productivity.
Section 7 concludes.



2        Acquisition and Innovation Decisions
In this section, we set up a simple industry-level partial equilibrium model to illustrate the endoge-
nous choices of foreign acquisition and innovation when domestic firms diﬀer in initial productivity,
and the complementarities that can emerge among productivity, innovation and acquisition.11
  11
    In the model, variation in investment levels across firms are optimal choices under complete information, so
that persistent productivity diﬀerences are not based on any type of market failure, incomplete information or
X-ineﬃciency.




                                                       6
2.1       Structure

Consider a model with heterogeneous domestic firms (Melitz, 2003) with a Constant Elasticity of
Substitution (CES) demand structure and increasing returns to scale in a setting of monopolistic
competition (Helpman and Krugman, 1985). The initial productivity of firm i is given by ϕi .
Forward-looking foreign firms select which domestic firms to acquire, and all firms choose a level
of innovation or other productivity-increasing investment, γ i . Production and profits reflect post-
                                                                                                     1 12
innovation productivity levels, γ i ϕi , and the firm’s marginal cost is given by                 γ i ϕi
                                                                                                         .
       The price set by each firm is a constant markup over marginal cost, and each variety in an
                                                                              1
industry is produced by a single firm. Firm i sets a price                  ργ i ϕi
                                                                                    ,   where ρ is the parameter in the
                                                                                                                1
CES utility function that defines the elasticity of substitution between varieties σ =                         1−ρ
                                                                                                                     > 1,
assumed to be constant across all markets.13 Each firm sells Ai ρσ (γ i ϕi )σ units, generating revenues
of Ai ρσ−1 (γ i ϕi )σ−1 , where Ai is a measure of market size for the markets relevant to firm i. The
profits generated by each firm are given by:
                                                         µ      ¶
                                                             1−ρ σ
                                            π i = Ai              ρ (γ i ϕi )σ−1
                                                              ρ
                                       ³         ´
                                           1−ρ
       To simplify, we denote χ =           ρ
                                                     ρσ , and work with an increasing transformation of the inno-
vation level λi = γ σ−1
                    i   from now on. The value, Vi , of each firm operating in the domestic market
(net of the fixed production cost) is equal to the variable profit it earns, πi , less the total cost of
innovations to increase productivity Ci (λi ):


                                            Vi (λi ) = Ai χλi ϕσ−1
                                                               i   − Ci (λi )                                          (1)
  12
     The model’s predictions are robust to specifying post-innovation productivity as an additive function of initial
productivity and innovation; (γ i + ϕi ). The multiplicative setup used here is similar to the model in Bustos (2010),
where the binary decision about technology investment is related to the export decision. In our case, firms choose
whether to invest, but, in addition, they also optimize over the level of investment as a function of innovation costs.
Heterogeneous firm productivities could reflect variation in marginal costs for firms using the same technologies or
variation in the quality of output produced, allowing more productive firms to charge higher prices.
  13
                                                                         RN           1
     The representative consumer’s utility function is given by U = [ 0 q(i)ρ di] ρ where ρ ∈ (0, 1). The demand for
                                                                         i p(i) −σ
a particular variety of the product sold by a given firm is q(i) = E    Pi ( Pi )  , where Ei is total expenditure in the
relevant market for good i on all varieties in the industry, and Pi is a weighted average of variety prices in the relevant
market. The subindex i on Ei and Pi captures the fact that firms can sell in diﬀerent markets. We assume that
doing so does not incur transport costs. We define Ai = Ei Piσ−1 . See Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) for further details.




                                                                 7
2.2       The Innovation Decision

We allow the total cost of investment in productivity to be the sum of a fixed and a variable cost
of innovation:
                                              Ci (λi ) = ai + bi f (λi )

where λi measures the improvement in productivity following the investment. We do not impose
any specific functional form on f (λi ).14 At any given point in time, there is an upper bound on
the level of technology that a firm can attain by innovating that represents the "state of the art"
technology in a given industry. We denote this productivity level Φmax .
       The firm chooses a level of innovation λ∗i that maximizes the value of the firm. When the optimal
level of innovation is at an interior solution, which we refer to as Case 1 in what follows, the firm
innovates up to the level where the marginal benefit equals marginal cost:15


                                                Ai χϕσ−1
                                                     i   = bi f 0 (λ∗i )                                            (2)


Equation (2) shows that, ceteris paribus, at an interior solution, λ∗i = λ∗ (Ai , bi , ϕi ), a firm with
a higher initial productivity level ϕi , greater market size Ai , or lower costs of technology invest-
ment bi , will make a greater investment in productivity. Figure 1 provides an illustration of the
                                                                   ³ ´            ³ ´
positive relationship between λ∗i and ϕi for two possible values of Abii .16 When Abii is higher,
the optimal level of innovation, λ∗i , is greater for any level of ϕi . This illustrates two important
economic mechanisms: the complementarity between innovation and initial productivity, as well as
the complementarity between larger market size (or lower innovation) costs and innovation. ϕD
                                                                   ³ ´
(ϕF ) is the value of ϕi at which a firm with a low (high) value of Abii would find it worthwhile to
invest in innovation.
  14
      We require only that the technology total cost function Ci (λi ) has a continuous first derivative and is strictly
positive whenever λi > 1. Notice that we do not impose a technological complementarity between innovation and
initial productivity which could reflect an assumption that absorptive capacity is increasing in ϕi . One way to do
this would be to specify b as a decreasing function of ϕi . The current specification is general enough to include this
possibility.
   15
      This first order condition gives the optimal level of investment when bi is suﬃciently high that the firm does not
                                                               A χϕσ−1
find it optimal to innovate up to ϕmax . This is for bi > f 0 (( ϕi maxi )σ−1 )
                                                               ϕi
  To ensure positive innovation, ai must be suﬃciently low so that firm value under (optimal) investment is larger
than firm value under no investment. This is true when ai ≤ bi ((λ∗ − 1)f 0 (λ∗ ) − f (λ∗ ). In the interior optimum
λ∗ > 1, (since Vλ0 |1 = Ai χϕσ−1 − bi f 0 (1) > 0 as f 0 (1) = 0 where we have imposed marginal cost continuity). The
interior optimum is guaranteed to be a maximum as long as marginal cost (or, equivalently, f 0 ) is a continuous
increasing function of λ. For λ∗ to be unique, f 0 should also be strictly increasing for λ > 1.
  16
     The first order condition (2) does not separately identify Ai and bi . Access to larger markets and lower marginal
costs of investment in technology have similar eﬀects on the choice of λi . Either assumption is suﬃcient.




                                                           8
   The solution in Case 1 takes into account the costs and benefits of innovation and the firm’s
initial productivity to determine the interior solution. However, a common assumption in the
literature on multinational production is that subsidiaries operate at the same productivity level as
their parent, independent of their initial characteristics. We represent this possible assumption on
the technology transfer process by allowing for any acquired firm to find it optimal to innovate up
to the "state of the art" technology level, and refer to this special case as Case 2 in what follows.
This could arise if productivity-enhancing innovation incurred only a fixed cost, i.e. bi = 0, in
which case the optimal innovation is at a corner solution for all initial levels of productivity. This
             ³      ´σ−1
implies λ∗i = Φϕmax      , which is a decreasing function of initial productivity. Figure 2 provides
                  i

an illustration of the relationship between λ∗i and ϕi in this case (represented by λF in the figure).
Unlike in Figure 1, the amount of innovation is independent of Ai .


2.3    The Acquisition Decision

We denote Vi∗ as the value of the firm, given by equation (1), at the optimal investment level λ∗i
for firm i. We now turn to how foreign ownership aﬀects innovation and firm value under each case
governing the innovation process and, hence, how foreign firms select whom to acquire.
   We allow foreign acquisition to aﬀect two model parameters. The trade literature has shown
that foreign ownership provides access to larger markets. If AD measures the size of the domestic
market, we allow foreign-acquired firms to have access to an additional larger market, (denoted A∗ )
so that the total market for a foreign-acquired firm is AF = AD + A∗ , where AF ≥ AD . Foreign
ownership may also bring with it lower innovation costs (access to proprietary technologies, lower
costs of financing, etc.) such that bF ≤ bD or aF ≤ aD (these costs can remain at their original
level or fall). We assume throughout that 0 ≤ bF ≤ bD and, for simplicity, that the domestic firm
is always at the interior solution given by the first order condition in equation (2).
   Given the parameter values relevant for the ownership structure of the firm, the optimal level of
innovation under foreign ownership is λ∗F                                   ∗D
                                       i , and under domestic ownership is λi . Using equation

(1) for firm value under each ownership structure, the incremental value of the firm under foreign
acquisition can be written as:

                      ¡                ¢ σ−1                ¡     ¡ ∗F ¢        ¡ ∗D ¢¢
         Vi∗F − Vi∗D = AF λ∗F
                           i  − AD λ∗D
                                    i   χϕi  − (aF − aD ) −  bF f  λi    − bD f  λi               (3)


Under the assumptions that AF ≥ AD , bF ≤ bD and aF ≤ aD , and at least one of these inequalities is


                                                  9
                                          ¡           ¢
strictly true, expression (3) is positive. Vi∗F − Vi∗D represents the value created by the acquisition.
       We assume that the price paid by a foreign firm if it were to acquire firm i, Ri , divides the value
created through the acquisition between the buyers and the sellers. This assumption underpins
the theory of eﬃciency-based M&A activity (Ravenscraft and Scherer, 1987), and suggests that
                   ¡           ¢
Ri = Vi∗D + (1 − α) Vi∗F − Vi∗D , where (1 − α) is the share of the surplus going to the domestic
owners of the firm and α is the share going to the acquiring parent. α ∈ [0, 1] can be thought of
as reflecting the relative bargaining weights of each party in the transaction.17 We assume that
there is a fixed cost to a foreign firm of making an acquisition, K, representing the fixed search and
administrative costs related to the acquisition process.
   The model predicts that a firm is acquired in anticipation of a positive future payoﬀ to the
                                               ¡           ¢
acquiring firm, whenever Vi∗F − (Vi∗D + (1 − α) Vi∗F − Vi∗D ) − K ≥ 0. That is, the foreign firm
has an incentive to make an acquisition whenever:

                                                ¡           ¢
                                               α Vi∗F − Vi∗D ≥ K                                                    (4)


       Now we can investigate the relationship between acquisition incentives and initial firm produc-
tivity. The nature of this relationship depends on the process by which λ∗F
                                                                         i  is determined.
       In Case 1, the optimal amount of innovation satisfies the first order condition given in equation
(2).18 Applying the envelope theorem to the value of the firm under foreign and domestic control
       d(Vi∗F −Vi∗D )     ¡    ∗F       ∗D
                                           ¢
yields     dϕσ−1      = χ  AF λi  − AD λi    > 0. That is, the value created by foreign acquisition
               i

is increasing in initial productivity, and more productive domestic firms are more likely to be
acquired. This result arises from the complementarity between foreign firm characteristics (larger
markets and/or lower costs of innovation), innovation and the acquired firm’s productivity. A given
innovation is more valuable in more productive firms; and this value is greater under foreign control
due to, for instance, the access to distribution networks granted by the foreign firm, which means
that the innovation can be leveraged in a larger market and, hence, is more profitable.
       An alternative scenario emerges if the process by which λ∗F
                                                                i  is determined is governed by Case
2, when multinationals find it optimal to transplant their own superior level of technology, Φmax ,
  17
     We assume α is fixed for all potential acquisition targets. If a larger number of foreign firms were competing to
acquire the most productive domestic firms, this might suggest that α decreases in ϕi . This would make positive
selection less likely in the data, and hence by itself cannot explain our findings.
  18
     Case 1, in practice, represents a world where the innovation process is costly, and achieving a higher productivity
level requires greater expenditure. For example, installing a technology with better machinery or more talented
managers is likely to be more expensive; and we might think that there is an increasing opportunity cost of allocating
scarce MNC resources to a particular acquired firm.



                                                          10
regardless of who they buy. In this scenario, the value of the firm under foreign ownership, Vi∗F =
AF χΦσ−1
     max − aF , is independent of its initial characteristics and, in particular, independent of ϕi .

This means that there are no sources of complementarity between the characteristics of the acquired
firm and the implemented technology. Since the value of the firm had it remained under domestic
control, Vi∗D , is an increasing function of ϕi , the value added by acquisition is decreasing in ϕi ,
d(Vi∗F −Vi∗D )
    dϕσ−1
                 = −AD χλ∗D
                         i  < 0, and less productive domestic firms are more likely to be acquired.
      i

    In our model, the identity of the acquiring firm is irrelevant for the optimal choice of innovation.
We require only the possibility that the parent brings a lower cost of innovation and/or a larger
market than the firm would have had under domestic control. Hence, heterogeneity among parents
does not aﬀect the predictions arising in the model for innovation and acquisition decisions.19
    Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the diﬀerent relationships between λ∗i and ϕi , highlighting the role
played by selective foreign acquisition in Case 1 and Case 2 —that is, under the two diﬀerent possible
processes determining λ∗F
                       i . In each case, the bold line shows the predicted relationship between

initial productivity and innovation within an industry for a given K. In Figure 1, firms above
e 1 are acquired and innovate; firms between ϕD and ϕ
ϕ                                                   e 1 remain domestic and innovate; and firms
                                                                                   e 2 are
below ϕD remain domestic and do not make any investments. In Figure 2, firms below ϕ
acquired and implement the innovation required to raise the productivity level of the acquired firm
                      e 2 remain domestic, and the most productive of these may choose optimally
to Φmax . Firms above ϕ
to innovate.



3      Data Description
The results in this paper are based on the Encuesta de Estrategias Empresariales (ESEE), a panel
dataset of Spanish manufacturing firms collected by the Fundación SEPI (a non-government or-
ganization) and the Spanish Ministry of Industry every year since 1990. It is designed to be
representative of the population of Spanish manufacturing firms and includes around 1,800 firms
per year (aiming to survey all firms with more than 200 employees and a stratified sample of smaller
firms). The response rate in the survey is 70 to 80 percent and, new firms are re-sampled over time
to ensure that the panel remains representative.20
    Our data span the years 1990 to 2006. 83.5 percent of the firms are domestic in the first year
  19
     A natural extension of the paper would be to examine the implications of the mechanism for bilateral FDI flows
and the resulting assortative matching between heterogeneous foreign parents and domestic firms.
  20
     Details on the survey characteristics and data access guidelines can be obtained at
http://www.funep.es/esee/sp/sinfo_que_es.asp.


                                                        11
they appear in the data, and 16.5 percent are foreign-owned. We define a firm as foreign-owned if
it reports that a foreign company owns at least 50 percent of its capital. 91 percent of firms report
either being 0 or 100 percent foreign-owned. Since 50 percent is a suﬃcient indicator for foreign
control, we have favored this definition of "acquisition" (the results are robust to specifying other
thresholds). Markusen (2002) defines foreign direct investment through acquisition as an investment
in which the firm acquires a substantial controlling interest in a foreign firm. We restrict our sample
to firms that are not owned by a foreign company in the first year they appear in the data, since
the model generates predictions about which domestic firms will be acquired. The data do not
record any further characteristics of the parent firm. However, our dataset is unique in that,
in addition to recording ownership status, it reports a large number of variables that reflect the
productivity-enhancing innovation activity undertaken by each firm. The data include variables
indicating whether the firm undertook process innovation, product innovation, and whether the
firm made eﬀorts to assimilate foreign technologies in a given year.
   The variables recorded in our data allow us to distinguish between process innovation related
to the introduction of new machinery and new methods to organize production, reflecting the
distinction in Teece (1977). The ESEE bases its survey questions on an OECD publication, the
Oslo Manual, which was designed to formalize guidelines for collecting and using data on industrial
innovation. It acknowledges the fine line between an organizational innovation and other types of
process innovation by noting that "a starting point for distinguishing process and/or organizational
innovations is the type of activity". In particular, "organizational innovations deal primarily with
people and the organization of work." Accordingly, the ESEE asks respondents whether their firm
has undertaken a process improvement that involves the use of new machines and/or the use of new
methods to organize production. Some examples of the latter are "practices to improve knowledge
sharing," "education and training systems," "new methods for distributing responsibilities and
decision making" and "management systems for general production or supply operations."
   The data also contain other information on the activities of these firms that will allow us to
shed light on the mechanisms at work in our model. In particular, we know whether a firm exports
and its volume of exports. Importantly, we also observe whether the firm uses the foreign parent as
a channel for its exports, or via other means (this information is available only every four years).
We do not know of any other dataset that includes all these detailed variables for a large panel of
firms over an extended period of time (17 years in our data).
   We also use the ESEE data to define three diﬀerent variables that measure firm productivity. The


                                                  12
first is the natural log of the firm’s real sales, relative to the industry mean (similar to Verhoogen,
2008). The second is labor productivity defined as the natural logarithm of real value added per
worker, relative to the industry mean (similar to Lileeva and Trefler, 2010). The third is Total
Factor Productivity (TFP) obtained using the method outlined in Olley and Pakes (1996).21 The
ESEE categorizes firms into 20 industries, based on the two-digit NACE classification. Summary
statistics are given in Table 1, and variable definitions are included in the notes to this table.



4     The Acquisition Decision

4.1     Estimation Strategy

The first set of predictions arising from the model sheds light on which domestic firms are likely to be
the targets of foreign acquisitions. As we saw in Section 2, two very diﬀerent selection mechanisms
can arise as a function of the process through which the level of innovation is determined upon
acquisition. In Case 1, foreign firms acquire the most productive firms in the economy (those with
higher ϕi ), so that there is positive selection. In Case 2, foreign firms transfer their own productivity
level to the domestic firm, regardless of who they buy. Under this innovation process, there will be
negative selection: foreign firms acquire the least productive firms (those with lower ϕi ).
    We estimate the type of selection at work in the data in the following way. Rearranging inequality
                       ¡             ¢
(4), we denote Fit∗ = α Vi∗F − Vi∗D − K. The binary outcome of the acquisition decision Fit can
be seen as reflecting a threshold rule for the underlying latent variable Fit∗ , so that Fit = 1 if
Fit∗ ≥ 0 and Fit = 0 if Fit∗ < 0. We also allow the average probability of acquisition to vary by
year and industry by including year (dt ) and industry (ds ) dummies. Given these assumptions, the
probability that a given firm i in industry s is acquired in year t can be estimated with the following
linear approximation:
                                          Fit = α + βϕi + dt + ds + ν it                                            (5)

We will first measure ϕi as the productivity of firm i in the base year (the first year the firm
appears in the data, which we subsequently exclude from the analysis). We then allow for a time-
varying measure of productivity, ϕit , —namely, lagged productivity. Empirically, lagged and initial
  21
     The Olley-Pakes (1996) approach and other frequently-used solutions to the endogeneity of input levels to unob-
served productivity shocks in calculating the values of factor coeﬃcients in measures of TFP rely on the assumption
that productivity evolves as an AR(1) process. To the extent that this approach does not allow firms to choose the
optimal level of investment in productivity-enhancing technology as a function of observable characteristics, it is less
well-suited to our research question. This is why we chose to present three productivity measures.



                                                          13
productivity are highly positively correlated, but the ordering of firms based on lagged productivity
may better reflect the attractiveness of any one firm at the time of potential purchase. Fit is an
indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm is foreign-owned in period t. A probit model gives similar
results to the linear probability model.
              b is predicted to be positive. In contrast, in Case 2, with negative selection, β
   In Case 1, β                                                                               b is

expected to be negative. Note that the observed selection eﬀect oﬀers insight about the actual
nature of the potential technology transfer from multinational parents to domestic subsidiaries.


4.2    Foreign firms select the most productive domestic firms

Before turning to the regression analysis, we first use our dataset to explore the patterns of selection
graphically. Figure 3 plots the distribution of initial productivity for two groups of firms: those
that are acquired by a foreign firm four years after our baseline productivity is computed and those
that remain domestic. One can clearly see that the distribution of acquired firms (solid line) lies to
the right of those that remain domestic. Since our measure of productivity is demeaned relative to
the industry, this does not reflect diﬀerences in firm size by industry. Figure 4 reproduces Figure 3
by industry. A striking pattern emerges: positive selection is present in every industry. These two
figures provide prima facie evidence that the positive selection predicted by Case 1 in our model
dominates in the Spanish data.
   We now turn to a more systematic regression analysis and estimate equation (5) to establish
this first fact. The results are shown in Panels A and B of Table 2. The dependent variable in all
columns is the indicator for foreign ownership, and this is regressed on our three proxies for initial
productivity. These are the logarithm of real firm sales (Columns 1 to 3), the logarithm of labor
productivity (Columns 4 to 6) and the logarithm of TFP (Columns 7 to 9), all relative to their
industry mean. All regressions include time dummies, industry dummies, and industry trends, so
they can be interpreted as within-industry diﬀerences in the probability of acquisition as a function
of initial productivity, controlling for possible diﬀerential trends in acquisitions by industry. The
regressions in Panel A use baseline (initial) productivity measured by these three variables, while
those in Panel B use the lagged value of the productivity measures.
   Regardless of the productivity measure used, we find that more productive firms are more
likely to become foreign-owned. For example, the coeﬃcient of 0.0228 in Column 1a implies that,
conditional on being domestic in any given year, one standard deviation higher initial sales is
associated with a 3.9 percentage points higher probability of being acquired the year after. The


                                                  14
coeﬃcient (0.0226) is very similar in Column 1b, which uses lagged sales, reflecting the fact that
these two measures are highly correlated. Given that 4.6 percent of all the firms in our sample of
initially domestic firms become owned eventually, this explains a significant fraction of the cross-
sectional variation in acquisition probabilities.22
   Columns 2, 5 and 8 do not restrict the relationship between initial productivity and acquisition to
being linear and replace the productivity variable with indicator variables capturing the productivity
quartile the firm is in. For example, in Column 2a, which uses initial productivity measured by
sales, being in the second quartile increases the probability of being foreign-owned by 2.5 (1.5
in Column 2b, using lagged sales) percentage points relative to firms in the first quartile; being
in the third quartile by four percentage points (4.01 in Column 2b); and being in the highest
productivity quartile by 9.9 percentage points (9.6 in Column 2b). A similar pattern emerges when
using labor productivity or TFP as the productivity measure. Therefore, firms at the upper end
of the productivity distribution are substantially more likely to become foreign-owned, and the
eﬀect is increasing in firm productivity, with the upper quartile having a much higher probability
of acquisition.
   Finally, Columns 3, 6 and 9 explore the possibility that foreign firms are selecting exporters
(because, for example, exporting firms have less exchange rate exposure), and exporting is positively
correlated with initial productivity. We introduce a dummy variable for exporting status (the
variable equals one if the firm reports exporting in the base year in Panel A, and equals one if the
firm is exporting in the previous year in Panel B) and interact it with initial productivity. Initial
productivity always remains positively related to the probability of being acquired, regardless of
export status. There is also evidence that multinationals are more likely to target exporters. In
addition, we find some evidence of higher positive selection among exporters (positive significant
coeﬃcient on the interaction of the export dummy and the productivity measures in Panel B).
So, overall, even though some firms may be acquired because of their exporter status, positive
selection persists, and multinationals are more likely to acquire the most productive firms among
both exporters and non-exporters.
   Table 2, therefore, reinforces the results from Figures 3 and 4 and shows that, within our
cross-section of firms, the more productive domestic firms are more likely to become foreign-owned
—evidence of positive selection and the presence of "cherry-picking." These selection patterns are
inconsistent with a model in which foreign firms always find it optimal to transfer their superior
  22
     Table 1 shows that 3.5 percent of our observations are firms under foreign ownerhsip. This corresponds to the
4.6 percent of firms being acquired during the sample (that appear in the data both before and after acquisition).


                                                       15
technology across international (or firm) borders to any domestic firm, as is commonly assumed.
    While the results in a number of papers point to the presence of positive selection by foreign firms
in other countries (e.g., for Chile, Ramondo, 2009; for Indonesia, Arnold and Javorcik, 2009; for the
U.K., Criscuolo and Martin, 2009), to the best of our knowledge, no prior studies have explained
this empirical regularity. When viewed within the context of our model, our finding suggests that
acquisition patterns reflect an underlying complementarity between the initial productivity of the
acquired firm and the extent of innovation post-acquisition. As we will see later, this finding has
significant implications for the relationship between multinational activity in a country and the
evolution of the productivity distribution.



5     The Innovation Decision

5.1     Estimation Strategy: Fixed Eﬀects and Propensity Score

After having established that foreign firms positively select domestic firms as targets, we now test
the set of predictions relating productivity-enhancing investments to acquisition —namely, that upon
being acquired, foreign subsidiaries invest more in innovation than they would have done had they
remained domestic. Our model suggests that in either Case 1 or Case 2 —and therefore regardless
of whether selection is positive or negative —acquired firms undertake more investment activity,
controlling for the initial productivity of the acquired firm. This can be seen in Figures 1 and 2 as
the diﬀerence between λFi and λD
                               i .

    In Case 1, the optimal level of investment under each ownership structure is determined by the
first-order condition given in equation (2). In this case, innovation can increase upon acquisition for
several reasons. The foreign firm could provide access to a larger market and/or bring with it lower
innovation costs, such that ( Abii )F > ( Abii )D . In Case 2, foreign firms transfer their own superior level
of technology to the domestic firm upon acquisition. This means that innovation will increase upon
acquisition.
    Our innovation variables are based on the firm-level responses to the questions of whether
the firm made specific types of innovation in that year, which we interpret as improvements to
firm technology. We are interested in how the firm’s technology, which is the result of successive
innovations, changes with foreign ownership. Since at any point in time, the firm’s technology can be
characterized as the sum of innovations made up to that point, we use the yearly variables on firm-
                                                                                            P
level innovation described in Section 3 to measure the firm’s technology at time t as: Iit = tj=t0 Iij ,


                                                     16
where t0 is the year the firm entered the data.23 Any diﬀerences in technology across firms in the
year they enter the data will be captured by the firm fixed eﬀects in our empirical specifications.
As a result, all the variation in a firm’s innovative activity, and the resulting technology level, that
we relate to changes in the firm’s ownership structure is variation that occurs within the sample.24
       Empirically, we first estimate the eﬀect of acquisition on technology using the panel structure
of the dataset and including year fixed eﬀects as follows:


                                         Iit = α + γFit + dt + η i +     it                                      (6)


where Iit is a proxy for productivity-enhancing innovation. The fact that the level of productivity
ϕi aﬀects investment directly for foreign-owned firms is absorbed by the firm fixed eﬀects, along with
any other permanent unobserved characteristics of firms. Including firm fixed eﬀects, ηi , implies
                             b is a measure of the change in investment after being acquired,
that the estimated parameter γ
controlling for the fact that foreign firms select to acquire higher initial productivity firms, and this
is predicted to be positive.
       The fixed eﬀects specification controls for selection based on time-invariant firm characteristics
(e.g., initial productivity). However, it is important in the context of our 17-year panel to ac-
knowledge that firm characteristics may evolve diﬀerently over time (for reasons outside the model)
and impact multinational selection decisions diﬀerentially. In particular, selection may be driven by
lagged firm characteristics and decisions that could be correlated with future innovation. To address
this, we use a propensity score estimator to reweight firms in equation (6) to reflect diﬀerences in
the probability of being acquired based on prior characteristics.
       We calculate the propensity score for each firm in the following way. For each year, we consider
firms acquired in that year as treated observations and firms that are never acquired as control
observations. We pool treated and control observations across all years, to estimate the probability
that a firm is acquired as a function of a number of characteristics (see Lechner, 1999). This
estimated probability is the propensity score, pb. The characteristics used to obtain the propensity
score are lagged productivity (measured both by log firm sales and log labor productivity), lagged
sales growth, lagged export status, lagged average wage, lagged innovation, lagged log capital per
employee, lagged log capital and a year trend. We also allow for this relationship to vary across
  23
     We have allowed the stock of innovation to depreciate at diﬀerent rates over time. The results are qualitatively
similar to the ones presented with this —the simplest —specification.
  24
     Supplemental Appendix Table S1 shows that each measure of the stock of innovation Iit , enters the production
function as a significant shifter of productivity.



                                                         17
industries by estimating the propensity score separately for each industry.25
       One can transform the propensity score estimates into weights such that the propensity score
reweighted regression yields a consistent estimate of a parameter of interest (Dehejia and Wahba,
1997; Busso, DiNardo and McCrary, 2009). We will obtain the Average Treatment Eﬀect (ATE)
of acquisition on innovation in a specification like equation (6), using the weights derived from
the propensity score (Rubin, 2001). Specifically, the weight for each treated firm is 1/b
                                                                                        p, and the
weight for each control firm is 1/(1 − pb).26 We restrict the analysis to firms that fall within the
common support. Busso, DiNardo and McCrary (2009) show that the finite sample properties of
this propensity score reweighting estimator are superior to the propensity score matching techniques
(where each treated firm is matched to one or several controls).
       The propensity score reweighting estimator obtained by reweighting observations in equation
(6), allows us to control not only for selection on time-invariant characteristics of firms (just like
the equal-weighted fixed eﬀects regression), but also for time-varying characteristics through the
propensity score. The underlying assumption in the estimation is that, conditional on observ-
able time-varying and any time-invariant characteristics that aﬀect selection, treatment is random.
Hence, outcomes for the treated are attributable only to treatment status (this is typically referred
to as the ignorability assumption, or selection on observables).


5.2       Acquired firms undertake more innovation

Since we have detailed information on the types of innovation implemented within domestic firms
upon foreign acquisition, our data will allow us to shed light on the actual process of technol-
ogy adoption by domestic firms, and precisely what types of innovations are more likely to be
adopted/transferred.
       Our measures of innovation are specific actions related to the implementation of product and
process innovation, and the assimilation of foreign technology. All columns of Table 3 reflect re-
gressions of an innovation variable on the lagged foreign ownership variable. Reflecting the fact
that it takes some time for firm strategies to change after acquisition, we observe empirically that
innovations take place mainly with a one-year lag. Lagging this independent variable also minimizes
  25
     We also performed the standard tests to check that the balancing hypothesis holds within each industry. We
found that all covariates are balanced between treated and control observations for all blocks in all industries.
  The relationship between each of these variables and the probability of being acquired is shown in Supplemental
Appendix Table S2. Lagged log firm sales is the most significant predictor of acquisition, consistent with our model.
  26
     Since never-acquired control firms may be used as controls more than once, we sum the control weights by firm
to obtain the weight for the control firm (Lechner, 1999). We also winsorize the weights at one percent because of
extreme outliers in the weights. The results are not sensitive to the exact outlier cut-oﬀ.


                                                         18
possible concerns about reverse causation.
       In Table 3, we report the results for each investment proxy variable: process innovation (Panel
A), product innovation (Panel B) and assimilation of foreign technologies (Panel C). The first
column in each panel includes only firm fixed eﬀects; the second also includes a control for sales
growth in the year prior to acquisition (to control for possible diﬀerences in innovation related to
previous firm growth); and the third allows for industry-level trends in investment. The fourth
column presents the propensity score reweighted estimates.
       The fixed eﬀects specifications in Columns 1 to 3 of Panel A show that process innovation is
positively and significantly associated with foreign ownership. Column 1a shows that a foreign-
acquired firm is 57-percent more likely to have undertaken a process innovation while foreign-
owned, relative to a firm that stays domestic. This estimate is robust to controlling for lagged
sales growth (Column 2a) and industry trends (Column 3a). Column 4a shows the propensity
score reweighted regressions that allow us to control for time-varying selection and other forms of
endogeneity. The coeﬃcient 0.645 is similar to earlier columns and also highly significant, implying
that firms undertake more process innovation upon acquisition.
       There is also some evidence that foreign-acquired firms conduct more product innovation and
are also more likely to assimilate foreign technology. However, while the coeﬃcients are positive and
significant in Columns 1b and 1c, standard errors are larger when controls for lagged sales growth
and industry trends are included, as is also true for the propensity score estimation. Nonetheless,
the coeﬃcient values on lagged foreign ownership remain similar in magnitude for each variable
in these specifications, and is significant at the ten-percent level for the assimilation of foreign
technologies in the propensity score estimation of Column 4b.27 This suggests that the foreign
parent is transferring new technologies upon acquisition.
       Table 4 shows the eﬀect of foreign ownership on the disaggregated measures of process innova-
tion. We distinguish between firms that report to have invested only in new machines (Panel B),
only in new methods of organizing production (Panel C) or in both simultaneously (Panel A). The
results reveal some interesting contrasts. While foreign-acquired firms are not significantly more
likely to only introduce new machinery or only introduce new ways of organizing production, the
simultaneous introduction of new machinery and new organizational process is significantly asso-
ciated with foreign acquisition (Teece, 1977). Panel A shows this result. Both the fixed eﬀects
  27
    Note that the variable indicating the assimilation of foreign technologies is available only every four years,
reducing the number of observations in these specifications and, hence, reducing the power of the fixed eﬀects results
since we have, at most, five observations within a firm for this variable.



                                                         19
specifications of Columns 1a to 3a and the propensity score estimation of Column 4a show that
upon acquisition, firms are more likely to introduce new machines and new organizational methods
simultaneously. This is an interesting result since we might have expected that foreign firms would
also be more likely to introduce either type of process innovation independently. It is consistent
with the complementarities found by Black and Lynch (2001), Bresnahan et al. (2002), Brynjolfsson
and Hitt (2003) and Bartel et al. (2007) between diﬀerent types of technology upgrading. Since
firms appear to introduce both types of innovations jointly, it is important to allow for the eﬀect of
both actions when quantifying the multinational productivity advantage.


5.3    The Role of Market Access Provided by the Foreign Parent

These findings on increased innovation following acquisition, together with our positive selection
results, are consistent with a world in which multinationals choose to acquire the most productive
firms since that is where the returns to their investment are highest. This could arise because the
foreign firm gives access to technology at a cost (bi ) that is lower than the innovation costs for the
firm had it remained under domestic control, as previously proposed in the literature on the sources
of multinational advantage (see Caves, 1996). We highlight an alternative reason for our findings,
based on a key feature of multinationals: they often grant their subsidiaries access to a larger global
market.
   Tables 5 and 6 explore whether innovation decisions are related to whether foreign ownership
brings with it access to foreign markets. We regress the innovation variables on indicator variables
for whether the firm exports, and for whether the firm exports through the foreign parent. Exporting
through the foreign parent may mean that the firm uses the distribution channels and the networks
of the foreign firm to export, or that it sells its goods directly to the foreign parent (as part of a
global production system). The base category is that the firm exports via any other channel such as
through its own means, using a Spanish specialized intermediary or cooperative export agreements
with other firms.
   Table 5 presents the results for overall process innovation (Panel A) and for process innovation
that involves the simultaneous introduction of new machines and new methods of organizing produc-
tion (Panel B). Column 1a reveals that starting to export is positively associated with investment
in process innovation, consistent with the findings of previous studies (Verhoogen, 2008; Bustos,
2010; Lileeva and Trefler, 2010; Aw et al., 2010). This result holds controlling for foreign ownership
(Column 2a), which is also significant, suggesting that the ownership mechanism outlined in this


                                                  20
paper oﬀers an explanation for acquired firms’ increased process innovation that is separate from
the export channel.
    Columns 3a and 4a introduce our key variable of interest, showing fixed eﬀects regressions using
process innovation as a dependent variable, where we include the indicator variables for whether
the firm exports via the foreign parent. Notably, we find that starting to export through a foreign
parent has a large and significant coeﬃcient. This suggests that the market access provided by the
foreign parent is a key driver of the increased process innovation associated with acquisition.
    Since we can distinguish between diﬀerent types of process innovation, we evaluate the type
of process innovation exporters are more likely to undertake. Although exporting is, on average,
not significantly associated with the simultaneous introduction of new machines and new forms of
organizing production (Column 1b), foreign-owned firms are more likely to engage in this type of
process innovation (Column 2b). Column 3b shows that, similar to the process innovation results
in Column 3a, innovation is driven mainly by those foreign-owned exporters that export via the
foreign parent. In contrast, we find that exporting is significantly associated with the introduction
of new machines exclusively, while exporting through a foreign parent is not (unreported). This
reinforces our findings in Table 4, which suggest that foreign ownership leads to a specific type of
product innovation, which involves both new machines and new methods of organizing production.
    Columns 5 to 8 in Table 5 present the propensity score results for the market access channel,
allowing us to control for time-varying selection and endogeneity. Here, we consider the treatment
to be starting to export through the foreign parent, and we recalculate the propensity score and the
associated weights for each firm as described in Section 5.1. Column 5 shows that exporting through
a foreign parent leads to more process innovation (Column 5a) and, in particular, to innovation that
involves the introduction of new machines and organizational practices simultaneously (Column
5b).28 This result holds when controlling for lagged foreign ownership (Column 6), exporting status,
and their interaction (Columns 7 and 8).
    Table 6 shows the eﬀect of market access through the foreign parent on product innovation and
the assimilation of foreign technologies. Both using fixed eﬀects and the propensity score estimator,
we find that exporting via a foreign parent leads to more product innovation and the adoption of
foreign technologies. These results shed light on those in Table 3, where we found a statistically
weaker relationship between foreign ownership and these two variables. Once we distinguish between
foreign-owned firms that export via a foreign parent and those that do not, we see that those that
  28
     Interestingly, we find that exporting through a foreign parent does not lead to the introduction of new machines
or new organizational practices separately (results unreported).


                                                         21
use the parent as an export platform and, hence, have access to larger markets also invest in new
products and adopt new foreign technologies.
   Taken together, these results imply that when firms are acquired by a foreign parent, they
increase innovation particularly when the parent firm provides access to export markets. The
observed relationship between market access and innovation activity oﬀers further support for the
mechanism outlined in Case 1, since only in that case is there a role for market access as a driver
of innovation decisions. It also indicates that market access can itself provide a suﬃcient reason
for acquisition (even when foreign and domestic firms face similar variable innovation costs) when
larger market access increases the potential benefits from investment activity.


5.4    Exports and Wages

Finally, in Table 7, we show other changes that take place within firms as a consequence of foreign
ownership. We study how the share of exports in total sales (Panel A), the logarithm of total
exports for exporters (Panel B) and the logarithm of average firm wage (computed as the total
wage bill divided by the number of employees, Panel C) change with foreign acquisition. Columns
1 to 3 show the equal weighted fixed eﬀects specification, and Column 4 shows the propensity score
reweighted results.
   We find that the proportion of exports in total sales increases significantly following foreign
acquisition. The propensity score estimate in Column 4a shows that the share of exports is, on
average, five percentage points higher in each year for firms that are acquired compared to similar
firms that are not acquired. We also find that the volume of exports for exporters is 25-percent
higher for exporters under foreign ownership (Column 4b). Finally, Panel C shows that average firm
wage increases by six percent following acquisition. This result is driven by an increase in the total
wage bill, rather than by a change in the number of employees (results unreported). This suggests
that firms are increasing their wages and/or upgrading the skill of the workforce following foreign
acquisition. Again, this result, is interesting in itself and consistent with the technology upgrading
identified in the previous sections, to the extent that worker skill and technology are complements
in the production function.




                                                 22
6     Foreign Ownership and Productivity Evolution
Section 4.2 showed that there is positive selection of target firms by foreign multinationals, consistent
with Case 1, and Section 5.2 established that, upon acquisition, firms upgrade their technology by
doing more process innovation and, in particular, by investing simultaneously in new machines
and in new methods to organize production. Now we investigate the eﬀect of acquisition on firm
productivity directly, as well as its consequences for the evolution of the distribution of productivity
within industries.
    Under the assumption that the investment activities described above are indeed productivity-
enhancing, the increased levels of these activities upon acquisition are predicted to lead to higher
productivity for acquired firms. Table 8 shows the results of estimating equation (6) with our mea-
sures of productivity as the dependent variable. Column 1 in Panels A to C (for each productivity
measure) estimate equation (6) without firm fixed eﬀects; Columns 2 and 3 include firm fixed eﬀects
and industry trends, respectively; and Column 4 shows the propensity score reweighting estimates.
    The point estimates are much larger in the cross-sectional estimation of Column 1 relative to
any of the other columns that include fixed eﬀects and better control for selection and endogeneity
using the propensity score. This reflects the fact that the positive selection identified earlier will
lead to substantial over-estimation of the productivity advantage in cross-sectional analysis (as also
demonstrated by Criscuolo and Martin, 2009). However, we also find that acquisition is significantly
positively associated with increased productivity, controlling for selection. The propensity score
reweighted specifications in Column 4 imply that, after acquisition, real sales increase by 18 percent,
on average, for acquired firms. In turn, labor productivity is 13-percent higher and TFP is 16-percent
higher for acquired firms.
    There are a number of concerns about using measures of productivity based on accounting
variables that this paper shares with most of the productivity literature. If there are changes in
how some costs (e.g., management) are allocated between establishments in a firm, or in how input
or output prices are accounted for (e.g., when using transfer pricing), the accounting-based measures
of productivity can be problematic. One advantage of our paper is that we are able to measure
actual changes in the technology that goes directly into the production function (our measures of
innovation and technology adoption in Section 5), such that we do not have to rely exclusively on
productivity measures to evaluate the eﬀects of foreign ownership. Note, also, that the introduction
of transfer pricing upon acquisition would make it harder for us to find any productivity eﬀects of
acquisition since the transfer price within a multinational is likely to be smaller than the market


                                                   23
price, reducing reported sales volumes. In any case, the productivity results in Table 8 confirm the
results that we obtained in Table 3 using direct measures of the changes in the technologies entering
the production function and aﬀecting productivity.29
       Finally, we discuss the implications of our findings for the evolution of the distribution of pro-
ductivity within industries. We showed that foreign firms are more likely to acquire the most
productive firms within industries (Table 2), and that, upon acquisition, firms innovate (Table 3),
increasing productivity (Table 8). This set of results implies that acquisition activity can lead to
an increase in the dispersion of the productivity distribution.30 One can see this in Figure 5, which
shows the distribution of firm productivity in the base year, and four years after that, for firms
that are domestic in that first year but will be foreign-owned four years later. The distribution is
shifted to the right, indicating that productivity increased for firms following the acquisition, over
the whole distribution of firm initial productivity. Figure 6 shows the distribution of productivity in
the base year and four years later for firms that remained domestic. While there is a slight increase
in productivity (productivity is generally known to increase over time), it is much less pronounced
than for foreign-acquired firms. Thus, Figures 5 and 6 provide evidence that the dispersion in the
productivity distribution will increase with foreign entry. This is an important consequence of our
earlier findings since it has implications for the evolution of within-industry productivity distribu-
tions as more foreign firms enter an industry. Under this mechanism, foreign entry does not lead to
productivity convergence, but, on the contrary, could lead to further divergence. Of course, there
could be other reasons (such as spillover eﬀects or other externalities) why multinational entry may
improve less productive firms’ productivity. However, the direct eﬀect of the foreign acquisition
process is an increase in productivity heterogeneity.



7        Conclusion
In this paper, we use rich and detailed data on Spanish manufacturing firms to establish that foreign
firms acquire the best firms within industries ("cherry-picking"), but, nonetheless, also invest more
in a number of innovation activities upon acquisition. In particular, controlling for the selection
eﬀect, firms increase both their process innovation (with the simultaneous introduction of new
  29
     All our results are robust to the analysis of firms that report no change in reporting unit throughout the time they
are in the sample, as well as restricting the sample to firms that report no changes in the number of establishments.
This rules out the concern that the definition of the reporting unit changes following acquisition.
  30
     If multinational entry also serves to raise the threshold level of productivity at which firms exit the domestic
market (as in Helpman et. al., 2004), the resulting productivity distribution will shift to the right, but the increase
in dispersion following multinational entry will be less pronounced.


                                                           24
machines and organizational practices) and their product innovation. Firms also report that they
assimilate more foreign technologies upon acquisition.
       We develop a simple model that illustrates how these two facts are fundamentally related. The
model relies on standard assumptions about firm production, heterogeneity, consumer demand and
market competition (Helpman and Krugman, 1985; Melitz, 2003) and incorporates two well-known
characteristics of multinational firms: multinationals grant access to larger markets and/or have
lower technology implementation costs. Since the incentives for innovation and acquisition are
increasing in initial productivity, foreign firms would find it more profitable to acquire the most
productive firms, and innovate more on acquisition.
       The observed positive selection suggests that there are complementarities between innovation
activity and the initial characteristics of the acquired firm that could go beyond any possible tech-
nological complementarity between firms with similar productivity levels. Our results also suggest
there is a complementarity between market access and innovation. Taken together, these findings
can explain a number of important facts: first, why more productive firms innovate more; second,
why foreign firms acquire the most productive firms within industries; and third, why foreign-owned
firms increase their innovation upon acquisition.
       It is, perhaps, not surprising that integration into a foreign multinational is associated with
higher levels of innovation since transaction costs theories of the firm suggest that the reason
for integration in the first place is to achieve the eﬃciently high levels of investment that arm’s
length transacting would preclude.31 Our contribution is to illustrate the drivers of the innovation
process and to highlight that superior or proprietary technologies are not necessary to generate
the prediction that a given firm finds it optimal to invest more under foreign control than under
domestic control.
       In addition, the complementarity between market scale and innovation oﬀers one explanation
for why all firms do not imitate the practices of high productivity firms in the market and why
productivity diﬀerences persist. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to link market scale
to the jointly determined acquisition outcomes and innovation incentives. Finally, while we focus
on the multinational firm’s acquisition choice, the economic mechanism we emphasize should also
be relevant for purely domestic integration decisions when the acquirer facilitates access to larger
markets.
  31
     The reason why a foreign firm chooses to enter via acquisition rather than through an arm’s length relationship
is the subject of a large literature and typically requires some form of contractual incompleteness. While our model
allows for this possibility, our predictions hold even without contractual incompleteness around the technology transfer
in itself.

                                                          25
References
 [1] Arnold, Jens M., and Beata S. Javorcik. 2009. "Gifted kids or pushy parents? Foreign direct
    investment and plant productivity in Indonesia." Journal of International Economics, 79(1):
    42-53.

 [2] Andrew Atkeson and Ariel Burstein. 2010. “Innovation, Firm dynamics, and International
    Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118(3), 433-484.

 [3] Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2010. "R&D Investment, Exporting, and
    Productivity Dynamics" American Economic Review, forthcoming.

 [4] Barba Navaretti, Giorgio and Anthony J. Venables. 2004. "Multinational Firms in the World
    Economy", Princeton University Press.

 [5] Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn Shaw, 2007. "How Does Information Technology
    Really Aﬀect Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improve-
    ment and Worker Skills," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1721-1758.

 [6] Black, Sandra, and Lisa M. Lynch. 2001. "How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices
    and Information Technology on Productivity," Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, 434—
    445.

 [7] Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. "Measuring and Explaining Management Prac-
    tices Across Firms and Countries." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1351-1408.

 [8] Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2010. "Why Do Management Practices Diﬀer across
    Firms and Countries?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24 (1), 203—224.

 [9] Branstetter, Lee, Raymond Fisman and Fritz Foley. 2006. "Do Stronger Intellectual Property
    Rights Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level
    Panel Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1), 321-349.

[10] Bresnahan, Timothy, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Loren Hitt. 2002. “Information Technology, Work
    Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 117, 339—376.

[11] Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin Hitt. 2003 “Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 85, 793—808.

                                              26
[12] Burstein, Ariel, and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. 2009. "Foreign Know-How, Firm Control, and
    the Income of Developing Countries." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1): 149-195.

[13] Busso, Matias, John DiNardo and Justin McCrary. 2009. "New Evidence on the Finite Sample
    Properties of Propensity Score Matching and Reweighting Estimators", mimeo.

[14] Bustos, Paula. 2010. "Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on
    the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms." American Economic Review, forthcoming.

[15] Caves, Richard E. 1974. "Multinational Firms, Competition and Productivity in Host-Country
    Markets." Economica, 41(162): 176-93.

[16] Caves, Richard E. 1996. Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, Second Edition. New
    York: Cambridge University Press.

[17] Cohen, Wesley, and Daniel Levinthal. 1990. "Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on
    Learning and Innovation." Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 128-152.

[18] Criscuolo, Chiara, and Ralf Martin. 2009. "Multinationals and U.S. Productivity Leadership:
    Evidence from Great Britain." Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2): 263-281.

[19] Dehejia, Rajeev and Sadek Wahba. 1997. "Causal Eﬀects in Non-Experimental Studies: Re-
    Evaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs”, in Rajeev Dehejia, Econometric Methods
    for Program Evaluation, Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University, Chapter 1.

[20] Desai, Mihir A., Fritz C. Foley, and James R. Hines Jr. 2004. "A Multinational Perspective on
    Capital Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets." Journal of Finance, 59(6): 2451-2488.

[21] Dixit, Avinash K., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1977. “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
    Product Diversity.” American Economic Review, 67(3): 297-308.

[22] Doms, Mark E., and J. Bradford Jensen. 1998. “Comparing Wages, Skills and Productivity Be-
    tween Domestically and Foreign-Owned Manufacturing Establishments in the United States”.
    Geography and Ownerships as Basis for Economic Accounting, Baldwin, R.E., R.E., Lipsey,
    and J.D., Richardson, (Eds). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[23] Ekholm, Karolina, Rikard Forslid, and James R. Markusen. 2007. "Export-Platform Foreign
    Direct Investment." Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(4): 776-795.


                                               27
[24] Hanson, Gordon H., Raymond J. Mataloni, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2005. "Vertical Produc-
    tion Networks in Multinational Firms." Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4): 664-678.

[25] Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade: Increasing
    Returns, Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press.

[26] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple. 2004. "Export Versus FDI with
    Heterogeneous Firms." American Economic Review, 94(1): 300-316.

[27] Ichniowski, Casey, and Kathryn Shaw. 2010. “Insider Econometrics: A Roadmap to Esti-
    mating Empirical Models of Organizational Performance.” The Handbook of Organizational
    Economics, R. Gibbons and J. Roberts ed. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[28] Imbens, Guido. 2004. "Nonparametric Estimation of Average Treatment Eﬀects Under Exo-
    geneity: A Review." Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 4-29.

[29] Jensen, Michael C., and Richard S. Ruback. 1983. "The Market for Corporate Control: The
    Scientific Evidence." Journal of Financial Economics, 11(1-4): 5-50.

[30] Jovanovic, Boyan, and Peter L. Rousseau. 2002. "The Q-Theory of Mergers." American Eco-
    nomic Review, 92(2): 198-204.

[31] Lechner, Michael. 1999. "Earnings and Employment Eﬀects of Continuous Oﬀ-the-Job Training
    in East Germany after Unification." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 17, 74-90.

[32] Lileeva, Alla, and Daniel Trefler. 2010. "Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level
    Productivity ... for Some Plants." Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

[33] Lichtenberg, Frank R., and Donald Siegel. 1992. "Productivity and changes in ownership of
    manufacturing plants." Corporate takeovers and productivity, ed. Frank Lichtenberg, 25-43.
    Cambridge: MIT Press.

[34] Markusen, James R. 2002. Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade. Cam-
    bridge: MIT Press.

[35] McGrattan, Ellen, and Edward Prescott. 2010. "Technology Capital and the U.S. Current
    Account" American Economic Review, 100(4), 1493-1522

[36] Melitz, Marc J. 2003. "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
    Industry Productivity." Econometrica, 71(6): 1695-1725.

                                                28
[37] Nocke, Volker and Stephen Yeaple. 2007. "Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions versus Green-
    field Foreign Direct Investment: The Role of Firm Heterogeneity". Journal of International
    Economics, 72(2), 336-365.

[38] Nocke, Volker and Stephen Yeaple. 2008. "An Assignment Theory of Foreign Direct Invest-
    ment". Review of Economic Studies, 57(2), 529-557.

[39] OECD. 2005. Oslo Manual: Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting Innovation Data. 3rd
    Edition. OECD.

[40] Olley G. Steven, and Ariel Pakes. 1996. "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommuni-
    cations Equipment Industry." Econometrica, 64(6): 1263-1297.

[41] Ramondo, Natalia. 2009. "Foreign Plants and Industry Productivity: Evidence from Chile."
    Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 111(4): 789-809.

[42] Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2009. "Trade, Multinational Production, and
    the Gains from Openness." NBER Working Paper #15604.

[43] Ravenscraft, David J., and Scherer, F.M. 1987. Mergers, Sell-oﬀs and Economic Eﬃciency.
    Washington DC: The Brookings Institution.

[44] Stiebale, Joel, and Frank Reize. 2010. "The Impact of FDI on Innovation in Target Firms."
    International Journal of Industrial Organization, forthcoming.

[45] Syverson, Chad. 2010. "What Determines Productivity?" Journal of Economic Literature,
    Forthcoming.

[46] Teece, David J. 1977. "Technology Transfer by Multinational Firms: The Resource Cost of
    Transferring Technological Know-how." The Economic Journal, 87(346): 242-261.

[47] Verhoogen, Eric A. 2008. "Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
    Manufacturing Sector." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2): 489-530.




                                               29
Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Productivity Growth as a Function of Initial Productivity with Significant
Variable Costs of Innovation (Case 1).




Figure 2: Productivity Growth as a Function of Initial Productivity with Negligible
Variable Costs of Innovation (Case 2).




                                            30
    F
    Figure 3: Distribution
              D          n of Initial Productivvity for Acqquired and Non-Acquuired Firm
                                                                                       ms.




    Note: The dasshed line show
    N                         ws the empiriical pdf of initial productivvity (measuredd by log saless demeaned by
                                                                                                               b industry) oof
    f
    firms that are domestic at time t and will
                                          w stay domeestic at time t+4. t     The boldd line shows the
                                                                                                    t empiricall pdf of initiaal
    p
    productivity o firms that are
                 of           a domestic ata time t, but will
                                                          w become foreign-owne
                                                                        f            ed by time t+44.


Figuure 4: Selection by In
                         ndustry.




Note: Figure 4 repproduces Figu
                              ure 3 for eachh industry separately.


                                                              31
Figure 5: Distribution of Productivity for Acquired Firms, Before and After the Foreign
Acquisition.




Note: The dashed line shows the empirical pdf of initial productivity (measured by log sales demeaned by
industry) of firms that are domestic at time t, but will become foreign-owned by time t+4. The bold line shows the
empirical pdf of productivity of these firms at time t+4 (i.e., after acquisition).


Figure 6: Distribution of Productivity for Non-Acquired Firms, Change over Four Years.




Note: The dashed line shows the empirical pdf of initial productivity (measured by log sales demeaned by
industry) of firms that are domestic at time t and will stay domestic at time t+4. The bold line shows the empirical
pdf of productivity of these firms at time t+4.




                                                        32
                                                  Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
Variable                                                                   Mean                      Std. deviation              N

Foreign                                                                          0.035                    0.184               20896
ln Sales                                                                        15.372                    1.862               20845
Base year ln Sales (demeaned by industry)                                       -0.563                    1.723               20845
ln Labor productivity                                                           10.399                    0.680               20527
Base year ln Labor prod. (demeaned by industry)                                 -0.166                    0.638               20203
ln TFP (Olley Pakes)                                                             8.418                    0.599               18806
Base year ln TFP (Olley Pakes)                                                   8.387                    0.629               18475
Process Innovation                                                               2.236                    2.720               20896
Product Innovation                                                               1.700                    2.635               20896
Assimilation of Foreign Technologies                                             0.350                    0.694                5555
New Machines                                                                     0.980                    1.550               20896
New Methods of Organizing Production                                             0.305                    0.773               20896
Both (new machines and new methods of org.)                                      0.837                    1.677               20896
Export                                                                           0.530                    0.499               20860
Export channel:
Export via foreign parent                                                        0.016                    0.125                5543
Exports/Sales                                                                    0.139                    0.232               20803
ln Exports                                                                      13.927                    2.612               11042
ln Average wage                                                                 10.029                    0.447               20841
Lag Sales growth                                                                 0.024                    0.299               17848



Notes: The sample includes all firms in the ESEE (1990-2006) that are not foreign-owned (potential acquisition targets) in their
first year in the sample. Foreign is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm has at least 50-percent foreign ownership. Ln
Sales is the natural logarithm of the firm's real sales. Base year ln Sales is the natural logarithm of firm's real sales, relative to the
industry mean, in the first year the firm appears in the sample. Ln Labor productivity is the natural logarithm of real value added
per worker (where valued added is calculated by ESEE as the sum of sales plus change in inventory, less purchases and costs of
goods sold). Base year ln Labor productivity is the natural logarithm of real value added per worker, relative to the industry mean,
in the first year the firm appears in the sample. Ln TFP is the natural logarithm of total factor productivity and Base year ln TFP is
the natural logarithm of total factor productivity in the base year, calculated using the approach of Olley and Pakes (1996), relative
to the industry mean, in the first year the firm reports it. Process Innovation, Product Innovation, Assimilation of Foreign
Technologies, New Machines, New Methods of Organizing Production, and Both are all defined in a similar way, and reflect the
stock of reported innovations of each type the firm has done during the sample period (see Sections 3 and 5 for more details).
Export is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm exports any goods. Export via foreign parent is an indicator variable that
equals one if the firm declares it exports through a foreign parent. Exports/Sales is the share of exports over total sales. Ln Exports
is the natural logarithm of exports. Ln Average wage is the natural logarithm of the total wage bill per worker. All nominal
variables are in 1990 euros (deflated using the industry-level producer price index – Indice de Precios Industriales).




                                                                        33
                                                                                        Table 2. The Selection Decision
Productivity Measure                                                 ln Sales                                ln Labor Productivity                                           ln TFP (Olley Pakes)
Panel A                                             1a                  2a                 3a            4a              5a           6a                                 7a           8a             9a
Base year productivity                          0.0228***                              0.0196***     0.0238***                  0.0157***                            0.00878*                   0.00625**
                                                (0.00259)                              (0.00433)     (0.00524)                   (0.00476)                           (0.00503)                  (0.00268)
2nd quartile Base year productivity                                0.0250***                                          0.0111                                                       0.00955
                                                                   (0.00720)                                        (0.00811)                                                     (0.00973)
3rd quartile Base year productivity                                0.0400***                                       0.0236***                                                        0.0106
                                                                   (0.00840)                                        (0.00895)                                                     (0.00940)
4th quartile Base year productivity                                0.0985***                                       0.0375***                                                        0.0120
                                                                    (0.0111)                                        (0.00975)                                                     (0.00982)
Exporting firm in base year                                                             0.01000                                 0.0414***                                                       0.0468***
                                                                                       (0.00998)                                 (0.00789)                                                      (0.00760)
Exporting in base year*Base year p                                                      0.00372                                   0.00309                                                        -0.00604
                                                                                       (0.00574)                                  (0.0124)                                                       (0.0131)
Observations                                       20845              20845              20845         20203          20203        20203                               18475        18475         18475
R-squared                                          0.067              0.061              0.067         0.028           0.027        0.039                              0.025        0.025          0.042
Panel B                                             1b                  2b                 3b                 4b                   5b                6b                 7b                   8b                9b
Lagged productivity                             0.0226***                              0.0150***          0.0320***                              0.0164***          0.0223***                              0.0117***
                                                (0.00255)                              (0.00303)          (0.00518)                              (0.00455)          (0.00497)                              (0.00382)
2nd quartile Lagged productivity                                   0.0153***                                                 0.0108***                                                  0.00689*
                                                                   (0.00514)                                                 (0.00384)                                                  (0.00382)
3rd quartile Lagged productivity                                   0.0401***                                                 0.0294***                                                  0.0192***
                                                                   (0.00773)                                                 (0.00559)                                                  (0.00538)
4th quartile Lagged productivity                                   0.0959***                                                 0.0599***                                                  0.0410***
                                                                    (0.0107)                                                 (0.00890)                                                  (0.00798)
Lag Exporting firm                                                                      0.00987                                                  0.0369***                                                 0.0370***
                                                                                       (0.00715)                                                 (0.00618)                                                 (0.00615)
Lag Exporting firm*Lagged produc                                                       0.0116**                                                   0.0153*                                                   0.00856
                                                                                       (0.00454)                                                 (0.00902)                                                 (0.00875)
Observations                                       20671              20671              20631               20331              20331              20291               18949              18949              18914
R-squared                                          0.068              0.061              0.069               0.034              0.038              0.043               0.028              0.031              0.038


Industry FEs and industry trends                    yes                 yes                yes                   yes              yes                yes                 yes                yes                 yes
Notes: Foreign is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm has at least 50-percent foreign ownership. Base year (lagged) ln Sales is the natural logarithm of firm's real sales, relative to the industry mean, in
the first year the firm appears in the sample (one year prior to the dependent variable). Base year (lagged) labor productivity is the natural logarithm of real value added per worker, relative to the industry mean, in
the first year the firm appears in the sample (one year prior to the dependent variable). Base year (lagged) ln TFP is the natural logarithm of total factor productivity, calculated using the approach of Olley and
Pakes (1996), relative to the industry mean, in the first year the firm reports it (one year prior to the dependent variable). Exporting firm in base year equals one if the firm was an exporter in the first year it
appears in the sample. Lag Exporting firm equals one if the firm was an exporter the previous year. The first year the firm appears in the sample is dropped from all regressions. All columns include year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. * indicates 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance.



                                                                                                            34
                                     Table 3. Foreign Ownership and Innovation

                                                                      Process Innovation
Panel A                                      1a                     2a                   3a                        4a
Lag Foreign                              0.574***                0.496**             0.419**                    0.645**
                                          (0.190)                (0.206)              (0.180)                   (0.254)
Observations                               20671                  17714                20671                     16048
R-squared                                  0.499                  0.490                0.527                     0.528

                                                                       Product Innovation
Panel B                                      1b                      2b                  3b                         4b
Lag Foreign                               0.387*                   0.274               0.293                      0.239
                                          (0.205)                 (0.216)             (0.202)                    (0.306)
Observations                               20671                   17714               20671                      16048
R-squared                                  0.368                   0.361               0.410                      0.384

                                                            Assimilation of Foreign Technologies
Panel C                                       1c                    2c                  3c                          4c
Lag Foreign                                0.144*                 0.127               0.111                      0.147*
                                          (0.0736)              (0.0774)            (0.0705)                    (0.0797)
Observations                                5434                  4612                5434                        3961
R-squared                                   0.160                 0.161               0.200                       0.199

Firm FEs                                     yes                    yes                     yes                    yes
Control Lag Sales growth                                            yes
Industry trends                                                                             yes
Propensity score weighting                                                                                         yes

Notes: Foreign is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm has at least 50-percent foreign ownership. The dependent
variables are our measures of innovation (see Section 3 for details). All columns include year fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by firm. * indicates 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance.




                                                                                       35
 Table 4. Foreign Ownership and Innovation: New Machines and New Methods of Organizing Production

                                             Both (new machines and new methods of organizing production)
Panel A                                      1a                 2a                 3a                  4a
Lag Foreign                              0.430***            0.329*            0.360**             0.448**
                                          (0.156)            (0.169)            (0.144)             (0.218)
Observations                               20671              17714              20671               16048
R-squared                                  0.244              0.237              0.296               0.271

                                                                         New Machines
Panel B                                       1b                     2b                 3b                         4b
Lag Foreign                                0.0273                 0.0505             -0.0126                    -0.0337
                                          (0.0871)               (0.0935)           (0.0891)                    (0.132)
Observations                               20671                  17714               20671                      16048
R-squared                                   0.346                  0.338              0.368                      0.377

                                                           New Methods of Organizing Production
Panel C                                       1c                  2c                  3c                           4c
Lag Foreign                                 0.117               0.116              0.0710                       0.231*
                                          (0.0995)             (0.109)            (0.0929)                      (0.124)
Observations                               20671                17714              20671                         16048
R-squared                                   0.146               0.138               0.186                        0.154

Firm FEs                                     yes                    yes                     yes                    yes
Control Lag Sales growth                                            yes
Industry trends                                                                             yes
Propensity score weighting                                                                                         yes


Notes: Foreign is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm has at least 50-percent foreign ownership. The dependent
variables are our measures of innovation (see Section 3 for details). All columns include year fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by firm. * indicates 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance.




                                                                                       36
                                              Table 5. Access to Export Channel and Process Innovation:
                                              Evidence from Panel Data and Propensity Score Weighting
                                                                                 Process Innovation
Panel A                                    1a           2a           3a           4a            5a                           6a               7a              8a

Export via foreign parent                                                0.628**          0.512*          0.610**         0.623*           0.623*          0.612**
                                                                         (0.284)          (0.276)         (0.273)         (0.321)          (0.321)         (0.287)
Export                                 0.172**          0.160**          0.203*            0.183                                                           0.0510
                                       (0.0711)         (0.0715)         (0.111)          (0.119)                                                          (0.146)
Lag Foreign                            0.579***          0.509*           0.378                                                             0.601           0.314
                                        (0.193)          (0.279)         (0.291)                                                           (0.481)         (0.427)
Observations                             20860            20686           5422             4633            4900            4823             4823            4823
R-squared                                0.498            0.500           0.482            0.517           0.515           0.521            0.521           0.552

                                                                 Both (new machines and new methods of organizing production)
Panel B                                    1b              2b             3b          4b           5b            6b           7b                              8b

Export via foreign parent                                             0.540**         0.446*          0.517**          0.542**         0.542**          0.509**
                                                                          (0.252)         (0.238)        (0.221)          (0.259)         (0.259)           (0.202)
Export                                   0.0508          0.0444           0.0924          0.0765                                                            -0.0392
                                        (0.0491)        (0.0492)         (0.0732)        (0.0749)                                                          (0.0972)
Lag Foreign                                             0.441***           0.186           0.221                                            0.320            0.199
                                                         (0.158)          (0.211)         (0.218)                                          (0.297)          (0.256)
Observations                             20860            20686            5422            4633            4900            4823             4823             4823
R-squared                                0.243            0.244            0.234           0.296           0.275           0.278            0.278            0.357
Firm FEs                                  yes              yes              yes             yes             yes             yes              yes              yes
Industry trends                                                                             yes                                                               yes
Propensity score weighting                                                                                  yes              yes             yes              yes

Notes: Export is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm exports any goods. Export via foreign parent is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm
declares that it exports through a foreign parent. Foreign is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm has at least 50-percent foreign ownership. The
dependent variables are our measures of innovation (see Section 3 for details). All columns include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *
indicates 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance.




                                                                                           37
      Table 6. Access to Export Channel, Product Innovation and Assimilation of Foreign Technologies:
                          Evidence from Panel Data and Propensity Score Weighting
                                                           Product Innovation
Panel A                             1a         2a            3a           4a           5a           6a

Export via foreign parent               0.517**         0.528**         0.469**         0.662***        0.662***         0.694***
                                        (0.238)         (0.250)         (0.227)          (0.244)         (0.244)          (0.238)
Export                                  0.0318           0.0455                                                           -0.0518
                                        (0.105)         (0.105)                                                           (0.117)
Lag Foreign                             0.0361          0.00286                                           -0.193           -0.349
                                        (0.311)         (0.351)                                          (0.384)          (0.365)
Observations                             5422             4633            4900            4823             4823             4823
R-squared                                0.346            0.395           0.379           0.382            0.382            0.432

                                                               Assimilation of Foreign Technologies
Panel B

Export via foreign parent              0.259***         0.249**          0.184*          0.196*          0.196*            0.179*
                                       (0.0977)         (0.0981)        (0.0942)         (0.102)         (0.102)         (0.0921)
Export                                  0.0104           0.0137                                                           -0.0119
                                       (0.0219)         (0.0231)                                                         (0.0298)
Lag Foreign                             0.0843           0.0298                                           0.0450         0.00954
                                       (0.0729)         (0.0717)                                         (0.0903)        (0.0835)
Observations                             5410             4632            4899            4822             4822             4822
R-squared                                0.167            0.208           0.225           0.224            0.224           0.268
Firm FEs                                  yes              yes             yes             yes              yes              yes
Industry trends                                            yes                                                               yes
Propensity score weighting                                                 yes             yes              yes              yes

Notes: Export is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm exports any goods. Export via foreign parent is an indicator
variable that equals one if the firm declares that it exports through a foreign parent. Foreign is an indicator variable that equals
one if the firm has at least 50-percent foreign ownership. The dependent variables are our measures of innovation (see Section 3
for details). All columns include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. * indicates 10% significance; ** 5%
significance; *** 1% significance.




                                                                                           38
                                          Table 7. Foreign Ownership and Exports

                                                                              Exports/Sales
Panel A                                       1a                       2a                        3a                     4a
Lag Foreign                              0.0422***                 0.0324**                 0.0422***               0.0512**
                                          (0.0155)                 (0.0161)                  (0.0155)               (0.0234)
Observations                               20630                    16373                     20630                  17811
R-squared                                   0.041                    0.035                     0.053                  0.076

                                                                               ln Exports
Panel B                                       1b                       2b                        3b                     4b
Lag Foreign                                0.206*                   0.227*                    0.206*                 0.245*
                                           (0.118)                  (0.126)                   (0.119)                (0.144)
Observations                                10907                    8780                      10907                  10173
R-squared                                   0.165                    0.156                     0.177                  0.234

                                                                          ln Average wage
Panel C                                       1c                       2c                   3c                           4c
Lag Foreign                                0.0238                  0.0323**             0.0274*                     0.0563***
                                          (0.0152)                 (0.0159)             (0.0152)                     (0.0216)
Observations                               20667                    16399                20667                        17837
R-squared                                   0.427                    0.394                0.430                        0.431

Firm FEs                                     yes                      yes                      yes                      yes
Control Lag Sales growth                                              yes
Industry trends                                                                                yes
Propensity score weighting                                                                                              yes

Notes: Foreign is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm has at least 50-percent foreign ownership. Exports/Sales is the
share of exports over total sales. Ln Exports is the natural logarithm of exports. Ln Average wage is the natural logarithm of the
total wage bill per worker. The first year the firm appears in the sample is dropped from all regressions. All columns include year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. * indicates 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance.




                                                                                39
                                    Table 8. Foreign Ownership and Firm Productivity

                                                                                ln Sales
Panel A                                       1a                       2a                       3a                      4a
Lag Foreign                               2.042***                 0.165***                 0.120**                 0.175***
                                           (0.161)                 (0.0621)                 (0.0599)                (0.0543)
Observations                                20671                   20671                    20671                   16048
R-squared                                   0.072                    0.100                    0.147                   0.122

                                                                        ln Labor productivity
Panel B                                      1b                       2b                    3b                         4b
Lag Foreign                               0.367***                 0.126***              0.109**                    0.133***
                                          (0.0496)                 (0.0466)              (0.0449)                   (0.0506)
Observations                               20359                    20359                 20359                      15827
R-squared                                   0.031                    0.014                 0.031                      0.016

                                                                        ln TFP (Olley Pakes)
Panel C                                       1c                       2c                   3c                          4c
Lag Foreign                               0.254***                 0.168***             0.147***                    0.162***
                                          (0.0471)                 (0.0494)             (0.0487)                    (0.0494)
Observations                               18754                    18754                18754                       14844
R-squared                                   0.015                    0.007                0.024                       0.012

Firm FEs                                                              yes                      yes                      yes
Industry FEs                                 yes                      yes                      yes                      yes
Industry trends                                                                                yes                      yes
Propensity score weighting                                                                                              yes

Notes: Foreign is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm has at least 50-percent foreign ownership. ln Sales is the natural
logarithm of firm's real sales. Ln Labor productivity is the natural logarithm of real value added per worker. Ln TFP (Olley Pakes) is
the natural logarithm of total factor productivity, calculated using the approach of Olley and Pakes (1996). The first year the firm
appears in the sample is dropped from all regressions. All columns include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm.
* indicates 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance.




                                                                                   40
SUPPLEMENTAL APPENDIX:
             Table S1: Productivity Regressions Including Innovation Variables

                                        ln Value Added ln Value Added ln Value Added
                                               (1)            (2)            (3)        `
ln Capital                                  0.0998***         0.106***       0.104***
                                             (0.0137)         (0.0136)       (0.0243)
ln Labor                                     0.719***         0.727***       0.774***
                                             (0.0298)         (0.0295)       (0.0544)
Process Innovation                          0.0213***
                                            (0.00426)
Product Innovation                                            0.0109***
                                                              (0.00394)
Assimilation of foreign technologies                                         0.0692**
                                                                             (0.0305)
Firm Fixed Effects                            yes               yes             yes
Observations                                 18806             18806           4982
R-squared                                    0.265             0.263           0.295




                                                         41
Column 1 presents univariate probit regressions of the Foreign ownership dummy on the set of lagged
variables used in the propensity score estimation, on all industries pooled (for the results shown in the
paper, we estimate the propensity score by industry, to allow for different coefficients on the included
variables). Column 2 presents the multivariate probit regression using the same variables, on all industries
pooled. All regressions include industry dummies. The right-hand side variables are highly correlated, so
that when we run the multivariate regression many of them become insignificant. Notice that lagged firm
sales is the most significant determinant, consistent with our model.In the paper, the propensity score
weights are obtained by estimating the multivariate regression for each industry separately. All regressors
are balanced in all industries using the set of covariates in Column 2. When we used a more parsimonious
specification, with fewer variables, some of the regressors were not balanced across blocks in some
industries. These results are shown in Table S3, for a simpler specification of the propensity score.

                            Table S2: Probit model for propensity score estimation
                                                      Foreign                         Foreign
                                                     Univariate                      Multivariate
                                                         1                                2
Lag ln sales                                         0.238***                          0.178**
                                                     (0.0245)                          (0.0904)
Lag labor productivity                               0.252***                            -0.110
                                                     (0.0619)                          (0.0837)
Lag Sales growth                                      -0.0856                            -0.159
                                                      (0.118)                           (0.147)
Lag exports                                          0.500***                             0.105
                                                     (0.0890)                           (0.108)
Lag average wage                                     6.11e-07                          1.26e-07
                                                    (3.79e-07)                        (6.09e-07)
Lag Innovation                                       0.245***                          0.00367
                                                     (0.0747)                          (0.0837)
Lag ln capital                                       0.212***                           0.0454
                                                     (0.0216)                          (0.0932)
Lag ln capital per worker                            0.278***                           0.0918
                                                     (0.0388)                          (0.0936)
Year                                                                                 -0.0268***
                                                                                      (0.00981)
Industry Dummies                                       yes                                 yes
Observations                                          15046                              15046
Pseudo R-squared                                        na                                 0.14




                                                         42
This Table re-estimates the propensity score regressions in the paper, using a parsimonious specification for the
propensity score that only includes Lagged firm sales, Lagged labor productivity and year as controls when calculating
the score. The score is again calculated by industry, to allow for differences across industries in the coefficients. In
this case, the covariates are not balanced in some industries and blocks, which is why we chose a richer specification
for the paper, where all covariates are balanced. However, as can be seen in the table, the results are fairly robust
when using this simpler specification for the score.

        Table S3: Propensity score estimation when using only Lag Sales and Lag Labor Productivity in the score
                                  Process Innovation             Product Innovation       Assimilation of Foreign Tech.
Corresponding Col in Paper          Table 3 Col 4a                 Table 3 Col 4b                Table 3 Col 4c
Lag Foreign                            0.531***                         0.152                         0.111*
                                        (0.206)                        (0.225)                       (0.0619)
Observations                             18780                          18780                          4944
R-squared                                0.525                          0.384                          0.190

                             Both (New Machines and Org.)          New Machines                 New Organization
                                    Table 4 Col 4a                 Table 4 Col 4b                Table 4 Col 4c
Lag Foreign                            0.412**                         -0.106                        0.225**
                                       (0.164)                        (0.0983)                       (0.113)
Observations                            18780                          18780                          18780
R-squared                               0.274                           0.371                         0.148

                                       ln Sales                 ln Labor Productivity                ln TFP
                                    Table 8 Col 4a                 Table 8 Col 4b                 Table 4 Col 4c
Lag Foreign                            0.112**                         0.0744                        0.141**
                                       (0.0555)                       (0.0616)                       (0.0649)
Observations                            18780                          18504                          17065
R-squared                                0.103                          0.018                          0.017

Firm FEs                                 yes                            yes                            yes
Propensity score weighting               yes                            yes                            yes




                                                                              43
