                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       CLASSIFICATION, DETECTION AND CONSEQUENCES OF DATA ERROR:
              EVIDENCE FROM THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX

                                          Hendrik Wolff
                                          Howard Chong
                                      Maximilian Auffhammer

                                        Working Paper 16572
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16572


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




We are indebted to Alison Kennedy from UNDP for helpful correspondence and providing the “revised”
HDI statistics. We thank Jenny Aker, David Albouy, Werner Antweiler, Richard Carson, Maria Damon,
Alain DeJanvry, Levis Kochin, James Rauch, Elisabeth Sadoulet, George Wright, the editor and two
anonymous referees for many helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge generous funding provided
by a University of California’s Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation faculty research grant.
All errors in this manuscript are the authors’. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Hendrik Wolff, Howard Chong, and Maximilian Auffhammer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Classification, Detection and Consequences of Data Error: Evidence from the Human Development
Index
Hendrik Wolff, Howard Chong, and Maximilian Auffhammer
NBER Working Paper No. 16572
December 2010
JEL No. C43

                                            ABSTRACT

We measure and examine data error in health, education and income statistics used to construct the
Human Development Index. We identify three sources of data error which are due to (i) data updating,
(ii) formula revisions and (iii) thresholds to classify a country’s development status. We propose a
simple statistical framework to calculate country specific measures of data uncertainty and investigate
how data error biases rank assignments. We find that up to 34% of countries are misclassified and,
by replicating prior studies, we show that key estimated parameters vary by up to 100% due to data
error.


Hendrik Wolff                                      Maximilian Auffhammer
University of Washington                           Agricultural and Resource Economics Department
hendrik.wolff@gmail.com                            University of California, Berkeley
                                                   207 Giannini Hall
Howard Chong                                       Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
UC Energy Institute                                and NBER
2547 Channing Way                                  auffhammer@berkeley.edu
Berkeley, CA 94720
HGChong@berkeley.edu
          Classification, Detection and Consequences of Data Error:
               Evidence from the Human Development Index*
                   Hendrik Wolff, Howard Chong and Maximilian Auffhammer


We measure and examine data error in health, education and income statistics used to construct
the Human Development Index. We identify three sources of data error which are due to (i) data
updating, (ii) formula revisions and (iii) thresholds to classify a country‘s development status.
We propose a simple statistical framework to calculate country specific measures of data
uncertainty and investigate how data error biases rank assignments. We find that up to 34% of
countries are misclassified and, by replicating prior studies, we show that key estimated
parameters vary by up to 100% due to data error.

        ‘Perhaps the greatest step forward that can be taken, even at short notice, is to insist that
                    economic statistics be only published together with an estimate of their error.’
                                                                            Oskar Morgenstern, 1970

1. Introduction and Related Literature

       This paper studies the Human Development Index (HDI), which has become one of the

most widely used measures to communicate a country‘s development status. Compared to the

Gross Domestic Product (GDP), the HDI is a broader measure of development, since it captures

not only the level of income, but also incorporates measures of health and education (Srinivasan,

1994; Streeten, 1994; Anand and Sen, 2000). The United Nations Development Programme,

which releases the HDI statistics, classifies each country into one of three categories: ‗low

human development‘ for HDI scores between 0.0 and 0.5, ‗medium human development‘ for

scores between 0.5 and 0.8 and ‗high human development‘ for scores between 0.8 and 1.0.


_______________
* For correspondence contact Hendrik Wolff, Department of Economics, University of Washington, 349
Savery Hall, Box 353330, Seattle, WA 98195-3330. phone: (510) 220-7961, hgwolff@u.washington.edu.
We are indebted to Alison Kennedy from UNDP for helpful correspondence and providing the ―revised‖
HDI statistics. We thank Jenny Aker, David Albouy, Werner Antweiler, Richard Carson, Maria Damon,
Alain DeJanvry, Levis Kochin, James Rauch, Elisabeth Sadoulet, George Wright, the editor and two
anonymous referees for many helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge generous funding provided
by a University of California‘s Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation faculty research grant. All
errors in this manuscript are the authors‘.


                                                                                                      1
         Although these development categories were not originally designed to determine

international relations, development aid or should imply any other legal consequences, today

these three mutually exclusive categories are used in politics, academia, and the corporate world.

In business relations, the categories have been used for international pricing purposes (Bate and

Boateng, 2007). Since 2001 the pharmaceutical company Merck sells drugs at different prices

with up to 90% discounts for countries that are classified as ‘low’, and 75% reductions for

‘medium’ countries (Petersen and Rother, 2001). Second, the HDI has been widely used in

debates among development researchers and policy makers (Sen, 2000) and is actively invoked

to structure discussions in development-political debates of both governmental and non-

governmental organizations (NGOs) (Jahan, 2000; HDR, 1990 to 2006). For allocation of

development aid, it is known that the government of Ireland puts a particular focus on countries

categorized as ‘low human development’ (O’Neill, 2005). International climate accord designs

following the expiring Kyoto Agreement have included a proposal for linking countries’

abatement responsibilities according to their HDI (Hu, 2009). Thirdly, in economics, an

extensive literature has studied the relationships between HDI rankings, economic growth,

institutions, and other economic and social measures (Anand and Ravallion, 1993; Easterlin,

2000; Dasgupta, 2001). The conceptual underpinnings of the HDI can be found in the work by

Amartya Sen (i.e. 1977, 1984, 1985, 1987). For a recent mathematical ethical rationalization of

the HDI see Moreno-Ternero and Romer (2006). Oswald (1997), Blanchflower and Oswald

(2005) and Leigh and Wolfers (2006) explore links between a happiness index and the HDI.1

         Despite extensive use of the HDI statistics, the drastic changes in the distribution of HDI

scores for developing countries, as displayed in Figure 1, have gone unnoticed in the academic

1
 Other studies that specifically used the triple-bin classification include Kelley (1991), McGillivray (1991), Noorbakhsh (1998),
Baliamoune (2004) in development economics, Mazumdar (2002), Noorbakhsh (2006) in macroeconomics, Hargittai (1998),
Keiser et al. (2004) in communications and Guindon and Boisclair (2003) to analyze health outcomes across countries.



                                                                                                                               2
and policy literature. When the HDI was first published in 1990, the cross country-distribution

appeared to be approximately uniformly distributed between zero (least developed) and one

(most developed). Today, however, the distribution is twin-peaked with two sharp spikes around

the values of 0.5 and 0.8, which are the cut-off values for categorizing countries of ‘low’,

‘medium’ and ‘high’ human development.

       In this paper, we investigate the role of data error on the published HDI and the

consequences for its use in statistical analysis. We address these questions by exploiting (1) the

originally published HDI time series, (2) the subindicator variables used to construct the HDI, (3)

changes to the HDI formula, and (4) documented data revisions. We identify three sources of

data error: measurement error due to data revisions, data error due to formula updating and

misclassification due to inconsistent cut-off values. After isolating data revision error from error

due to formula updates, we estimate country specific variances of the HDI scores. For example,

the variance due to data revision for Bolivia represents the distribution of possible HDI values

for Bolivia in a given year, which is solely created by updates to the data series. We show that

the HDI contains data error standard deviations ranging from 0.03 (United States) to 0.11

(Niger), which is significant given the 0 to 1 scale. We find that the magnitude of the error

variances is greater the lower the HDI rank, which is consistent with the quality of the statistical

agencies improving with higher development. Likewise, country specific variances due to

formula revisions are calculated. Mapping these cardinal noise measures onto the ordinal

dimension, we find that 11%, 21% and 34% of all countries can be interpreted as currently

misclassified in the development bins due to the three sources of data error, respectively.

       We also investigate the ordinal rank error. Each year when the new HDI statistics are

published, much public attention focuses on the relative rank of a country to its rank in prior




                                                                                                  3
years and to the rank position of competing countries. For example, when Canada lost the top

HDI number 1 position in 2001, The National Post (3rd of July, 2001) wrote: ‘We’re not No. 1!

Canada drops in UN rankings…Prime Minister Jean Chretien often refers to the report in public

statements and speeches…’. Or, in 1998, when Pakistan (rank 138) bypassed India (rank 139),

The Tribune (September 14th, 1998) noted: ‘Pak beat India, both lose!’.2 To investigate the

reliability of such statements, we calculate each country’s likelihood of deviation from its

original published HDI rank. We find that on average the expected absolute deviation is nine

rank positions. Furthermore, the average 95% confidence interval of our simulated HDI rank

deviations ranges from -21 ranks to +20 ranks for the 2.5% percentile and the 97.5% percentile

respectively. These calculations show that statements based on ordinal comparisons are to be

interpreted with great care.

         Our results have direct implications for the academic literature. First, there is a vast

economic literature that uses the same country level data that are included in the construction of

the HDI, namely purchasing power parity adjusted income (i.e. Rogoff, 1996), life expectancy

(i.e. Acemoglu and Johnson, 2007) and the educational measures of literacy rate and school

enrollment statistics (i.e. Krueger and Lindahl, 2001). We investigate the inherent noise

characteristics for each of these variables separately by estimating country specific variances for

the underlying variables—GDP per capita, school enrollment, literacy rate and life expectancy.

We find that the variables of health and education exhibit particular large error variances in

developing countries; in comparison income has a smaller error variance but among the three

sub-indicators it reveals the largest updating bias. Second, the HDI has been used to analyze the

evolution of the world’s distribution of well being, to explore issues of inequality, polarization,


2
  Pakistan ranked 119 and 138 and India ranked 118 and 139 in 1997 and 1998 respectively. For an extended discussion about
these and similar rank statements see Morse (2003).



                                                                                                                        4
foreign direct investment, development aid and to econometrically test various convergence

hypotheses in macroeconomics. By replicating some of these studies and carrying out sensitivity

analyses, we find that key parameters, such as estimated Gini coefficients and speed of

convergence parameters, vary by up to 100% in their values solely due to the measurement error.

       Our paper is related to the literature that discusses the challenges in accurately estimating

national accounts and other aggregate statistics. Deaton and Heston (2008) provide an in depth

analysis of the various factors that affect PPP. In their case, in order to eliminate differences in

national price levels, GDP is combined with data by the International Comparison Program (ICP)

but the ICP’s methodologies are subject to various changes, (i.e. modifications of baskets,

Laspeyres versus Paasche index, product quality adjustments). In discussing previous revisions

of the methodologies, Deaton and Heston (2008) conclude that PPP data are ‘not always suitable

for the purposes to which they are put’. Krueger and Lindahl (2001) study the relationship

between economic growth and country level educational variables and discuss the direction of

bias one might expect by using different variables. Other papers that characterize the noise in

aggregate statistical data include Barro and Lee (2001) and de la Fuente and Doménech (2006)

for educational measures, Dowrick and Quiggin (1997) and Neary (2004) for income based

measures and Anderson (1999) for life expectancy. We add to this literature by systematically

isolating the different sources of error into data based errors, formula based errors and cut-off

value based errors. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to calculate country specific variance

measures of the HDI, income, life expectancy, literacy rate, school enrollment, as well as to

calculate indicators and probabilities of a country’s misclassification.

       The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section

3 outlines the framework and methods of measuring variances and misclassifications due to data




                                                                                                  5
revisions, formula changes and the threshold problem. Section 4 presents our results. Section 5

provides examples of how the HDI is used in various contexts and how errors can affects prior

academic analysis. We conclude with policy recommendations in Section 6.

2. Data

         The HDI is a composite indicator measuring a country’s level of development along three

dimensions: health, education and income. These dimensions are expressed as unit free and

double bounded subindicators y1, y2, y3, each taking values between zero and one. The

subindicators themselves are functions of data x on primary and secondary school enrollment

statistics, literacy rate, life expectancy and GDP per capita adjusted by purchasing power parity

(PPP). Finally, the HDI is calculated as a simple average of the three (k = 1, 2, 3) subindicators,

HDI = 1/3kyk(x), which is then used for ordinal and cardinal comparisons. The HDI is published

annually in the Human Development Reports (HDR) by the United Nations Development

Program (UNDP), which are available for the years 1990 to 2006 (HDR, 1990 to 2006).3

2.1. Original versus Revised Data

         In our analysis we exploit the fact that the original historical data matrix xt used by the

UNDP in year t differs from the revised matrix xRts which includes updates between t and s>t.

The original xt is available for the years t =1999 to 2006, whereas the revised data xRts are

available (i) for all years of the analyses, t = 1990 to 2006 and s = 2006 and (ii) for the HDI in t =

1975, the revised HDIR1975s is available for s = 1999, 2000,…, 2006. In this paper, xRt refers to

the variables for year t kindly provided to the authors as of fall of 2006 by the UNDP office,




3
  The UNDP mainly draws the GDP data from the World Bank, the educational statistics are provided by UNESCO and life
expectancy comes from the Population Division of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Since countries do not
consistently provide data using the same methodologies, these data sets are complemented by data from the Penn World Tables
as well as by UNDP’s own estimates to impute missing values. See the technical appendices of the HDR (1990-2006) for details.



                                                                                                                           6
except stated otherwise. xt refers to the data that we hand-copied4 from the tth year Human

Development Report (HDR, 1990 to 2006).

2.2. The HDI Formulas and Computation of Counterfactuals

         Since 1990, the UNDP has made three major updates to the formula used to construct the

HDI. For each year t and country i the HDI formula is given by

                                                     HDIit = hf(xit).

The formula h changed thrice as indexed by f {A, B, C}, which corresponds to the time periods

1990, 1995-1998 and 1999-2006, respectively. The three formulas are explained in the HDR

technical appendices (1990 to 1999) of Jahan (2000) and in the appendix of this web based

version.5 We construct three ‘counterfactuals’ denoted by hA(xRit), hB(xRit), and hC(xRit). Hence,

for the entire time series we recalculate what the HDI would have been if the alternate formulas

had been in place, using the most recent available historical data on the subindicators. In the

analysis we exploit exactly these differences between the ‘original’ HDI generated by the

formula that was active at time t compared to the HDI generated by the other two formulas that

were not active in that particular year t.

2.3. The Sample

         We construct a balanced panel from 1990 to 2006. A country is included in our panel if it

meets the following two conditions: (a) the country exists continuously between 1990 and 2006

(e.g., Croatia is dropped); (b) between the three revised subindicators and the countries’ HDI as

provided by the UNDP, the total sum of missing data points is less or equal to five. Furthermore,

in some of our analysis we distinguish between industrialized and non-industrialized countries

whereby the industrialized countries are defined as in Table 1.1 of HDR (1991). We impute any

4
  The data were hand-copied separately by two of the authors. Only after verifying that the two hand-copied data sets are 100%
identical, we proceeded with the analysis.
5
  The web version is available at http://faculty.washington.edu/hgwolff/EJOnlineWebVersionofHDI_Wolffetal2010.pdf .


                                                                                                                            7
missing data points by linear interpolation. In this way we obtain a balanced panel 99 countries

of which 76 are non-industrialized countries and 23 are industrialized countries.

3. Sources of Data Error and Methodology to Measure Data Uncertainty

       This section provides a detailed discussion of the three sources of data error:

measurement error due to data revisions (D), data noise due to formula updating (F) and

misclassification due to inconsistent cut-off values (C), which we abbreviate by D, F and C. We

propose a simple statistical framework to analyze these sources of error, which allows us to

calculate country specific variances and confidence intervals and to simulate country specific

probabilities of misclassification.

       Before discussing the details of each source of error below, it is useful to illustrate when

the different types of errors (D, F and C) enter into the construction of the HDI. The columns of

Table 1 show the overall structure of the data and the rows display when each error category

contributes to the data uncertainty, depending on the level of data analyzed. The first column

shows that with respect to the primary data variables x, the only source of error is due to data

updating (D). For the subindicator functions y, two sources of errors are identified. First, with

respect to D, y is vulnerable because the data error of x is directly translated into y through the

function y(x). Additionally, the nonlinear functions y(x) are subject to formula changes (F) over

time. Similarly, the aggregate HDI measure is subject to D and F through HDI = 1/3kyk(x). The

HDI development categories are subject to error type C. Finally, the three types of error can be

calculated for any function of HDI, (HDI), e.g. Gini coefficients or regression parameters.

       As we will make clear below, we calculate the three types of error independent of each

other. Hence it is not the case that error measure F will implicitly include some data error D or




                                                                                                 8
vice versa. Only in Section 3.4 and 4.2 we show how the different type of errors add up and

discuss the correlation structures among them.

       What are the distinctions between these sources of errors? While the first error D is well

known to econometricans as ‘measurement error’, the changes to the data by F and C are due to

subjective decisions by the data provider (here the UNDP). This subjective component changed

over time and impacted the construction and relative importance of sub-variables of the HDI as

well as the judgment on how to classify countries. Another distinction between D, F and C is that

our first two types of errors, D and F, are cardinal in nature. This is in contrast to our third type

of error, C, which is purely ordinal in nature in the sense that countries are either misclassified or

not within the UN triple-bin classification system.

3.1. First Source of Data Error: Measurement error

       To obtain the first measure of the randomness of the HDI data, we exploit the following

exogenous changes to the data over time: The data xt (as used by the UNDP for the HDR at year

t) are in general not the same data as the UNDP publishes in year s for the same data year t. As

revised statistics become available, the UNDP updates the original data matrix xt at year s, s t,

which we then denote xRts.

       There are literally hundreds of reasons for data updates each year. The HDI draws their

datasets from a multitude of domestic and international agencies (e.g. UNESCO, World Bank,

Penn Tables). Often an agency may have data only for some subset of countries and some subset

of years. The remaining data points are then filled by datasets from other agencies, and

occasionally are interpolated by neighboring years or countries. The dozens of footnotes in the

yearly HDR reports point to the institutions that changed data year by year. The complexity of

the problem may be best illustrated with a specific example: since 1999, the UNDP publishes




                                                                                                    9
historic HDI scores going back until the year 1975, HDI1975. Figure 2 displays HDI1975 scores as

they are reported in each of the HDR reports from 1999 to 2006. In every year, between 1999

and 2006, substantial data revisions took place for the same 1975 HDI score. For example, while

in 2000 Portugal was reported to have a historic HDI1975 of 0.73 (that was below the HDI1975 of

Venezuela), by 2006 Portugal’s HDI1975 increased to 0.79 and is now substantially above the

2006 reported HDI1975 of Venezuela. On average across all countries the HDI updating bias for

the year 1975 can be calculated as 0.003 with a standard deviation of the updating error of 1975

= 0.012. Given that the data updates took place after a quarter of a century, we consider 0.012 to

be large. Instead, in a world of good data quality 1975 should be close to zero. This implies that

whenever an analyst uses UNDP data, the same analysis run at a later date will result in different

estimates due to a changed data matrix. Hence, when the HDI is released in year t, the value

must be understood as an inexact value subject to future data revisions. This problem is what we

refer to as measurement error from data updating.

       To parameterize this measurement error, assume that the relationship between the

observed HDI score of country i and the true (but unknown) subindicators, denoted by y*itk, can

be expressed as

                                     HDIit = 1/3k(y*itk + εitk)

where εitk is orthogonal to y*itk and is distributed with mean mitk and country specific variance

s2itk. The relationship between the observed HDI score of country i and the true HDI*

consequently is HDIit = HDIit* + eit with eit being the composite error term distributed with mean

1/3kmitk and country specific variance 2i that is determined by the covariance structure of the

measurement error of the subindicators in country i, covi(εtk).




                                                                                                10
       Exploiting the original xt and revised xRt, we now are in the position to calculate country

specific variances of the measurement error due to data updating (D) given by

                         2D,i = t(ht(xit)–ht(xitR))2/(T–1) for  t                           (1)

with ht denoting the formula which was active at time t and T = ABC\2006 is the union of the

three time periods A, B, C, except for the last year of 2006. T denotes the number of elements in

set T. The variance of the data-updating measurement error is based on the difference between

the original HDI as published in the HDR at year t, ht(xit), and the reconstructed counterfactual

HDI for year t using revised data xitR available to us today. To obtain a consistent estimate of the

variance, we assume that ht(xitR) represents our currently best available estimate of HDIit* and

discuss in our result the implications of this assumption.

       Importantly note that we calculate 2D,i independently from error type F. Specifically, we

disentangle D from F by constructing each pair of data {ht(xit), ht(xitR)}t  t   to be conditional

on the same HDI formula, namely the formula that was active at time t. (Instead, if one were

using the pairs of data {ht(xit), HDIR} as reported in the yearly UNDP reports, one would have

erroneously incorporated error-type F into error type D).

       3.2. Second Source: Changes in HDI Formula

       Since its release in 1990, the HDI was often criticized with respect to its analytical

framework and methodology (Desai, 1991; Kelley, 1991; McGillivray, 1991; Aturupane et al.,

1994; Noorbakhsh, 1998). The UNDP responded to this challenge by working with Nobel

laureate Amartya Sen, Sudhir Anand, Paul Streeten and others to intellectually lead an effort to

update the methodology and value judgments. As a result UNDP has made three major updates

to the formula used to construct the HDI which are further discussed in Anand and Sen (1994,

1997, 2000), Jahan (2000), the technical appendices of the HDRs (1990 to 2006) and



                                                                                                  11
summarized in the appendix of the web based version paper. These three changes are clearly

visible in the empirical distribution of the HDI displayed in Figure 3. In particular, different

distributional characteristics occur for the sub-periods A (1990), B (1995-1998) and C (1999-

2006) that correspond to the three formula regimes hA(xit), hB(xit), and hC(xit), respectively.

         We exploit this variation of the HDI scores across the counterfactual formulas to

calculate country specific variances due to the formula (F) updates that is

                                2F,i = tg (hg(xitR)–hC(xitR))2/(2T–1)  t                                           (2)

where g is the index to sum over the formula indices A, and B. The variance 2F,i is based on the

country specific differences of the HDI generated by the most recent and improved formula hC

compared to the HDI counterfactuals generated by the other two formulas hB and hA. We do

acknowledge that the formula revisions were undertaken to improve the HDI statistics and hence

one interpretation of 2F,i is to understand it as a measure of historic noise due to the formula

updates. Alternatively, the country specific measures 2F,i can be interpreted as a present

measure of noise, if the UNDP will similarly continue to change the formula in the future and the

scores today would have to be understood as subject to those future formula revisions.

         Note that we again isolate the error type F from the former error type D. Hence it is not

the case that error-type F incorporates error-type D, and/or vice versa.6

3.3. Third Source of Misclassification: Arbitrary Cutoff Values

         In comparison to the cardinal measures of noise due to D and F, our third measure of

error, C, is entirely ordinal. It is an error of misclassification due to the arbitrariness of the two

cut-off values used to categorize countries into ‘low’, ‘medium’ and ‘high’ development


6
 We achieve the independence because the function σF is defined conditional on the revised data xR. Hence all terms on the right
hand side of σF are ‘counterfactual’ measures, what the HDI would have been if the revised data xR had been already known in
prior years under the different formula assumptions.



                                                                                                                            12
countries. Despite the fact that changes made to the HDI formula did have considerable impacts

on the empirical HDI distributions as displayed in Figure 3, the UNDP has decided to use the

same cut-off values (0.5 and 0.8) since 1990. Since the original cutoff-values are supposed to

distinguish three qualities of human development, with each formula change the UNDP could

instead have adjusted the cut-off values in such a way that the new adjusted thresholds again

reflect these same value judgments for the levels of quality. One possible procedure7 to obtain

revised threshold values—that are consistent with the initial 1990 value judgment of classifying

quality and consistent with the entire history of formula changes—is as follows. In 1990,

Morocco and Egypt were the two countries closest around the original cut off value of 0.5 (with

HDI scores of 0.49 and 0.50, respectively). On the counterfactual distribution of formula hC

applied to 1990, these two countries take on the values 0.54 and 0.56. Taking the mean (0.55)

provides the revised threshold for separating between the low and medium human development

groups. Similarly we proceed with the cut off value 0.8 and obtain the revised value 0.70.

3.4. Overall Error Variance

         So far, we have treated the two sources of errors D and F independently of each other.

The user of the HDI statistics may, however, be also interested in having a sense of the “overall”

error within the HDI database.8 To this end, we calculate the country-specific overall cardinal

error variance statistics as

                                    σ2(overall)i = σ2Di+σ2Fi + 2cov(eDi,eFi)

which takes into account the covariance structure of the individual error contributions,

                                       cov(eDi,eFi) = t(eDit–mDi)(eFit–mFi)/T

7
  Our procedure to choose the revised bin cutoffs is based upon the objective to maintain constant the initial (1990) value
judgment by the UNDP, in the sense that the thresholds separate low from medium and medium from high developed countries.
One referee suggested selecting those cutoff values which maximize the objective function to maintain the development category
of as many countries as possible. This would lead to the revised thresholds values of 0.62 and 0.76.
8
  We thank the editor for providing the idea to aggregate errors.



                                                                                                                          13
whereby eDit = HDIit–HDIRit and eFit = f(hf(xitR)–hC(xitR))/2. We can thus analyze how much

each source of error (1) and (2) contributes to the overall level of error in the HDI database.

3.5. Simulation 1: The expected number of misclassified countries

       For the cardinal sources of data error, for each country we can calculate the probability of

being misclassified. Given the parameterization of the measurement error as HDIi2006* = HDIi2006

- ei2006 and assuming ei2006 ~ N(0,2.,i), normally distributed with mean zero and variance 2.,i (as

calculated by 2F,i, 2D,i, and 2(overall),i) we analytically calculate for each country the

probability of being misclassified as


                                                   with          0.0, 0.5 ,
                               .

                   .
               .                        .
                                                               with            0.5, 0.8 ,

                               .
                           .
                                                   with           0.8, 1.0 ,

where p() is the probability density function of the estimated HDIi* distributions. Hence, for

countries reported to be ‘low development’, we calculate the probability of being classified as a

medium or a high development country; similarly, we proceed for the ‘medium’ and ‘high’

development countries. Finally, adding these integrals over all countries provides the expected

number of misclassified countries.

3.6. Simulation 2: The expected number of deviation in HDI ranks

       In addition to sorting countries into the three broad HDI categories of ‘low’, ‘medium’

and ‘high’, the UNDP statistics are used to produce league rankings of countries. We calculate

the expected number of absolute deviations in rank by simulating (n = 1,…, 10,000) the 2006

HDI ranking. The simulated rankings are produced by calculating for every country i the

simulated HDI as SimHDIi,2006 = HDIi,2006 + i with i distributed as mean zero and variance



                                                                                                  14
σ2(overall)i. Finally, after each nth simulation country i’s simulated rank is recorded relative to

its actual observed rank in 2006.

4. Results

4.1. Results with Respect to the Cardinal Errors of Data Updating and Formula Changes

         If one followed Oskar Morgenstern’s (1970) advice given in the introduction, an

alternative way for UNDP to report HDI scores would be to report country specific noise

measures. To do so, we display country specific standard errors in Table 2. With respect to the

standard errors due to the measurement error of data updating (column 8), we find that D,i

ranges between a minimum value of 0.004 (United States) and a maximum value of 0.069

(Syria), with an average value across all countries of 0.026. Given that the HDI is an average

over three subindicators, whereby positive and negative deviations in the subindicators cancel

out,9 and given that the HDI is scaled from of 0 to 1, these standard deviations are large and

significant. Figure 4 displays the relationship between the country specific measurement error

due to the data revisions, D,i and the countries’ HDI score (as of 2006). We note that more

developed countries have smaller updating variances. Similarly column (3) displays the country

specific data measurement errors due to formula updates F,i, whose ranges on average are even

higher compared to D,i. We find the estimated F,i range between a minimum value of 0.034 and

a maximum value of 0.127 with a world average standard deviation of 0.072.

         Since the HDI is primarily used as an ordinal measure, we now turn to the impact of these

cardinal measures on the ordinal dimension. Figure 5 displays the case of the “average” non-

industrial country with HDI = 0.65 using the average standard deviation over all non-


9
 The correlation between the three subindicator error terms εitk, k  {1,2,3} is close to zero and can be viewed as distributed
approximately independently. Hence the average standard deviation of the subindicator errors s2k must be larger in magnitude,
compared to the standard deviation of the HDI, D,i. Section 4.4 confirms this by analyzing the compound error term.



                                                                                                                           15
industrialized countries due to data revisions, D=0.03 and due to formula updates F=0.08.

Figure 5 shows that substantial probability mass is spread over all three development categories.

In Table 2, the category specific probabilities are displayed for all countries in columns (4)-(6),

and (9)-(11) for the formula based error and data upgrading errors respectively. For example, as

of 2006, South Africa, Mongolia, Syria, India, Honduras, Bolivia have non-zero probabilities of

belonging to all three categories simultaneously. Even a high human development country, such

as Costa Rica with HDI of 0.84, can still be a ‘low’ with 0.3% probability and yet be ‘medium’

to 37%. Finally, columns (7) and (12) display the total probability of a particular country being

misclassified by using formula (4). The sum over these column probabilities show that currently,

in expectation, 10.4 countries are misclassified due to data updating measurement error and 20.7

countries are misclassified due to formula updates; these numbers translate into, 11% and 21% of

all countries being misclassified.

       We interpret the misclassification of 11% due to data updating as conservative because

2D,i is just based on “short term” differences between xt and xRt, based on the years from 1990

to 2006. There also exists “long term” data updating error, which taking into account, that may

increase 2D as |HDIt HDIRts| increases with s. While we cannot capture this long-term effect by

formula (1) (due to the lack of published original data prior to the HDR of 1990), we illustrated

the magnitude of such “long term” drift in Figure 2.

4.2. Overall Cardinal Error and Rank Simulations

       The typical user of the HDI statistics may not be concerned about the individual error

statistics σ2D and σ2F if they are calculated independently of each other, but the researcher may be

more interested in obtaining a sense of the overall error in the data. For this purpose we calculate

country specific overall cardinal error statistics σ2(overall)i and find that the world average of



                                                                                                 16
these measures σ2(overall) = iσ2(overall)i/N equals to 0.007, compared to σ2D = 0.001 and σ2F =

0.006. Furthermore we find that all country specific covariance terms cov(eDi,eFi) are relatively

small (all correlation coefficients are smaller than 0.06 in absolute value) which implies that the

updating error is not linearly correlated with the formula error. This implies that 86% of the total

HDI variance is contributed by the formula error and 14% by the measurement error due to data

updating.10 By using the same methodology as in Section 3.5, we calculate the “overall”

expected number of countries misclassified as 22.9. The country specific overall variance

statistics are given in column (3) of Table 3.

          Moreover, column (1) of Table 3 displays the country specific expected absolute value of

rank displacements based upon the rank of the country’s HDI in 2006. Worldwide, the average

country is displaced by about nine ranks. This average absolute displacement obscures the

direction of rank displacement and the uncertainty over rank displacements. To this end, Figure 6

displays the average rank displacement over 10,000 simulations as a function of the countries’

2006 HDI score along with the 95% confidence intervals. The confidence intervals are large,

leading to an average deviation of -21 ranks and +20 ranks for the 2.5% percentile and the 97.5%

percentile respectively. Figure 6 also shows that countries with a low initial 2006 rank (low HDI

score) do on average better in the simulated rank statistics and countries with an initial high HDI

in 2006 are more likely to lose ranks in the simulations.

4.3. Results with Respect to the Cutoff Value Problem

          Our third measure of misclassification is due to the non-adjustment problem of the cut-

off values 0.5 and 0.8 that the UN uses to classify countries as low, medium and high human

developed countries. If the UNDP had adjusted the cut-off values in a manner consistent with the

10
   We calculate the %-contribution of the jth cardinal source of error to the overall error as σ2ji/ σ2(overall)i. This calculation is
hence net of the covariance of the two error sources. The covariance terms can essentially be neglected due to the fact these are
small in magnitude.



                                                                                                                                  17
1990 classification, since 1999 (the year of the last formula update), the thresholds should be at

the values 0.55 and 0.70, as opposed to 0.5 and 0.8. This lack of adjustment of the cutoff values

results in 34% of the countries being misclassified today.11 Among all developing countries the

percentage of misclassification is even higher: 45%. With such a high percentage statements

such as ‘over the last decade x% of African countries successfully moved from the ‘low’ to the

‘medium’ human development category’—as expressed in numerous policy papers and news

reports (United Nations 1996, People’s Daily 2001, Daily Times 2005)—become useless at best,

if not blatantly misleading. The listing of the misclassified countries due to this source of error is

provided in Table 4.

4.4. Measurement Error with Respect to the Underlying Variables of the HDI

         Thus far, we analyzed the data error of the HDI. Since the same variables used to

construct the HDI serve as key data in many academic studies as well as inputs to many other

international comparative statistics, it is worthwhile analyzing the subindicators y pertaining to

health, education and income in more detail.

         The first four columns of Table 5 display summary statistics of the overall HDI updating

error, e, and the vector of subindicator updating errors, ε, for our sample of 76 non-industrialized

countries. In general, the standard deviations of the health and education indexes are larger than

the standard deviations of the income statistics. It is interesting to note, however, that the main

driver for the HDI upward bias stems from the change to the income index (mincome=0.01).12

Instead, the errors on the health and the education indices show distributions that are centered

around zero. Note, that the min/max columns in Table 5 reveal some enormous changes; the



11
   The percentage of countries misclassified is calculated as the number of countries that have HDI scores in the ranges [0.5,
0.55) and [0.70, 0.8) divided by the total number of countries in our sample (99).
12
   Statistically, this upward bias with a standard deviation of 0.02 is not significantly different from zero.



                                                                                                                          18
income index changed by 15% (Sudan and Chad) and the education index even by 25%

(Mongolia) on the total scale from 0 to 1.

         One may ask whether the three subindicator updating errors are correlated. An analysis of

the year-by-year correlation matrices of the errors does not show any systematic co-movement,

as the correlation coefficients are close to zero in all years. This suggests that the statistical

adjustments on the three dimensions are independent of each other and indicates that the

respective national statistical offices responsible for health, education, and income statistics have

no systematic contemporaneous responses. Furthermore, statistical independence of the three

subindicator error variables εk implies that their errors must be on average larger than the

variance of the HDI error e, which is confirmed by Table 5. Hence, while the three subindicator

errors offset each other with respect to the HDI,13 when working with the variables of education,

income and health, one faces even larger data error.

         To analyze the drivers of the HDI data error in more detail, we calculate country specific

noise measures due to data revisions with respect to the underlying variables, x. Table 6 reports

country specific standard errors calculated as the country specific standard deviation (xn)i

(computed analogously to (2) by exploiting the 2006 data revision of xnit for t = 1999 to 2005).

In order to obtain a sense of the relative magnitude of the errors in each variable, we divide the

standard deviations by the level corresponding variable in the year 2006, xni2006 and display the

resulting relative standard errors in Figure 7. Adult literacy rate, GDP and the gross enrollment

ratio contribute most to the updating error of the HDI. In contrast, life expectancy is revised




13
    Under the assumption of independence, the standard deviation for the composite HDI error, e, is given by
std(e)=SQRT[(ksk2/9)], which, after replacing sk by , equals to std(e)= 0.014. The estimated standard deviation of the HDI
measurement error by formula (1) applied to period C is 0.015, hence very close to std(e), confirming this theoretical result of
independence.



                                                                                                                            19
much less. As is clearly recognizable in Figure 7, we find that the more highly developed the

country the smaller its measurement error due to data updating.

5. Discussion of the results

       Given that the HDI is subject to a considerable amount of measurement error, the use of

the HDI and its triple bin classification system can lead to serious interpretability problems. We

now investigate the consequences of these three sources of errors by replicating prior studies and

uses of the HDI, with each of the analysis being uniquely linked to our three sources of errors.

5.1. The HDI as a definitional measure

       While there does not exist a standardized definition of the term “developing country”, the

definition is often linked to the HDI, as being a country with low to moderate development

status. In fact, often scientific studies have been explicitly using the HDI system to identify a set

of developing countries (i.e. Noorbakhsh, 2006; Varenne, 2007; Lauber and Roessler, 2007;

Alvan, 2009). Leading online dictionaries do refer to the HDI in order to define the term

“developing country” (Wikipedia, 2008; Babylon, 2009; SearchWiki, 2009). Here it is common

to differentiate development status by using three different colors. In Figure 8, we recreate such a

map by displaying the HDI scores for 2006. To demonstrate the impact of misclassification in

our sample, we reclassify the countries using the updated thresholds of 0.55 and 0.70 as

discussed in Section 3.3. The visual impact of this reclassification is striking, especially in South

America, Southeast Asia and Africa. This misclassification is particularly problematic, if

organizations/institutions use these categories to design particular policies or rules.

5.2. The HDI and Foreign Development Aid:

       Although, to our knowledge, the HDI is not formally used by any development agency as

the sole index used to determine the distribution of development funds, there are clear




                                                                                                   20
indications that the HDI plays a significant role in governmental institutions’ and NGOs’

decisions for foreign aid allocation.14 In 2000, the Deputy Director of the UNDP exemplified this

debate by stating:

         ‘At the global level, issues are now being explored as to whether bilateral aid can be

         allocated on the basis of HDI, or the core funds of multilateral agencies can be based on

         the index […]’ (p. 10, Jahan, 2000).

In fact, ‘charity scorecards’ are increasingly used as a tool for helping individuals decide which

countries to donate money to. Here the HDI can be used to construct such a score. For example,

on the homepage of http://www.charityscorecard.org/ a world map of HDI scores is displayed.

The use of the HDI in this context may explicitly and implicitly steer users to “misclassified

countries”. Further, the triple bin classification is often used for report writing purposes to

describe donor activities by governmental organizations (United Nations, 1996; HDR, 2001 to

2007) and non-governmental organizations. For example, Geneva Global (2007), which holds

investments of 60 million client dollars in development projects, structures its funds according to

the three HDI categories. For each year, the United Nations (HDR 2001 to 2006) analyzes the

newest data on development aid as a function of the three human development categories.

Drawing on these HDR statistics, Table 7 summarizes that across all years countries in the ‘low’

category obtained 3.4 times the official development assistance (ODA) per capita as compared to

the medium development countries, which we do not claim is a causal effect but rather an

interesting correlation.

5.3. Use of the HDI statistics in the academic literature




14
 For a related discussion see Alesina and Dollar (2000), Alesina and Weder (2002), Arcelus et al. (2005), Bandyopadhyay and
Wall (2006), Easterly et al. (2004).



                                                                                                                       21
         The HDI has been increasingly employed in the academic literature to describe the

evolution of the world’s “welfare” distribution in terms of various measures of inequality, such

as the Gini coefficient, and to discuss the path of polarization, e.g. Pillarisetti (1997), Ogwang

(2000), Mazumdar (2002), Noorbakhsh (2006), Prados de la Escosura (2007). The results

published in these studies can differ greatly depending on which year the researcher collected the

data in. To illustrate, Figure 9 displays HDI Gini coefficients using the formulas hA, hB and hC for

data covering 1975 to 2005 in five years intervals. The values produced by formula hA are 25%

to 50% higher and the time trend steeper compared to the time series generated by formula hC.

This substantial difference would lead to different conclusions or policy recommendations by the

analyst. For a recent discussion on the relevance of levels and gradients of Gini estimates see for

example Sala-i-Martin (2006) and Prados de la Escosura (2007).

         We find that a number of recent studies are sensitive to random selection of countries that

is due to the “arbitrariness” of the cut-off values: For example in the macroeconomic literature,

Mazumdar (2002) and Noorbakhsh (2006) use the triple bins to analyze the existence of

convergence clubs (Quah 1996) by testing the beta and the sigma conditional convergence

hypothesis, originally discussed in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992). In particular, Noorbakhsh

(2006) runs beta-convergence regressions of the form

                                    ln(hdiit+T/hdiit)/T =  + ln(hdiit) +it                                           (3)

conditional on the country belonging to the ‘low’ development bin. The dependent variable is the

annualized growth of the HDI variable for country i over the period t to t+T and hdiit is the ratio

of HDI in the ith country to the average for the sample.15 The regression is then repeated for the



15
   A value of β in the range of (-1, 0) would imply β-convergence of the countries in the sample. A β of zero means no
convergence and a positive value for β indicates divergence, with the speed of convergence/divergence the higher the absolute
value of β.



                                                                                                                         22
bins ‘medium’ and ‘high’ and the comparison of the  estimates is used to analyze the existence

of convergence clubs.

            To illustrate the consequences of the random selection, we first rerun the convergence

regression (3) conditional on the HDI being in the interval A0 = [0.5, 0.8) as specified in

Noorbakhsh (2006, p. 10, table 3). Then we perform the same regression with the adjusted cut-

off values in the set A1 = [0.55, 0.70). The results are displayed in Table 8. Comparing the main

parameter of interest, , the estimate of the second regression is about 100% off the first

regression implying a much faster speed of convergence.16 This demonstrates that results based

on the reported HDI can be very sensitive to changes of the HDI triple bin classification system.

5.4. Implications of the results in statistical analysis

            Econometrically speaking, the average error measures 2D and 2F calculated in Section

4.1 imply that there is a 3% and 14% downward attenuation bias in a ordinary least squares

(OLS) regression, y = 1 + 2HDI* + , if the observed HDI—instead of the “true” (but

unknown) HDI*—is used as the regressor (for any variable y of interest). The bias of the OLS

estimate b2 is given by17

                                      plim bD2 = [1-2D/(2D+2HDI*)]2  0.972

and

                                       plim bF2 = [1-2F/(2F+2HDI*)]2  0.862.

This is important since in many econometric cross-country studies the HDI is used as a regressor,

i.e. Globerman and Shapiro (2002), Mazumdar (2002), Sanyal and Samanta (2004), Neumayer


16
   Note that the two  estimates are statistically significant with t values of -6.74 and -.4.59 for the sample of countries in A0 and
in A1, respectively. We reject at the 1% significance level the hypothesis of uniform convergence in A0 and in A1 based on the
Wald test examining whether β1 is different from β0, based on the pooled sample with appropriate interaction terms, with
standard errors clustered by country.
17
     2HDI* is approximated by the empirical analogue of the 2006 HDI scores, σ̂ 2HDI* = 0.036.



                                                                                                                                  23
(2003), Noorbakhsh (2006), Leigh and Wolfers (2006). This is even more crucial when working

with the individual subindicator variables, since (as shown in Section 4.4) their average standard

deviation of the measurement error is larger than the error of the HDI.

6. Conclusions

       This paper identifies three sources of HDI data error and we make the following

empirical contributions. First, we calculate country specific noise measures due to measurement

error, formula choice and inconsistencies in the cut-off values. We find that the HDI statistics

contain a substantial amount of noise on the order of 0.01 to 0.11 standard deviations. In

analyzing the sources of the updating error we calculate country specific variances of GDP per

capita, literacy rate, educational enrollment and life expectancy and we calculate the

interdependence between these measures. We find that in general the higher the development

status of a country, the more precise are the reported data. Second, we calculate the

misclassification measures with respect to these three sources of data error by simulating the

probabilities of being misclassified and sensitivity analysis of the cut-off values. We find that up

to 45% of the developing countries are misclassified due to the failure to update the cutoff

values. The discrete classification system is vulnerable when many countries are close to the

thresholds, as is the case in the most recent years. Third, we discuss various empirical examples

from the prior macroeconomic/development literature where the HDI has been employed and

find that its use is problematic. Key parameters vary by up to 100% in their values. Although

there may be certain benefits for the UN and charities for using a triple-bin classification

system—bins are likely to improve publicity for the HDI and may hence help with more efficient

internal organization of aid institutions—our results raise serious concerns about the system. We

suggest that the United Nations should discontinue the practice of classifying countries into these




                                                                                                 24
triple bins because in our view the two cut-off values are arbitrary, can provide incentives for

strategic behavior in reporting official statistics, and have the potential to misguide politicians,

investors, charity donators and the public at large.

       This paper did not investigate the drivers of why in the early years of the HDI—when its

political role was still uncertain—the distribution as displayed in Figure 1 looked so different

from today’s. However, we caution governments, private investors, donor organizations and

users of the charity scorecards not to take the triple bin system as a tool for international

negotiations (Hu, 2009), foreign direct investments (Arcelus et al., 2005), pricing (Bate and

Boateng, 2007), or the allocation of foreign aid (Jahan, 2000; Neumayer, 2003). Such politically

sensitive uses of the HDI might potentially provide perverse incentives for a country to

manipulate the subindicator variables, if it has realized the comparative advantage of a 0.49 HDI

score vs. a 0.51 score. In fact, announcements such as the statement by Jahan (2000) (discussed

in Section 5.2) might have just created these incentives. We quote Oskar Morgenstern (1970):

       ‘Governments, too are not free from falsifying statistics. This occurs, for example, when

       they are bargaining with other governments and wish to obtain strategic advantages or

       feel impelled to bluff [...]. A special study of these falsified, suppressed, and

       misrepresented government statistics is greatly needed and should be made.’




                                                                                                 25
References

Acemoglu, D. and Johnson, S. (2007). ‘Disease and Development: The Effect of Life

Expectancy on Economic Growth’, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 115, pp. 925-985.

Alesina, A. and Dollar, D. (2000). ‘Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why?’, Journal of

Economic Growth, vol. 5(1), pp. 33-63.

Alesina, A. and Weder, B. (2002). ‘Do Corrupt Governments Receive Less Foreign Aid?’

American Economic Review, vol. 92(4), pp. 1126-1137.

Anand, S. and Sen A.K. (2000). ‘The Income Component of the Human Development Index’,

Journal of Human Development, vol. 1(1), pp. 83-106.

Anand, S. and Ravallion, M. (1993). ‘Human Development in Poor Countries: On the Role of

Private Incomes and Public Services’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 7( 1), pp. 133-150.

Anand, S. and Sen A.K. (1994). ‘Human Development Index: Methodology and Measurement’,

Human Development Report Office. UNDP. New York.

Anand, S. and Sen, A.K. (1997). ‘Concepts of Human Development and Poverty. A

Multidimensional Perspective’, in Human Development Papers. UNDP. New York.

Anand, S. and Sen, A. (2000). ‘The Income Component of the Human Development Index’,

Journal of Human Development and Capabilities, vol. 1(1), pp. 83-106.

Anderson R.N. (1999). ‘Method for constructing complete annual U.S. life tables’. Vital Health

Stat vol. 2(129), pp. 1-28.

Arcelus, F.J., Sharma, B. and Srinivasan, G. (2005). ‘Foreign Capital Flows and the Efficiency

of the HDI Dimensions’, Global Economy Journal, vol. 5(2), Article 4.

Aturupane, H., Glewwe, P. and Isenman, P. (1994). ‘Poverty, Human Development, and Growth.

An Emerging Consensus?’, American Economic Review, vol. 84(2), pp. 244-249.




                                                                                                 26
Babylon (2009): ‘Definition of the term “Developing Country” in Dictionary Babylon’

http://www.babylon.com/definition/developing_countries/English (last accessed: 29 October

2009).

Baliamoune, M. (2003). ‘On the Measurement of Human Well-Being. Fuzzy Set Theory and

Sen'S Capability Approach’, World Institute for Development Economic Research Paper

2004/16.

Bandyopadhyay, S. and Wall, H.J. (2006). ‘The Determinants of Aid in the Post-Cold War Era’,

Working Paper 2006-021B, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Barro, R.J. and Lee, J.W. (1993). ‘International Comparisons of Educational Attainment’,

Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 32(3), pp. 363-94.

Barro R.J. and Lee, J.W. (2001), ‘International data on educational attainment. updates and

implications’, Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 53, pp. 541-563.

Barro, Robert J., and Sala-i-Martin, X. (1992). ‘Convergence’, Journal of Political Economy,

vol. 100, pp. 223–251.

Bate, R and Boateng, K. (2007). ‘Drug Pricing and Its Discontents. At Home and Abroad’,

Health Policy Outlook, vol. 9, August.

Blanchflower, D.G. and Oswald, A.J. (2005). ‘Happiness and the Human Development Indevol.

x. The Paradox of Australia’, Australian Economic Review, vol. 38, pp. 307-318.

Charityscorecard.org, http.//www.charityscorecard.org/ (last accessed 2 January, 2009).

Daily Times (2005). ‘Pakistan ranked at 135th in human development’. September 15.

Dasgupta, P. (2001). ‘Valuing Objects and Evaluating Policies in Imperfect Economies’, THE

ECONOMIC JOURNAL, vol. 111, pp. 1-29.




                                                                                               27
Deaton A. and Heston, A. (2008). ‘Understanding PPP and PPP-based national accounts’, NBER

Working Paper No. 14499.

de la Fuente, A. and Doménech, R. (2006). ‘Human Capital in Growth Regressions: How Much

Difference Does Data Quality Make?’, Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 4(1),

pp. 1-36.

Desai, M. (1991). ‘Human Development. Concepts and Measurement’, European Economic

Journal, vol. 35, pp. 350-357.

Dowrick, S. and Quiggin, J. (1997). ‘True Measures of GDP and Convergence’, American

Economic Review, vol. 87(1), pp. 41-64.

Easterlin, R. A. (2000). ‘The Worldwide Standard of Living Since 1800’, Journal of Economic

Perspectives, vol. 14(1), pp. 7–26.

Easterly, W., Levine, R. and Roodman, D. (2004). ‘Aid, Policies, and Growth. Comment’,

American Economic Review, vol. 94(3), pp. 774-780.

Geneva Global (2007). ‘Geneva Global Performance Philanthropy’, 15550 Liberty Ridge Drive

Wayne, PA 19087, USA. http.//www.genevaglobal.com/sector-priorities/high-hd/ (last accessed

2 January 2009).

Globerman, S. and Shapiro, D. M. (2002). ‘Global Foreign Direct Investments Flows. The Role

of Governance Infrastructure’, World Development, vol. 30(11), pp. 1899-1919

Guindon, G.E. and Boisclair, D. (2003). ‘Past, current and future trends in tobacco use’, Tobacco

Control, WHO Tobacco Control Papers, TRENDS2003.

Hargittai, E. (1998). ‘Holes in the Net. The Internet and International Stratification Revisited’

Proceedings of the Internet Society’s Internet Summit meetings.

HDR (1990 to 2006). ‘Human Development Report’, UNDP, Oxford University Press.




                                                                                                    28
Hu, A. (2009). ‘A new approach at Copenhagen’, Chinadialogue 2892, Part 1, April 06, 2009.

Rutgers Climate and Social Policy Initiative.

Jahan, S. (2000). ‘Measurement of Human Development. Seven Questions’, Lecture Reading by

Deputy Director of the Human Development Report Office, UNDP.

Keiser, J., Utzinger, J. Tanner, M. and Singer, B.H. (2004). ‘Representation of authors and

editors from countries with different human development indexes in the leading literature on

tropical medicine’, British Medical Journal, vol. 328, pp. 1229-1232.

Kelley, A. C. (1991). ‘The Human Development Index. "Handle with Care"’, Population and

Development Review, vol. 17(2), pp. 315-324.

Krueger, A.B. and Lindahl, M. (2001). ‘Education for Growth. Why and For Whom?’, Journal

of Economic Literature, vol. 39(4), pp. 1101-1136

Leigh, A. and Wolfers, J. (2006). ‘Happiness and the Human Development Index. Australia is

Not a Paradox’, Australian Economic Review, vol. 39(2). 176-184.

Mazumdar, K. (2002). ‘A Note on Cross-Country Divergence in Standard of Living’, Applied

Economic Letters, vol. 9(2), pp. 87-90.

McGillivray, M. (1991). ‘Redundant Composite Development Indicator’. World Development,

vol. 19 (10), pp. 1461-9.

Moreno-Ternero, J.D. and Romer, J.E. (2006). ‘Impartiality, Priority, and Solidarity in the

Theory of Justice’, Econometrica, vol. 74(5), pp. 1419–1427.

Morgenstern, O. (1970). ‘On the Accuracy of Economic Observations’, second edition, Princeton

University Press.

Morse, S. (2003). ‘Greening the United Nations’ Human Development Index’, Sustainable

Development, vol. 11, pp. 183–198.




                                                                                               29
Neary J. P. (2004). ‘Rationalizing the Penn World Table. True Multilateral Indices for

International Comparisons of Real Income’, American Economic Review, vol. 94(5), pp. 1411-

1428.

Neumayer, E. (2003). ‘The Determinants of Aid Allocation by Regional Multilateral

Development Banks and United Nations Agencies’, International Studies Quarterly, vol. 47(1),

pp. 101-22.

Noorbakhsh, F. (1998). ‘The human development index. some technical issues and alternative

indices’, Journal of International Development, vol. 10(5), pp. 589–605.

Noorbakhsh, F. (2006). ‘International Convergence or Higher Inequality in Human

Development? Evidence for 1975 to 2002’, World Institute for Development Economic Research

Paper No. 2006/15.

Ogwang, T. (2000). ‘Inter-Country Inequality in Human Development Indicators’, Applied

Economic Letters, vol. 7(7), pp. 443-46.

O’Neill, H. (2005). ‘Ireland’s Foreign Aid in 2004’, Irish Studies in International Affairs, vol.

16, pp. 279–316.

Oswald, A. J. (1997). ‘Happiness and Economic Performance’, ECONOMIC JOURNAL, vol.

107(445), pp. 1815–1831.

Pakistan Times (2004). ‘Pakistan improves Human Development Indicators’, Pakistan Times

National News Desk. July 20, 2004.

People’s Daily (2001). ‘Ghana's Human Development Performance Recommended by UNDP’,

July 11, 2001.

Petersen, M. and Rother, L. (2001). ‘Maker Agrees to Cut Price of 2 AIDS Drugs in Brazil’, New

York Times. March 31, 2001.




                                                                                              30
Pillarisetti, J. R. (1997). ‘An Empirical Note on Inequality in the World Development

Indicators’, Applied Economic Letters, vol. 4(3), pp. 145-47.

Quah, D. (1996). ‘Twin Peaks. Growth and Convergence in Models of Distribution Dynamics’,

ECONOMIC JOURNAL, vol. 106(437), pp. 1045–1055.

Rogoff, K. (1996). ‘The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle’, Journal of Economic Literature, vol.

34(2), pp. 647-668.

Sala-i-Martin, X. (2006). ‘The World Distribution of Income. Falling Poverty

and…Convergence, Period’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 121(2), pp. 351-97.

Sanyal, R. N. and Samanta, S. K. (2004). ‘Determinants of bribery in international business’,

Thunderbird International Business Review, vol. 46(2), pp. 133–148.

SearchWiki (2009). ‘Definition of the term “Developing Country” in Dictionary SearchWiki’,

http://www.searchthewiki.com/wikisearch/?q=Developing%20-countries         (last   accessed:    29

October 2009).

Sen, A. K. (1977). ‘On Weights and Measures. Informational Constraints in Social Welfare

Analysis’, Econometrica, vol. 45(7), pp. 1539-72.

Sen, A. K. (1984). ‘The Living Standard’, Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 36, pp. 74-90.

Sen, A. K. (1985). Commodities and Capabilities, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Sen, A. K. (1987). ‘On Ethics and Economics’, The Royer Lectures at the University of

California at Berkeley. Oxford. Basil Blackwell Ltd.

Sen, A. K. (2000). ‘A Decade of Human Development’, Journal of Human Development, vol.

1(1), pp. 17-23.

Srinivasan, T. N. (1994). ‘Human Development. A New Paradigm or Reinvention of the

Wheel?’, American Economic Review, vol. 84(2), pp. 238-243.




                                                                                                31
United Nations (1996). ‘Africa Recovery’, UN-NADAF Midterm Review, September 1996.

Wikipedia (2008): Definition of the term “Developing Country” in Dictionary “Wikipedia”.

http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title= Developing_country&oldid=188947979 (last

accessed 1 February 2008).




Table 1. Structure of the Type of Errors for Different Levels of Data Aggregation
                          Type of Error                 x           y(x)        HDI(y)       (HDI)

                         Data revisions D                                                    

                        Formula updates F                                                     

                          Cut-off value C                                                      
Note: For each column we indicate by the symbol which type of data error can affect the particular variable
displayed in the column. x refers to the raw variables, y(x) to the subindicators which are functions of x, HDI is a
function of the y and (HDI) refers to any parameter of interest (i.e. Gini coefficient) that is calculated as a function of
one or multiple HDI values.




                                                                                                                        32
Table 2. Country i specific standard deviations and probabilities of belonging to development
category j
                                                       Measures based on                                         Measures based on measurement error
                           2006                       formula updates (F)                                             due to data revisions (D)
                         reported




                                                                                 Prob{i=’high’)




                                                                                                                                                       Prob{i=’high’)
                                                                 Prob{i=’mid’)




                                                                                                                                       Prob{i=’mid’)
                                                                                                  Prob{i=mis-




                                                                                                                                                                        Prob{i=mis-
                          human




                                                   Pr{i=’low’)




                                                                                                                         Pr{i=’low’)
                                                                                                   classified)




                                                                                                                                                                         classified)
                         develop-   2006   σ F,i                                                                 σ D,i
                           ment     HDI
                          status
  Country i
                           (1)      (2)    (3)     (4)           (5)             (6)                 (7)         (8)     (9)           (10)            (11)              (12)
  Niger                   low       0.31   0.13    93.1            6.9                  0.0          6.9         0.03    100.0           0.0                  0.0          0.0
  Mali                    low       0.34   0.12    91.9            8.1                  0.0          8.1         0.03    100.0           0.0                  0.0          0.0
  Burkina Faso            low       0.34   0.11    92.3            7.7                  0.0          7.7         0.02    100.0           0.0                  0.0          0.0
  Chad                    low       0.37   0.11    89.3           10.7                  0.0         10.7         0.04    100.0           0.0                  0.0          0.0
  Ethiopia                low       0.37   0.11    88.3           11.7                  0.0         11.7         0.03    100.0           0.0                  0.0          0.0
  Burundi                 low       0.38   0.11    85.4           14.6                  0.0         14.6         0.02    100.0           0.0                  0.0          0.0
  Mozambique              low       0.39   0.11    83.4           16.6                  0.0         16.6         0.03    100.0           0.0                  0.0          0.0
  Malawi                  low       0.40   0.13    78.7           21.2                  0.1         21.3         0.01    100.0           0.0                  0.0          0.0
  Zambia                  low       0.41   0.09    86.2           13.8                  0.0         13.8         0.04     98.5           1.5                  0.0          1.5
  Côte d'Ivoire           low       0.42   0.09    82.1           17.9                  0.0         17.9         0.02    100.0           0.0                  0.0          0.0
  Benin                   low       0.43   0.10    76.8           23.2                  0.0         23.2         0.03     99.0           1.0                  0.0          1.0
  Tanzania                low       0.43   0.08    80.1           19.9                  0.0         19.9         0.02     99.8           0.2                  0.0          0.2
  Nigeria                 low       0.45   0.10    69.0           31.0                  0.0         31.0         0.05     87.5          12.5                  0.0         12.5
  Rwanda                  low       0.45   0.08    72.4           27.6                  0.0         27.6         0.05     86.0          14.0                  0.0         14.0
  Senegal                 low       0.46   0.08    68.5           31.5                  0.0         31.5         0.02     99.5           0.5                  0.0          0.5
  Mauritania              low       0.49   0.08    56.6           43.4                  0.0         43.4         0.03     66.5          33.5                  0.0         33.5
  Kenya                   low       0.49   0.08    54.7           45.3                  0.0         45.3         0.02     64.3          35.7                  0.0         35.7
  Zimbabwe                low       0.49   0.05    56.6           43.4                  0.0         43.4         0.03     62.3          37.7                  0.0         37.7
  Lesotho                 low       0.49   0.06    53.7           46.3                  0.0         46.3         0.03     59.5          40.5                  0.0         40.5
  Togo                    low       0.50   0.08    52.5           47.5                  0.0         47.5         0.04     55.0          45.0                  0.0         45.0
  Uganda                 medium     0.50   0.10    49.2           50.7                  0.1         49.3         0.02     46.2          53.8                  0.0         46.2
  Cameroon               medium     0.51   0.07    46.6           53.4                  0.0         46.6         0.04     44.6          55.4                  0.0         44.6
  Madagascar             medium     0.51   0.08    45.4           54.6                  0.0         45.4         0.03     39.3          60.7                  0.0         39.3
  Sudan                  medium     0.52   0.07    41.1           58.9                  0.0         41.1         0.03     32.2          67.8                  0.0         32.2
  Congo                  medium     0.52   0.08    39.9           60.1                  0.0         39.9         0.05     35.3          64.7                  0.0         35.3
  Papua New Guinea       medium     0.52   0.06    33.9           66.1                  0.0         33.9         0.04     27.7          72.3                  0.0         27.7
  Nepal                  medium     0.53   0.09    38.0           61.9                  0.1         38.1         0.02     10.4          89.6                  0.0         10.4
  Bangladesh             medium     0.53   0.08    35.3           64.7                  0.0         35.3         0.02      7.3          92.7                  0.0          7.3
  Ghana                  medium     0.53   0.06    30.8           69.2                  0.0         30.8         0.04     20.5          79.5                  0.0         20.5
  Pakistan               medium     0.54   0.07    27.5           72.5                  0.0         27.5         0.03     10.7          89.3                  0.0         10.7
  Lao People's Dem. R.   medium     0.55   0.08    25.2           74.7                  0.1         25.3         0.06     18.7          81.3                  0.0         18.7
  Botswana               medium     0.57   0.05     8.3           91.7                  0.0          8.3         0.04      3.4          96.6                  0.0          3.4
  India                  medium     0.61   0.06     3.0           96.9                  0.1          3.1         0.01      0.0         100.0                  0.0          0.0
  Morocco                medium     0.64   0.04     0.0          100.0                  0.0          0.0         0.02      0.0         100.0                  0.0          0.0
  South Africa           medium     0.65   0.05     0.2           99.5                  0.3          0.5         0.07      1.3          97.2                  1.6          2.8
  Guatemala              medium     0.67   0.04     0.0           99.9                  0.1          0.1         0.02      0.0         100.0                  0.0          0.0
  Honduras               medium     0.68   0.06     0.1           97.9                  2.0          2.1         0.02      0.0         100.0                  0.0          0.0
  Mongolia               medium     0.69   0.07     0.3           94.1                  5.6          5.9         0.06      0.1          96.1                  3.9          3.9
  Bolivia                medium     0.69   0.06     0.0           97.1                  2.8          2.9         0.02      0.0         100.0                  0.0          0.0
  Nicaragua              medium     0.70   0.05     0.0           98.6                  1.4          1.4         0.04      0.0          99.2                  0.8          0.8
  Egypt                  medium     0.70   0.04     0.0           99.5                  0.5          0.5         0.04      0.0          99.7                  0.3          0.3



                                                                                                                                                                                       33
                         (1)     (2)    (3)    (4)   (5)    (6)     (7)    (8)    (9)    (10)    (11)    (12)
Viet Nam                medium   0.71   0.07   0.2   88.9    10.9   11.1   0.02    0.0   100.0     0.0    0.0
Indonesia               medium   0.71   0.06   0.0   93.9     6.0    6.1   0.03    0.0    99.9     0.1    0.1
Syrian Arab Republic    medium   0.72   0.06   0.0   92.0     7.9    8.0   0.07    0.1    88.6    11.3   11.4
Jamaica                 medium   0.72   0.06   0.0   88.0    11.9   12.0   0.02    0.0   100.0     0.0    0.0
Algeria                 medium   0.73   0.04   0.0   95.6     4.4    4.4   0.04    0.0    97.5     2.5    2.5
El Salvador             medium   0.73   0.05   0.0   90.3     9.7    9.7   0.05    0.0    91.1     8.9    8.9
Iran, Islamic Rep. of   medium   0.75   0.05   0.0   84.6    15.4   15.4   0.03    0.0    98.1     1.9    1.9
Dominican Republic      medium   0.75   0.06   0.0   80.0    20.0   20.0   0.02    0.0    99.9     0.1    0.1
Sri Lanka               medium   0.76   0.08   0.0   72.3    27.7   27.7   0.02    0.0    96.6     3.4    3.4
Paraguay                medium   0.76   0.07   0.0   72.1    27.9   27.9   0.03    0.0    93.0     7.0    7.0
Turkey                  medium   0.76   0.07   0.0   72.0    28.0   28.0   0.01    0.0    99.9     0.1    0.1
Jordan                  medium   0.76   0.07   0.0   73.1    26.9   26.9   0.03    0.0    89.1    10.9   10.9
Tunisia                 medium   0.76   0.06   0.0   76.2    23.8   23.8   0.02    0.0    96.2     3.8    3.8
Philippines             medium   0.76   0.06   0.0   73.8    26.2   26.2   0.03    0.0    90.6     9.4    9.4
Peru                    medium   0.77   0.05   0.0   74.1    25.9   25.9   0.02    0.0    96.9     3.1    3.1
China                   medium   0.77   0.06   0.0   69.7    30.3   30.3   0.02    0.0    94.7     5.3    5.3
Lebanon                 medium   0.77   0.06   0.0   68.1    31.9   31.9   0.04    0.0    74.9    25.1   25.1
Saudi Arabia            medium   0.78   0.07   0.0   63.1    36.9   36.9   0.02    0.0    86.9    13.1   13.1
Albania                 medium   0.78   0.07   0.0   59.5    40.5   40.5   0.04    0.0    66.8    33.2   33.2
Thailand                medium   0.78   0.09   0.1   56.9    43.0   43.1   0.02    0.0    80.0    20.0   20.0
Venezuela               medium   0.78   0.09   0.1   57.1    42.9   42.9   0.02    0.0    79.8    20.2   20.2
Colombia                medium   0.79   0.09   0.1   54.4    45.6   45.6   0.02    0.0    72.1    27.9   27.9
Brazil                  medium   0.79   0.08   0.0   53.9    46.1   46.1   0.02    0.0    62.6    37.4   37.4
Mauritius                high    0.80   0.09   0.0   50.0    50.0   50.0   0.01    0.0    50.0    50.0   50.0
Malaysia                 high    0.81   0.10   0.1   47.9    52.1   47.9   0.01    0.0    24.4    75.6   24.4
Romania                  high    0.81   0.09   0.1   47.8    52.1   47.9   0.05    0.0    46.3    53.7   46.3
Panama                   high    0.81   0.08   0.0   45.7    54.3   45.7   0.04    0.0    39.9    60.1   39.9
Trinidad and Tobago      high    0.81   0.11   0.2   46.5    53.4   46.6   0.01    0.0    26.4    73.6   26.4
Oman                     high    0.81   0.06   0.0   43.7    56.3   43.7   0.07    0.0    44.2    55.8   44.2
Bulgaria                 high    0.82   0.09   0.0   42.8    57.2   42.8   0.03    0.0    29.6    70.4   29.6
Mexico                   high    0.82   0.10   0.1   41.8    58.1   41.9   0.01    0.0     3.9    96.1    3.9
United Arab Emirates     high    0.84   0.05   0.0   21.1    78.9   21.1   0.02    0.0     3.4    96.6    3.4
Costa Rica               high    0.84   0.12   0.3   36.5    63.2   36.8   0.01    0.0     0.1    99.9    0.1
Uruguay                  high    0.85   0.10   0.0   30.8    69.2   30.8   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Chile                    high    0.86   0.11   0.0   29.1    70.9   29.1   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Argentina                high    0.86   0.08   0.0   21.5    78.5   21.5   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Hungary                  high    0.87   0.08   0.0   19.7    80.3   19.7   0.02    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Portugal                 high    0.90   0.07   0.0    6.7    93.3    6.7   0.03    0.0     0.1    99.9    0.1
Korea, Rep. of           high    0.91   0.07   0.0    6.6    93.4    6.6   0.02    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Greece                   high    0.92   0.08   0.0    6.3    93.7    6.3   0.02    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Hong Kong, China         high    0.93   0.05   0.0    0.9    99.1    0.9   0.02    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Israel                   high    0.93   0.06   0.0    1.2    98.8    1.2   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
New Zealand              high    0.94   0.06   0.0    1.1    98.9    1.1   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Spain                    high    0.94   0.06   0.0    1.0    99.0    1.0   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
United Kingdom           high    0.94   0.05   0.0    0.1    99.9    0.1   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Italy                    high    0.94   0.06   0.0    0.9    99.1    0.9   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
France                   high    0.94   0.05   0.0    0.3    99.7    0.3   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Denmark                  high    0.94   0.04   0.0    0.0   100.0    0.0   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Austria                  high    0.94   0.05   0.0    0.2    99.8    0.2   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Belgium                  high    0.95   0.04   0.0    0.0   100.0    0.0   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0



                                                                                                                34
                          (1)    (2)    (3)    (4)   (5)    (6)     (7)   (8)    (9)    (10)    (11)    (12)
Switzerland               high   0.95   0.05   0.0    0.1    99.9   0.1   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Netherlands               high   0.95   0.04   0.0    0.0   100.0   0.0   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
United States             high   0.95   0.03   0.0    0.0   100.0   0.0   0.00    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Japan                     high   0.95   0.05   0.0    0.1    99.9   0.1   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Sweden                    high   0.95   0.05   0.0    0.0   100.0   0.0   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Ireland                   high   0.96   0.05   0.0    0.2    99.8   0.2   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Australia                 high   0.96   0.05   0.0    0.0   100.0   0.0   0.02    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Norway                    high   0.97   0.04   0.0    0.0   100.0   0.0   0.01    0.0     0.0   100.0    0.0
Expected # of countries
                                                     20.7                               10.4
misclassified




                                                                                                               35
Table 3. Overall error statistics and simulated rank deviations
                                         Expected
                                         absolute                Measures based on overall error
                                           rank




                                                                                                        Prob{i=’high’)
                                                                                        Prob{i=’mid’)




                                                                                                                         Prob{i=mis-
                                                                          Pr{i=’low’)




                                                                                                                          classified)
                                         deviation
                                                     2006       σ
                                           from
                                                     HDI    (overall),i
                                          rank in
                                           2006
                  Country i
                                            (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)           (5)             (6)                 (7)
                  Niger                    3.7       0.31       0.13      92.7           7.3              0.0               7.3
                  Mali                      4.3      0.34       0.12      91.0           8.9              0.0               9.0
                  Burkina Faso              4.8      0.34       0.11      91.9           8.1              0.0               8.1
                  Chad                     5.3       0.37       0.11      87.9          12.1              0.0              12.1
                  Ethiopia                 5.7       0.37       0.11      87.2          12.8              0.0              12.8
                  Burundi                   6.2      0.38       0.11      84.9          15.1              0.0              15.1
                  Mozambique                6.5      0.39       0.12      82.4          17.6              0.0              17.6
                  Malawi                   6.8       0.40       0.13      78.6          21.3              0.1              21.4
                  Zambia                    6.9      0.41       0.10      83.5          16.5              0.0              16.5
                  Côte d'Ivoire             7.0      0.42       0.09      81.4          18.6              0.0              18.6
                  Benin                    7.1       0.43       0.10      75.7          24.3              0.0              24.3
                  Tanzania                  7.3      0.43       0.09      79.0          21.0              0.0              21.0
                  Nigeria                  7.3       0.45       0.11      67.5          32.4              0.1              32.5
                  Rwanda                   7.1       0.45       0.10      69.7          30.3              0.0              30.3
                  Senegal                  7.1       0.46       0.08      68.2          31.8              0.0              31.8
                  Mauritania               7.1       0.49       0.09      56.1          43.8              0.0              43.9
                  Kenya                    7.1       0.49       0.08      54.5          45.5              0.0              45.5
                  Zimbabwe                  7.0      0.49       0.06      55.9          44.1              0.0              44.1
                  Lesotho                  7.0       0.49       0.07      53.4          46.6              0.0              46.6
                  Togo                     7.1       0.50       0.09      52.3          47.7              0.0              47.7
                  Uganda                    7.2      0.50       0.10      49.2          50.7              0.1              49.3
                  Cameroon                 7.3       0.51       0.08      47.1          52.8              0.0              47.2
                  Madagascar               7.4       0.51       0.09      45.8          54.2              0.0              45.8
                  Sudan                     7.7      0.52       0.08      42.0          58.0              0.0              42.0
                  Congo                     7.9      0.52       0.09      41.6          58.2              0.2              41.8
                  Papua New Guinea          8.1      0.52       0.07      37.0          63.0              0.0              37.0
                  Nepal                    8.5       0.53       0.09      38.3          61.6              0.1              38.4
                  Bangladesh               8.6       0.53       0.08      35.8          64.2              0.1              35.8
                  Ghana                     9.2      0.53       0.07      33.4          66.5              0.0              33.5
                  Pakistan                 9.5       0.54       0.07      29.6          70.3              0.0              29.7
                  Lao People's Dem. R.      9.8      0.55       0.10      29.7          69.7              0.6              30.3
                  Botswana                 10.1      0.57       0.06      13.5          86.5              0.0              13.5
                  India                    10.2      0.61       0.06       3.4          96.5              0.1               3.5
                  Morocco                  10.3      0.64       0.04       0.0          99.9              0.0               0.1
                  South Africa             10.4      0.65       0.09       3.9          91.6              4.5               8.4
                  Guatemala                10.5      0.67       0.05       0.0          99.7              0.3               0.3
                  Honduras                 10.8      0.68       0.06       0.1          97.1              2.8               2.9
                  Mongolia                 10.7      0.69       0.09       2.0          85.9             12.1              14.1
                  Bolivia                  10.6      0.69       0.06       0.1          96.0              3.9               4.0
                  Nicaragua                10.7      0.70       0.06       0.1          94.3              5.6               5.7
                  Egypt                    10.6      0.70       0.05       0.0          96.9              3.1               3.1
                  Viet Nam                 10.5      0.71       0.08       0.3          88.2             11.5              11.8



                                                                                                                                        36
                        (1)    (2)    (3)    (4)   (5)    (6)     (7)
Indonesia               10.4   0.71   0.07   0.1   91.1     8.8    8.9
Syrian Arab Republic    10.5   0.72   0.09   1.0   80.7    18.3   19.3
Jamaica                 10.4   0.72   0.07   0.1   86.5    13.4   13.5
Algeria                 10.2   0.73   0.06   0.0   90.5     9.5    9.5
El Salvador             10.2   0.73   0.07   0.1   82.9    17.0   17.1
Iran, Islamic Rep. of   10.2   0.75   0.06   0.0   81.6    18.4   18.4
Dominican Republic      10.1   0.75   0.06   0.0   79.1    20.9   20.9
Sri Lanka               10.0   0.76   0.08   0.1   71.3    28.6   28.7
Paraguay                9.8    0.76   0.08   0.0   71.2    28.8   28.8
Turkey                   9.8   0.76   0.08   0.0   71.6    28.4   28.4
Jordan                   9.6   0.76   0.07   0.0   70.6    29.3   29.4
Tunisia                 9.5    0.76   0.06   0.0   74.6    25.4   25.4
Philippines             9.7    0.76   0.06   0.0   72.0    27.9   28.0
Peru                    9.5    0.77   0.05   0.0   73.3    26.7   26.7
China                    9.6   0.77   0.06   0.0   69.2    30.8   30.8
Lebanon                 9.8    0.77   0.07   0.0   65.2    34.8   34.8
Saudi Arabia             9.8   0.78   0.07   0.0   62.6    37.4   37.4
Albania                 9.9    0.78   0.08   0.0   58.3    41.7   41.7
Thailand                10.0   0.78   0.09   0.1   56.7    43.2   43.3
Venezuela               10.0   0.78   0.09   0.1   56.8    43.1   43.2
Colombia                10.3   0.79   0.09   0.1   54.2    45.7   45.8
Brazil                  10.4   0.79   0.09   0.0   53.7    46.3   46.3
Mauritius               10.5   0.80   0.09   0.0   50.0    50.0   50.0
Malaysia                10.5   0.81   0.10   0.1   47.9    52.1   47.9
Romania                 10.7   0.81   0.11   0.2   47.9    51.9   48.1
Panama                  10.7   0.81   0.09   0.0   46.0    54.0   46.0
Trinidad and Tobago     10.7   0.81   0.11   0.2   46.5    53.3   46.7
Oman                    10.8   0.81   0.09   0.0   45.6    54.3   45.7
Bulgaria                11.0   0.82   0.09   0.0   43.1    56.8   43.2
Mexico                  11.0   0.82   0.10   0.1   41.9    58.0   42.0
United Arab Emirates    10.9   0.84   0.05   0.0   23.1    76.9   23.1
Costa Rica              10.9   0.84   0.12   0.3   36.6    63.1   36.9
Uruguay                 10.9   0.85   0.10   0.0   30.8    69.1   30.9
Chile                   10.8   0.86   0.11   0.0   29.2    70.8   29.2
Argentina               10.6   0.86   0.08   0.0   21.8    78.2   21.8
Hungary                 10.5   0.87   0.08   0.0   20.1    79.9   20.1
Portugal                10.2   0.90   0.08   0.0    8.7    91.3    8.7
Korea, Rep. of           9.9   0.91   0.08   0.0    7.0    93.0    7.0
Greece                  9.6    0.92   0.08   0.0    6.6    93.4    6.6
Hong Kong, China         9.2   0.93   0.06   0.0    1.3    98.7    1.3
Israel                   9.0   0.93   0.06   0.0    1.4    98.6    1.4
New Zealand              8.6   0.94   0.06   0.0    1.2    98.8    1.2
Spain                   8.3    0.94   0.06   0.0    1.2    98.8    1.2
United Kingdom           7.9   0.94   0.05   0.0    0.2    99.8    0.2
Italy                    7.7   0.94   0.06   0.0    1.0    99.0    1.0
France                   7.4   0.94   0.05   0.0    0.3    99.7    0.3
Denmark                  7.2   0.94   0.04   0.0    0.0   100.0    0.0
Austria                  7.2   0.94   0.05   0.0    0.2    99.8    0.2
Belgium                  7.2   0.95   0.05   0.0    0.1    99.9    0.1
Switzerland              7.2   0.95   0.05   0.0    0.1    99.9    0.1



                                                                         37
                         (1)    (2)     (3)     (4)    (5)    (6)     (7)
Netherlands              7.4    0.95     0.04      0.0   0.1   99.9    0.1
United States            7.8    0.95     0.03      0.0   0.0 100.0     0.0
Japan                    8.3    0.95     0.05      0.0   0.1   99.9    0.1
Sweden                   9.0    0.95     0.05      0.0   0.1   99.9    0.1
Ireland                  9.7    0.96     0.05      0.0   0.2   99.8    0.2
Australia                11.3   0.96     0.05      0.0   0.1   99.9    0.1
Norway                   14.0   0.97     0.04      0.0   0.0 100.0     0.0
Average world absolute                 Expected # of countries
                         9.0                                          22.9
deviation in rank                      misclassified.




                                                                             38
Table 4. As of 2006, countries misclassified due to the arbitrary cut off points
                     Countries with HDI2006  [0.5 and 0.55) Countries with HDI2006  [0.7 and 0.8)
                     Bangladesh                              Albania
                     Cameroon                                Brazil
                     Congo                                   China
                     Ghana                                   Colombia
                     Madagascar                              Dominican Republic
                     Nepal                                   Algeria
                     Pakistan                                Egypt
                     Papua New Guinea                        Indonesia
                     Sudan                                   Iran, Islamic Rep. of
                     Uganda                                  Jamaica
                                                             Jordan
                                                             Lebanon
                                                             Sri Lanka
                                                             Peru
                                                             Philippines
                                                             Paraguay
                                                             Saudi Arabia
                                                             El Salvador
                                                             Syrian Arab Republic
                                                             Thailand
                                                             Tunisia
                                                             Turkey
                                                             Venezuela
                                                             Vietnam




                                                                                                      39
Table 5. Updating error summary statistics for the period 1999 to 2005

                                                                                  Industrial vs. Non-industrialized
               Non-industrialized Countries        Industrialized Countries                   Countries
                                                                                    Difference          Ratio of
 Indicators   mean   std. dev.   min     max    mean   std. dev.   min     max      in means            std. dev
 HDI          0.01     0.02      -0.06   0.08   0.01     0.01      -0.03   0.05        0.002*             0.55
                                                                                               †
 Health       0.00     0.03      -0.14   0.11   0.00     0.01      -0.01   0.02        0.002              0.20
 Education    0.00     0.03      -0.11   0.25   0.00     0.01      -0.09   0.05       -0.004*             0.44
 Income      0.01     0.02     -0.07 0.15 0.02       0.02     -0.02 0.09           0.009*            0.95
Symbol * states that estimate of ‘Differences in means’ is statically significant at 1% level, tested by regressing the vector of
updating errors on a constant and an indicator variable that takes the value one if the country is industrialized and zero
otherwise using robust standard errors. Symbol † indicates that the estimate of the same regression is different from zero only
at the 15% significance level.




                                                                                                                             40
Table 6. Upgrading error statistics of variables underlying the HDI
                                                  Gross                  Adult
                           GDP per                enroll-                literacy                Life
                           capita                 ment ratio             rate                    expectancy
                           2006                   (GER)                  (ALR)                   (LE) at
                           [PPP                   2006                   2006                    birth 2006
country         HDI 2006   US$]        (GDP)i    [%]          (GER)i   [%]          (ALR)i    [years]        (LE)i
Niger           0.311          779.1       67.7         21.5       0.6         18.2        1.2           44.6      2.4
Mali            0.338          997.8       55.3         35.0       1.1         28.7       11.1           48.1      2.6
Burkina Faso    0.342         1168.8       75.5         26.4       1.0         27.6        6.5           47.9      0.7
Chad            0.368         2090.1       73.5         34.8       1.5         49.1       10.2           43.7      1.0
Ethiopia        0.371          755.8       86.3         36.0       1.1         44.0        0.5           47.8      1.4
Burundi         0.384          677.3       49.2         36.2       5.1         52.8        2.7           44.0      1.4
Mozambique      0.390         1236.6       59.2         48.6       4.9         49.0        0.6           41.6      2.2
Malawi          0.400          646.2       59.6         64.3       1.7         63.5        0.6           39.8      1.0
Zambia          0.407          943.2       69.4         54.3       2.9         81.5        4.8           37.7      3.4
Côte d'Ivoire   0.421         1551.0       90.3         39.6       1.2         52.7        1.2           45.9      2.5
Benin           0.428         1091.0      136.4         49.4       1.4         42.0        3.3           54.3      1.4
Tanzania        0.430          674.4       36.7         47.8       4.1         79.1        3.4           45.9      2.8
Nigeria         0.448         1154.2       56.1         55.0       5.7         69.5        0.5           43.4      2.9
Rwanda          0.450         1262.7      254.9         51.8       6.6         71.6        2.4           44.2      3.9
Senegal         0.460         1712.8      144.6         38.1       0.9         41.2        0.3           56.0      1.0
Mauritania      0.486         1940.5      277.3         45.6       1.6         42.2        3.5           53.1      1.5
Kenya           0.491         1139.6       73.8         60.1       2.6         86.0        4.4           47.5      1.8
Zimbabwe        0.491         2065.2      352.4         52.4       2.6         91.3        1.8           36.6      2.5
Lesotho         0.494         2618.9      247.9         65.5       2.9         85.3        1.6           35.2      3.7
Togo            0.495         1535.8      178.6         55.0       3.3         62.2        3.1           54.5      2.3
Uganda          0.502         1478.4       93.4         66.1      10.7         70.7        0.4           48.4      1.2
Cameroon        0.506         2173.6      194.5         62.3       2.7         75.8        0.3           45.7      2.3
Madagascar      0.509          857.0       57.2         56.5       2.2         69.7        6.5           55.6      2.7
Sudan           0.516         1948.7      400.5         36.7       0.9         62.1        0.9           56.5      0.3
Congo           0.520          978.2      279.0         51.7      11.4         84.9        0.4           52.3      1.5
Papua N. G.     0.523         2543.4      146.3         40.7       1.6         66.7        6.0           55.7      1.5
Nepal           0.527         1489.8       75.2         57.0       2.3         46.3        1.3           62.1      0.7
Bangladesh      0.530         1870.3      163.4         57.1       7.7         42.1        0.8           63.3      0.6
Ghana           0.532         2239.7      159.4         47.2       2.3         76.0        7.8           57.0      1.5
Pakistan        0.539         2225.4      118.1         38.4       3.2         46.6        2.2           63.4      2.2
Lao             0.553         1953.9      122.7         61.0       0.5         68.1        8.7           55.1      0.4
Botswana        0.570         9944.7      728.2         70.7       3.7         80.5        0.4           34.9      4.0
India           0.611         3139.4      258.1         62.0       1.3         60.3        1.2           63.6      0.4
Morocco         0.640         4309.4      134.1         57.8       1.7         52.6        0.4           70.0      0.4
South Africa    0.653        11192.2     1017.3         76.6       6.6         86.7        1.5           47.0      1.6
Guatemala       0.673         4313.0      304.6         66.2       2.8         71.2        0.6           67.6      0.5
Honduras        0.683         2876.4      216.5         71.4       1.7         77.3        2.2           68.1      1.7
Mongolia        0.691         2055.6      131.8         77.3       2.0         98.6       13.6           64.5      1.9
Bolivia         0.692         2719.6      221.5         86.5       5.7         87.7        0.3           64.4      0.3
Nicaragua       0.698         3634.2      361.5         70.2       2.1         67.8        4.6           70.0      0.2
Egypt           0.702         4210.8      139.5         75.5       1.8         58.5        0.9           70.2      0.5
Viet Nam        0.709         2744.8       84.0         62.8       1.3         93.2        1.6           70.8      0.5
Indonesia       0.711         3608.5      175.0         68.4       2.0         89.0        0.2           67.2      0.2
Syria           0.716         3609.8      542.5         62.6       3.1         77.7        3.1           73.6      0.9
Jamaica         0.724         4163.1      166.0         76.9       5.0         88.3        0.1           70.7      1.6



                                                                                                                         41
Algeria         0.728    6603.1    449.3    73.2    1.8   71.0   1.3   71.4   0.5
El Salvador     0.729    5040.8    688.1    69.7    1.5   80.6   0.2   71.1   0.2
Iran            0.746    7524.8    287.1    72.2    2.9   80.1   1.1   70.7   0.6
Dominican R.    0.751    7449.3    461.8    74.1    1.7   85.1   1.1   67.5   2.0
Sri Lanka       0.755    4389.6    214.3    62.7    3.0   92.5   0.7   74.3   0.8
Paraguay        0.757    4812.9    552.4    69.7    3.7   94.2   1.1   71.2   0.1
Turkey          0.757    7752.6    209.6    69.1    2.5   87.0   0.6   68.9   0.6
Jordan          0.760    4687.8    320.0    79.0   11.0   91.9   0.6   71.6   0.3
Tunisia         0.760    7767.6    227.5    75.4    0.8   75.2   0.1   73.5   1.2
Philippines     0.763    4614.1    217.9    81.5    1.1   95.8   1.6   70.7   0.1
Peru            0.767    5678.4    218.7    86.4    2.9   91.2   2.3   70.2   0.2
China           0.768    5896.1    127.2    70.4    2.5   87.6   2.4   71.9   0.3
Lebanon         0.774    5836.8    653.7    83.8    1.9   87.8   0.4   72.2   1.2
Saudi Arabia    0.777   13825.2   1479.4    58.6    1.6   79.6   0.4   72.0   0.4
Albania         0.784    4977.8    426.7    68.0    0.8   87.2   5.9   73.9   0.1
Thailand        0.784    8089.8    303.7    73.7    4.7   96.2   1.7   70.3   0.6
Venezuela       0.784    6042.7    991.1    74.2    1.8   93.7   0.3   73.0   0.3
Colombia        0.790    7256.3    415.2    72.9    2.3   92.7   0.6   72.6   0.2
Brazil          0.792    8194.7    439.7    85.7    6.4   88.5   0.8   70.8   0.8
Mauritius       0.800   12027.3    506.4    74.5    1.5   86.0   0.6   72.4   0.4
Malaysia        0.805   10276.1    331.0    73.2    2.2   89.4   0.2   73.4   0.1
Romania         0.805    8479.5    756.9    75.3    2.1   98.5   0.5   71.5   0.4
Panama          0.809    7277.8    756.8    79.7    2.1   92.8   0.3   75.0   0.1
Trinidad & T.   0.809   12181.9    339.7    66.9    1.9   98.7   2.4   69.8   1.4
Oman            0.810   15259.1   1451.6    68.3    2.1   77.1   0.6   74.3   0.8
Bulgaria        0.816    8077.9    646.3    80.9    2.5   98.7   0.2   72.4   0.5
Mexico          0.821    9803.2    406.7    75.3    0.7   92.3   0.8   75.3   0.6
Arab. Emirat.   0.839   24055.9   1859.6    59.9    4.7   78.3   0.3   78.3   1.1
Costa Rica      0.841    9481.4   1016.6    72.4    1.2   96.1   0.1   78.3   0.6
Uruguay         0.851    9420.6    460.2    89.4    1.3   97.9   0.1   75.6   0.2
Chile           0.859   10873.6   1458.5    81.3    1.0   96.3   0.2   78.1   0.6
Argentina       0.863   13298.0   1038.5    89.3    4.8   97.2   0.1   74.6   0.2
Hungary         0.869   16814.4   1232.3    87.5    2.0   99.0   0.1   73.0   0.4
Portugal        0.904   19628.9    970.5    89.3    2.5   99.0   0.7   77.5   0.3
Korea, R.       0.912   20499.3   1002.1    95.0    2.0   99.0   0.3   77.3   0.8
Greece          0.921   22204.7    908.5    93.4    1.8   99.0   2.3   78.3   0.2
Hong Kong       0.927   30822.1    967.0    76.7    4.5   94.3   0.3   81.8   0.5
Israel          0.927   24381.6   1066.0    89.7    2.6   95.8   0.8   80.0   0.2
New Zealand     0.936   23413.0   1027.2   100.0    2.4   99.0   0.0   79.3   0.3
Spain           0.938   25046.8   1268.7    96.1    1.9   99.0   0.2   79.7   0.2
Italy           0.940   28180.2   1831.0    89.3    3.1   99.0   0.1   80.2   0.4
UK              0.940   30821.2   1427.8    93.1    7.5   99.0   0.0   78.5   0.0
France          0.942   29300.5   1421.8    92.6    1.2   99.0   0.0   79.6   0.2
Denmark         0.943   31913.8   2203.3   100.0    2.3   99.0   0.0   77.3   0.1
Austria         0.944   32276.4   1840.6    91.1    1.7   99.0   0.0   79.2   0.2
Belgium         0.945   31095.8   1158.4    94.7    4.4   99.0   0.0   79.1   0.3
Netherlands     0.947   31789.4   2108.1    98.2    2.1   99.0   0.0   78.5   0.0
Switzerland     0.947   33039.6   1606.2    85.7    2.8   99.0   0.0   80.7   0.4
United States   0.948   39676.1   1870.0    93.3    1.3   99.0   0.0   77.5   0.2
Japan           0.949   29251.4   1534.0    85.5    1.9   99.0   0.0   82.2   0.2
Sweden          0.951   29540.7   1269.6    96.5    6.5   99.0   0.0   80.3   0.3



                                                                                    42
Ireland     0.956   38827.0   1826.0    99.0   1.8   99.0   0.0   77.9   0.3
Australia   0.957   30331.1   3492.0   100.0   5.7   99.0   0.0   80.5   0.3
Norway      0.965   38453.5   4225.7   100.0   0.9   99.0   0.0   79.6   0.1




                                                                               43
Table 7. Official development assistance (ODA) received in US dollar per capita by year and human
development category
                                               2006      2005       2004    2003      2002       2001
                            ‘medium’            7.2          6.5      6.5    5.7       5.9        6.6
                          ‘low’               30.1      27.9         24.2   18.4      14.9       14.5
Data are from the Human Development Reports 2001 to 2006.




Table 8. Convergence club regression results for medium development category
                       Sample conditional on          HDI2006  [0.5,0.8)     HDI2006  [0.55,0.70)
                       constant                      -.02556 (-56.69)        -.02847 (-35.36)
                       slope                         -.01380 (- 6.74)        -.02667 (-4.59)
                                    2
                       adjusted R                      .53                     .74
          t statistics in parentheses.




                                                                                                        44
 Fig. 1. Historical HDI scores for Non-industrialized Countries in 1990/91 and 2005/06

density
          5

                             2006                     2005
                             1991                     1990
          4
          3
          2
          1
          0




                           .2         .3         .4          .5         .6         .7         .8         .9         1 HDI
                                   low                                       medium                     high

 Notes: On the horizontal axis we display the HDI, which ranges from 0 to 1. 1990/91 are the first and 2005/06 are last two years for which
 the HDI scores originally have been made available (HDR, 1990, 1991, 2005, 2006). To make the HDI-distributions comparable across
 years we use the balanced panel of 99 developing countries that have been evaluated by the UNDP for all years. Countries that existed for a
 subset of years only (e.g. Croatia) are not considered. All densities are estimated by the Epanechnikov kernel method with bandwidth 0.01.




 Fig. 2. HDI of 1975 of Portugal and Venezuela as reported in the years 1999 to 2006

                                     0.8
                      HDI1975

                                    0.78
                                                                                                      Portugal
                                    0.76

                                    0.74                                                              Venezuela

                                    0.72

                                     0.7
                                           1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
                                                                               Year of data revision




                                                                                                                                        45
Fig. 3. Density of HDI as published by the HDR reports


                                                            Period C
                                       Period B

                Period A
     fraction




                2


           1.5


                1


           0.5


                0
                1                                                                                      2005
                    0.8
                                 0.6                                                       2000
                                          0.4                                    1995
                                                     0.2
                                                              0    1990




Fig. 4. Relationship between countries’ development status and the standard deviations due to
measurement error generated by data updates

                          D,i         0.08
                                       0.07
                                       0.06
                                       0.05
                                       0.04
                                       0.03
                                       0.02
                                       0.01
                                       0.00
                                              0.20   0.30   0.40   0.50   0.60    0.70   0.80   0.90   1.00
                                                                                                   HDIi2006
Linear trendline based on sample of 99 countries, R2 = 0.184.




                                                                                                              46
Fig. 5. Representation of data error of a country with HDI = 0.65




Fig. 6. Simulated HDI ranks compared to rank of country in 2006

Deviation in 40                                                                                                           average
number of
ranks
                                                                                                                          deviation in
             30                                                                                                           rank
                                                                                                                          ‐95%
             20
                                                                                                                          95%
             10

               0
                   1   6 11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61 66 71 76 81 86 91 96                                    HDI rank of
             ‐10                                                                                                  2006


             ‐20

             ‐30

             ‐40

Average, 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles of simulated rank distributions, displaying the deviation in rank for a country compared to its rank in
2006. Ranks based on the sample of 99 countries for which the overall cardinal error can be calculated consistently.




                                                                                                                                         47
Fig. 7. Relationship between Countries’ Development Status and the relative standard Errors due to
Measurement Error generated by Data Updates of the underlying Variables of the HDI

                                           Panel a: Relative Standard Error Literacy Rate
      DLiti /Liti      0.5
                        0.4
                        0.4
                        0.3
                        0.3
                        0.2
                        0.2
                        0.1
                        0.1
                        0.0
                              0.3        0.4         0.5         0.6         0.7          0.8       0.9         1.0
                                                                                                               HDIi2006
Quadratic trendline y = -2.2904x3 + 4.9837x2 - 3.5914x + 0.8739 is based on least squares estimation of sample of 99 countries, R2 = 0.375.




                                      Panel b: Relative Standard Error GDP per capita
                       0.300

                       0.250

                       0.200

                       0.150

                       0.100

                       0.050

                       0.000
                               0.3         0.4         0.5        0.6         0.7         0.8       0.9        HDI
                                                                                                               1.0 i2006

Linear trendline is based on least squares estimation of sample of 99 countries, R2 = 0.073.




                                                                                                                                        48
                                      Panel c: Relative Standard Error Life Expectancy
                       0.12

                         0.1

                       0.08

                       0.06

                       0.04

                       0.02

                           0
                               0.3       0.4          0.5         0.6         0.7         0.8      0.9       1.0
                                                                                                             HDIi2006
Linear trendline is based on least squares estimation of sample of 99 countries, R2 = 0.456.




                                 Panel d: Relative standard Error Gross Enrollment Ratio
                       0.250

                       0.200                                                         y = ‐0.0642x + 0.0888
                                                                                           R² = 0.1178
                       0.150

                       0.100

                       0.050

                       0.000
                                0.3        0.4         0.5        0.6         0.7         0.8       0.9      1.0
                                                                                                             HDIi2006
Linear trendline is based on least squares estimation of sample of 99 countries, R2 = 0.118.




                                                                                                                        49
Fig. 8. World map of the Human Development Index

Panel (a). Reported Human Development Index 2006




Panel (b). Adjusted Human Development Index 2006




Note. Panel (a) displays the classification using the actually reported HDI Index for the year 2006 for all reported countries (industrialized
and non-industrialized). Countries in white have no reported data. Panel (b) displays the classification based on the revised thresholds that
we calculate in Section 4.3. if the UNDP had consistently updated the cutoff values for classification.


Fig. 9. Gini Coefficients computed by the HDI Formulas A, B and C
                            Gini coefficient




                                                0.5                                        formula A

                                               0.45                                        formula B

                                                0.4                                        formula C


                                               0.35

                                                0.3

                                               0.25

                                                0.2
                                                      1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000     2005



                                                                                                                                          50
Appendix

Formula Changes
The most important changes are described in the following subsections, and the reader is referred to
Anand and Sen (1994, 1997, 1998), the technical appendices of the HDRs (1990 to 2006) and to Jahan
(2000) for details.

Income. At first, in 1990 GDP per capita (in PPP) was logged in the income index. Between 1991 and
1998, however income above a certain cut-off point got substantially adjusted with a regressive version
of the “Atkinson Function". The cut-off point was taken as the average world income on the assumption
that every person should have at least this level of income for building basic capabilities (Jahan 2000).
Since this formulation however was argued to particularly punish middle income countries, the original
formulation of logging GDP per capita was again introduced in 1999 with formula hC (Anand and Sen,
1998).

Education. Following the suggestion by Kelley (1991), compared to 1990, in 1991 mean years of
schooling was added as a second component to adult literacy to form a more general index of education.
Adult literacy was given two-thirds weight and mean years of schooling one-third weight according to an
argument that adult literacy is a more representative stock variable for educational attainment. However,
the variable “mean years of schooling” was constructed in a complicated way and for some of the
countries it was criticized to not reflect their educational infrastructure properly (Jahan 2000). In an effort
to further improve the measure, from 1995 onward, mean year of schooling was replaced by the
combined gross enrolment of schooling at the primary, secondary and tertiary level of education.

Maxima and mimina. Until 1994, in order to normalize the variables x into the double bounded indices
y, observed maxima and minima were used as goalposts. This created however the problem that it got
difficult to distinguish whether changes in the HDI of a country was because of its improved
performance or because of changes to the maxima and minima of the sample of countries considered. In
order to make HDI trends over time more meaningful, since 1994 fixed maxima and minima were
introduced based on the trends of the variables of what that their values was estimated to be in the
following 25 years (HDR, 1994).




                                                                                                            51
HDI formulas hf used by the UNDP in the three subperiods f  {A, B, C}
Formula hC
y1i = healthi = (life expectancyi – 25 ) / (85 – 25)
y2i = educationi = 2/3 adult literacy indexi + 1/3 combined gross enrollment indexi
y3i = incomei = min(1, (log(GDP per capitai) – log(100)) / (log(40000) – log(100)))
adult literacy indexi = (adult literacy ratei – 0) / (100 – 0)
gross enrollment indexi =min(1, (Combined gross enrolment ratio for primary, secondary and tertiary
level schoolsi / 100)18

Formula hB
income is calculated by a version of the "Atkinson Function". Given a cutoff value c
W(y*) = y* for y* < c
W(y*) = c + 2(y* – c)^(1/2) for y* in [c, 2c]
W(y*) = c + 2(c)^(1/2) + 3(y* – c)^(1/3) for y* in [2c, 3c]
for [3c, 4c], [4c, 5c] etc.
whereby c is defined as ‘world average income’.19 With this function defined,
y3i = incomei = W(y*i) = (W(GDP per capitai) – W(100)) / W(40000)
y1i and y2i are defined as in formula hC

Formula hA
y1i = healthi = (life expectancyi – low1) / (high1 – low1)
y2i = educationi = adult literacy ratei – low2) / (high2 – low2)
y3i = incomei = log(GDP per capitai) – log(low3)) / (log(high3) – log(low3))
The "goalposts" of lowk and highk for each subindicator k  {1,2,3} are the values of the minimum and
the maximum of the kth subindicator index of all considered countries. In 1990, the implicit goalposts
were 42 and 78 for life expectancy, 12.3 and 100 for literacy rate, and 10^2.34 and 10^3.68 for GDP per
capita.




18
   The combined gross enrolment ratio is calculated for the number of students enrolled in primary, secondary and tertiary levels of
education, regardless of age, as percentage of the population of official school age for the three levels. The gross enrolment ratio can be
greater than 100% as a result of grade repetition and entry at ages younger or older than the typical age at that grade level. For this reason
the education index takes the minimum of one and the ratio.
19
   This function is described on page 111 in the Technical Notes of the HDR of 1995.



                                                                                                                                                 52
