                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         BEWARE OF UNAWARENESS:
        RACIAL/ETHNIC DISPARITIES IN AWARENESS OF CHRONIC DISEASES

                                           Pinka Chatterji
                                            Heesoo Joo
                                            Kajal Lahiri

                                        Working Paper 16578
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16578


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




This research was supported by the National Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities, National
Institutes of Health (grant number P20MD003373). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Center on Minority Health and
Health Disparities, the National Institutes of Health, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The HRS 2006 Biomarker data is sponsored by the National Institute on Aging (grant number NIA
U01AG009740) and was conducted by the University of Michigan.

© 2010 by Pinka Chatterji, Heesoo Joo, and Kajal Lahiri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Beware of Unawareness: Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Awareness of Chronic Diseases
Pinka Chatterji, Heesoo Joo, and Kajal Lahiri
NBER Working Paper No. 16578
December 2010
JEL No. I1

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper studies racial/ethnic disparities in awareness of chronic diseases using biomarker data from
the 2006 HRS. We estimate a 3-step sequential probit model which accounts for selection into: (1)
participating in biomarker collection; (2) having illness (hypertension or diabetes); (3) being aware
of illness. Contrary to studies reporting that African-Americans are more aware of having hypertension
than non-Latino whites, we do not find this conclusion holds after self-selection and severity are considered.
Likewise, African-Americans and Latinos are less aware of having diabetes compared to non-Latino
whites. Disparities in unawareness are exacerbated when we limit the sample to untreated respondents.


Pinka Chatterji                                       Kajal Lahiri
State University of New York at Albany                State University of New York at Albany
Economics Department                                  Economics Department
1400 Washington Avenue                                1400 Washington Avenue
Albany, NY 12222                                      Albany, NY 12222
and NBER                                              klahiri@albany.edu
pchatterji@albany.edu

Heesoo Joo
State University of New York at Albany
Economics Department
1400 Washington Avenue
Albany NY 12222
hj528176@albany.edu
1.0     Introduction


        There are well-documented racial/ethnic disparities in the incidence of chronic diseases

in the US. Numerous studies show that African-Americans and Latinos are more likely than

non-Latino whites to develop and have adverse consequences related to chronic health conditions

such as heart disease, cancer, diabetes, arthritis, obesity, and hypertension (see NHDR, 2003 for

a review). Racial/ethnic disparities in chronic diseases can result from a variety of mechanisms,

including differences across groups in access to effective medical care, insurance status, SES,

geography, and patient/provider interactions (Adler & Stewart, 2010; Gray et al., 2009; Bahr,

2007; Caillier, 2006; LêCook et al., 2010; Alegria et al., 2002; Balsa et al., 2005; Balsa &

McGuire, 2003; Chandra & Skinner, 2003). Recent work suggests that factors related to health

knowledge and information also contribute to health disparities (Cutler & Lleras-Muney, 2010;

Aizer & Stroud, 2010; Goldman & Lakdawalla, 2005; Meara, 2001).1 If patient-level factors

such as therapy compliance or behavioral response to health information vary across groups,

these differences ultimately may lead to disparities in effective treatment and health outcomes

even when groups have equal access to medical care.


        Early awareness of having a chronic health condition is another aspect of health

knowledge that influences an individual’s ability to manage the progression of a disease, and

may contribute to health disparities. Without early preventative intervention, the course of a

chronic disease is a continuum from the disease-free state to asymptomatic biological change,


1
  Lleras-Muney & Cutler (2010), for example, report that knowledge and cognitive ability explain a portion of the
education gradient in health behaviors. Aizer & Stroud (2010) find that more educated mothers are more likely than
less educated mothers to quit smoking in response to new information about the dangers of cigarettes, explaining a
portion of the education gradient in newborn health. Goldman & Lakdawalla (2005) find that education disparities
in HIV outcomes can be attributed in part to differences across groups in adherence to a complicated treatment
regimen. Meara (2001) reports that differential response to knowledge by SES can explain about one third of the
education gradient in maternal smoking.

                                                                                                                 1
clinical illness, impairment, disability and ultimately death. Due to the long latency period, early

recognition and treatment of chronic illnesses is critical for preventing a rapid progression of the

condition to disability. In the present study, we examine whether there exist racial and ethnic

disparities in the awareness of two highly prevalent, costly chronic diseases that are typically

asymptomatic in their early stages -- diabetes and hypertension. We use new, state-of-the-art

data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), which includes biomarkers for diabetes and

measurement of hypertension. We build on prior work in this area by using a three-step

sequential probit model, which accounts for the possibility that there are factors (both observed

and unobserved) that drive an individual’s choice to participate in the medical examination

portion of the HRS survey, the likelihood the individual has chronic health conditions, and the

probability that the individual is aware of having a chronic health condition if he does indeed

have one. As we discuss below, these factors are likely to be correlated with race/ethnicity, and

thus may obscure the identification of racial/ethnic disparities in awareness of chronic conditions

if we do not adjust for them.


         In contrast to recent research, which indicates that African-Americans are more aware

of having hypertension than non-Latino whites, our findings suggest that while relatively more

African-Americans receive treatment for this illness, African-Americans still are

disproportionately unaware of having the condition compared to individuals from other

racial/ethnic groups. With respect to diabetes, both African Americans and Latinos are more

likely than non-Latino whites to have the disease and be treated for it, but the remaining

untreated minorities are less likely to be aware of their condition compared to non-Latino whites.

We find no income gradient in awareness of hypertension or diabetes, but more post-secondary

education is associated with higher likelihood of awareness among those with hypertension.


                                                                                                    2
2.0        Background


           Studies of disease awareness require data that include both self-reports of illness and

objective measurement of the condition. That is, classifying an individual as being unaware of

having a disease requires that the individual reports not having the disease, and also that an

almost simultaneous medical examination shows that the individual does indeed have the disease.

In the US context, the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) is one of

the few large-scale surveys which provide both self-reported and objective measurements of

chronic illness. 2 As a result, most previous studies of disease awareness in the US are based on

the NHANES.


            Several recent studies examine racial/ethnic differences in awareness of chronic disease,

with some results related to hypertension showing greater awareness among minorities compared

to non-Latino whites. Hertz et al. (2005), for example, use the 1999-2002 NHANES and find

that 82 percent of African-Americans over 60 years of age are aware that they have hypertension

compared to 72 percent of non-Latino whites in the same age group (Hertz et al., 2005). Ong et

al. (2007) report that awareness of hypertension is higher among African-Americans than non-

Latino whites in the 2001-2002 NHANES (African-Americans 73.2% vs. non-Latino whites

59.9%). Similarly, Howard et al. (2006), using the REasons for Geographic And Racial

Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) database, find that African-Americans are more likely to be

aware of their high blood pressure than non-Latino whites (odds ratio: 1.31).


           Other findings, however, suggest that minorities are less aware of having chronic illness

compared to non-Latino whites, or that there is no difference between minorities and non-Latino



2
    This information is available in the NHANES III and in later versions of these data.

                                                                                                       3
whites in awareness. Based on data from the 2003-2006 NHANES and the 2003-2007

Behavioral Rick Factor Surveillance System (BFRSS), Danaei et al.(2009) report that Latinos are

more likely than non-Latino whites to have undiagnosed diabetes (odds ratio: 2.03), but there are

no statistically significant differences between African-Americans and non-Latino whites. Pierce

et al. (2009) report no racial/ethnic differences in awareness of diabetes using 2004-2005 data

from the English Longitudinal Study of Aging (ELSA).


       Several empirical challenges arise in estimating racial/ethnic disparities in disease

awareness. First, individual-level factors such as disease severity and health status may

confound an observed association between race/ethnicity and awareness in a cross-sectional

sample. Hertz et al. (2005) and Ong et al. (2007), for example, find that African-Americans who

objectively meet criteria for hypertension are more likely to be aware of their condition than non-

Latino whites who meet objective criteria. The models, however, do not adjust for health status

and severity of disease. As a consequence, the results may reflect the fact that African-

Americans at a particular age simply are more likely than non-Latino whites to have advanced,

symptomatic disease, and, as a result, are more likely to be under treatment and be aware of the

disease. If that is the case, greater awareness of disease observed in the sample is not necessarily

indicative of better access to screening and treatment services.


       Moreover, awareness status is known only for those who objectively meet criteria for

disease. That is, one cannot observe whether a healthy person would be aware of his disease if

he had the disease. This censoring issue potentially confounds estimates of disparities in prior

work. For example, Howard et al. (2006) adjust for observable aspects of severity using a logit

model, and still find that African-Americans are more likely to be aware of having hypertension

compared to non-Latino whites. However, this single-equation approach does not account for the

                                                                                                   4
possibility that unmeasured aspects of health status and health behaviors may be correlated with

race/ethnicity, and also related to both the likelihood of having the disease and the likelihood of

being aware of the disease if it exists. This issue may confound estimates of racial/ethnic

disparities in unawareness.


       Most recently, Johnston et al. (2009), using the Health Survey for England (HSE),

examine the income/health gradient using self-reported and objective measures of hypertension.

They estimate a censored bivariate probit model to account for the possibility that measured and

unmeasured factors may affect both an individual’s propensity to meet objective criteria for

hypertension and an individual’s likelihood of misreporting his hypertension status (what we

term “being unaware” in our study). The findings show that income is negatively related to

misreporting hypertension status, but they do not find evidence of racial/ethnic disparities

(Johnston et al., 2009).


       In the present study, we estimate racial/ethnic disparities in health awareness among

older individuals in the US and build on prior work in a number of ways. First, we take

advantage of the rich data available in the HRS to adjust for a range of individual-level factors

that may be correlated with both race/ethnicity and awareness, including disease severity.

Second, like Johnson et al. (2009), we account for the possibility that factors exist which affect

both the likelihood of having chronic illness and the likelihood of being aware of the illness if it

exists. By jointly estimating equations modeling the probability of having the illness and the

probability of being aware of the illness if it exists, we can account for measured and

unmeasured variables that may confound an observed association between race/ethnicity and

awareness. We apply this method using data from the US, while Johnson et al. (2009) uses data

from England and focuses on the income/health gradient.

                                                                                                       5
        Our third contribution is that we take into account a second form of censoring that may

be particularly important in the estimation of racial/ethnic disparities - - censoring that results

from respondents refusing to participate in the collection of health examination and biomarker

data. We only observe objective and self-reported measures of chronic illness (and thus

unawareness status) for HRS respondents who: (1) agree to participate in the collection of health

examination and biomarker data; and (2) provide a self-report about chronic illness. We allow

for the possibility that individuals select into survey participation along measured and

unmeasured factors that also affect the existence of disease and awareness of disease if it exists.


        As discussed below, participation in the HRS biomarker data collection effort involves a

medical examination, which includes blood pressure measurement and a blood draw. Many

factors may affect an individual’s decision to participate in the medical examination, and some

of these factors are also likely to affect disease prevalence and awareness. For example, an

individual who has strong mistrust of the health care system may be reluctant to participate in the

medical examination, and also may be more likely to have chronic illness and more likely to be

unaware of it if it exists. On the other hand, an individual who is knowledgeable about health

may be both more likely to participate in the medical examination, less likely to have illness, and

more likely to be aware of it if it exists. 3


        There are numerous reasons to believe that this type of censoring may be related to

race/ethnicity and SES. In the case of African-Americans, there is a well-documented history of

mistrust of medicine and medical research, stemming in part from the Tuskegee Syphilis Study

and other violations of medical ethics in the US that were targeted at minority patients (LaVeist
3
  The HRS provides both the respondent and the respondent’s physician with the results of the diabetes and
hypertension examinations. Thus, more health conscious individuals may have an incentive to participate. However,
it’s also possible that respondents with poor health behaviors may be more likely than others to participate if these
individuals believe that their health behaviors put them at elevated risk for disease.

                                                                                                                   6
et al., 2000; Achter et al., 2005; and Halbert et al., 2009). For all minority groups, culture,

language, immigration status, education, and health knowledge are just some of factors that may

affect participation in the HRS biomarker data collection as well as disease and awareness of

disease. For example, in a study of prostate cancer patients, Halbert et al. (2009) report that

African-Americans and low SES individuals report greater mistrust of the healthcare system

compared to non-Latino whites and higher SES individuals. Achter et al. (2005) find that

African- Americans are more likely to believe that clinical trials are not safe compared to non-

Latino whites. LaVeist et al.(2000), in a study of cardiac patients, find that lower satisfaction of

medical care among African-Americans compared to non-Latino whites partly comes from

mistrust of medical care. Thus, adjusting for this type of censoring is particularly relevant to the

estimation of racial/ethnic disparities.


3.0    Data, definitions, and sample statistics


3.1    The Health and Retirement Study


       Data for this study come from the 2006 Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a biannual,

nationally representative, longitudinal household survey initiated in 1992. The HRS started with

a sample of households in which the household heads were 51 to 61 years old (born between

1931 and 1941). The sample also included spouses of household heads that were of any age.

Since the first wave, the HRS has added samples which include different age cohorts. As of 2006,

the HRS contained 18,469 individuals from AHEAD (born before 1924), CODA (born in 1924-

1930), HRS (born in 1931-1941), War Babies (born in 1942-1947), Early Baby Boomers (born

in 1948-1953), and Late Baby Boomers (1954-1959). The HRS collects information through

face-to-face interviews, phone interviews, and proxy interviews.


                                                                                                       7
        The 2006 HRS core interview included an enhanced face-to-face interview with a

medical examination by a trained interviewer. The medical examination involved measurement

of height, weight, mobility, strength, blood pressure, and lung capacity, as well as collection of

biomarker data through saliva and blood samples. The sampling process used for the enhanced

interview is as follows. First, the HRS randomly assigned half of the households in the 2006

Core sample to an enhanced face-to-face interview in 2006. Those households who were not

assigned to an enhanced face-to-face interview in 2006 wave were assigned to an enhanced face-

to-face interview in the 2008 wave. Among those respondents who were assigned to an enhanced

face-to-face interview in 2006 (N=9,570), the HRS excluded respondents who were living in a

nursing home, who chose a proxy interview, or who chose a phone interview (12.4 percent of the

2006 enhanced face-to-face interview sample). Based on this process, 8,379 respondents in 2006

(45.4% of the entire HRS 2006 sample) were eligible for an enhanced interview which involved

a medical examination.


        Our analysis sample includes 8,051 respondents. We drop 328 respondents who were

eligible for an enhanced interview but have missing data for any socio-demographic and

economic variables we use in the analysis. The body mass index (BMI) variable, which is based

on respondents’ self-reported height and weight, had a large number of missing values. We

replace missing BMI values with the sample mean and use a missing data indicator to flag

respondents with missing BMI information.


         The first column of Table 1 shows the un-weighted mean characteristics for the analysis

sample. The mean age is 67 years old (min: 30, max: 104).4 The sample is 76 percent non-


4
 Those who are younger than the late baby boomer cohort (under 47 years old in 2006) are the spouses of household
heads who are older than 47 years old. These individuals comprise only 1.6 percent of the sample.

                                                                                                               8
Latino white, 14 percent African-American, 8 percent Latino, and 2 percent American Indian,

Alaskan Native, Asian and Pacific Islander (Table 1). In the sample, 22 percent are high school

dropouts, 34 percent have graduated from high school, 22 percent have completed some college

and 22 percent have completed four years of college or more. The average household income is

$69,922 (Table 1). Based on body mass index (BMI) calculated from self-reported height and

weight, 34 percent of the sample is overweight and 28 percent is obese (11 percent have missing

BMI information).


           Among HRS respondents who were eligible for the enhanced interview, some

respondents refused to participate in the medical examination and/or blood draw, or could not

provide usable information from the medical examination. There was a separate consent process

for the saliva and blood draws that was conducted just before the samples were collected.

Respondents only participated if they affirmed both that they understood the directions and that

they felt safe participating. 5 “Agreed to participate” in our sample includes eligible respondents

who agreed to participate in the medical examination and provided usable data from the medical

examination. “Refused to participate” includes those respondents who refused, as well as those

who accepted the medical examination but provided unusable measurements. For hypertension,

537 respondents who smoked, exercised, or consumed alcohol or food within the 30 minutes

prior to completing the blood pressure measure could not provide usable measurements of blood

pressure.


           If the respondents in the refusal group have very similar observable characteristics as

respondents in the acceptor group, it would be less likely that a sample selection problem exists

that would affect our estimates of racial/ethnic disparities. In Table 1, we show sample

5
    More information is available at: http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/sitedocs/userg/HRS2006BiomarkerDescription.pdf.

                                                                                                                  9
characteristics by refusal/acceptance status for both hypertension and diabetes. In the case of

hypertension, which involves a physical measurement of blood pressure status (described in

more detail below), the refusal group disproportionately includes African-Americans and

respondents with low income, less education, and poor health. The same general pattern is true

for diabetes, which involves a blood draw. This result differs from Johnston et al. (2009), who

report no selection problem with regard to agreeing to participate in measurement of chronic

illness. However, in our case, Table 1 strongly suggests the existence of a self-selection problem

in the 2006 HRS that must be addressed in the estimation of racial/ethnic disparities.


3.2     Measurement of chronic illness: hypertension and diabetes


        The HRS asks respondents to provide a self-report of hypertension and diabetes. If a

respondent is new in the 2006 wave, the respondent is asked “Has a doctor ever told you that

you have high blood pressure or hypertension [diabetes]?” If a respondent participated in a prior

HRS wave and reported hypertension (diabetes) in the last interview, the interviewer asks

him/her whether s/he wishes to dispute the prior report of illness. If not, the respondent is asked

whether s/he currently takes medication for hypertension (diabetes).


        If a respondent participated in a prior HRS interview but did not report hypertension

(diabetes), the respondent is asked “Since we last talked to you, has a doctor told you that you

have high blood pressure or hypertension [diabetes]?” If the respondent reports high blood

pressure or hypertension (diabetes) in the current period, s/he is asked a follow-up question about

whether s/he takes any medication for the illness. 6 In Table 2, we see that 56 percent of our


6
  This question structure has the advantage of reducing the likelihood of false-positive reporting due to ‘no longer
having the illness’ since the data is updated every two years. Even though hypertension or diabetes is very unlikely
to be completely cured, there is the possibility of complete recovery due to proper management. Update of the status
every two years certainly reduces the likelihood of this kind of error.

                                                                                                                 10
sample self-reports hypertension and 50 percent reports currently taking medication for

hypertension. Table 2 also shows that 20 percent of our sample reports having diabetes and 17

percent reports taking medication for diabetes.


        The HRS enhanced interview included measurement of each consenting participant’s

systolic blood pressure (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP), which we consider to be

objective measurement of hypertension. The blood pressure reading was taken three times

during the interview. We use the mean of the 2nd and the 3rd readings of systolic blood pressure

and diastolic blood pressure (Johnston et al., 2009). Based on standard definitions (see Hertz et

al., 2005; Morenoff et al., 2007; Angell et al., 2008; and Johnston et al., 2009), we consider a

person to be hypertensive if s/he has over 140 mmHg systolic blood pressure (SBP) or over 90

mmHg diastolic blood pressure (DBP). The HRS enhanced interview also included a blood draw

and blood analysis. As an objective measure of diabetes, we use the A1C level, a measure of the

average glucose level in the respondent’s blood over the past 2-3 months. 7 Following guidelines

from the American Diabetic Association, we consider an A1C of higher than 6 percent to be an

indicator of diabetes (Buell et al., 2007; and Ginde et al., 2008)8.


        As seen in Table 2, about 32 percent of our sample meets objective criteria for

hypertension and about 24 percent meets objective criteria for diabetes. Note that these

individuals have uncontrolled or undiagnosed disease – that is, these individuals include both

who are aware of their disease but have not been able to effectively treat it, as well as people

who are unaware that they have the illness. These rates, however, would not include individuals

7
  One merit of the A1C test is that test results are insensitive to the timing of measurement and show broad shot of
an individual’s diabetes status. A normal A1C for people without diabetes is 4-6 percent. However, A1C level is not
usually used for the diagnosis of diabetes but rather used for checking blood sugar level among diagnosed diabetes
patients.
8
  Buell et al.(2010) propose that A1C≤6% are normal and recommend glucose measurement for A1C level ≥5.8%.
Ginde et al.(2008) present that A1C≥6.1% are high risk group with undiagnosed diabetes.

                                                                                                                 11
who have the disease but who are being treated effectively with medication and/or lifestyle

changes.


       Co-morbidity between chronic illnesses is common, particularly among racial/ethnic

minorities. Among non-Latino whites, 18 percent have both hypertension and diabetes,

compared to co-morbidity rates of 35 percent among African-Americans, and 32 percent among

Latinos. The high co-morbidity among African-Americans and Latinos may reflect that African-

Americans and Latinos are in worse health overall compared to non-Latino whites. In Figures 1

and 2, we show the prevalence of hypertension and diabetes over different age groups in our

sample (based on the criteria that the patient has an objective measurement that indicates disease,

and/or self-reports medication use) by race/ethnicity. We see in Figure 1 that the largest

hypertension prevalence gap between African-Americans and non-Latino whites occurs in the

under-50 age group, which suggests that African-Americans have earlier onset of illness

compared to other groups. Figure 2 shows that in the case of diabetes, the prevalence gap

between African-Americans and non-Latino whites increases until the 65-70 year old age group

and decreases after that point. There is a similar pattern in the prevalence gap between Latinos

and non-Latino whites (Figure 2).


3.3    Definition of awareness


       Our primary definition of awareness is if conditional on having the disease as determined

by medical examination, respondents self-report that they do indeed have the illness. Following

a recent report of the Seventh Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation,

and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC7, 2003) and previous studies (Hertz et al., 2005;

Primatesta & Poulter, 2006; Morenoff et al., 2007; and Angell et al., 2008), our criteria for


                                                                                                   12
“having the disease” is if the respondent meets objective measurement criteria (e.g., has

uncontrolled illness) and/or the individual self-reports taking medication for the disease. We

include individuals who are taking medication as being part of the disease group because many

respondents in our sample have disease that is controlled by medication. For example, in our

sample, among those who report taking medication for hypertension, 63 percent have normal

blood pressure measurement and, among those who report taking medication or using insulin

pump for diabetes, 25 percent have normal blood sugar measurement.


         Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for disease prevalence and disease awareness.

Among those with hypertension, 83 percent of respondents are aware of having hypertension,

and, among those with diabetes, 64 percent of respondents are aware of having diabetes (Table

2).9 We see in Table 2 that awareness of hypertension is 83 percent for non-Latino whites, 88

percent for African-Americans and 83 percent for Latinos. These findings show that awareness is

higher among African-Americans compared to non-Latino whites, which is consistent with

previous studies (Hertz et al., 2005; and Ong et al., 2007). For diabetes, awareness is 63 percent

for non-Latino whites, 64 percent for African-Americans and 67 percent for Latinos. This result,

which shows small differences in awareness between racial and ethnic groups for diabetes, is

also consistent with previous studies from NHANES data (Danaei et al., 2009 and Pierce et al.,

2009).




9
 In Table 3, we compare the weighted versions of these rates to published rates based on NHANES respondents
over 60 years old. The prevalence of hypertension appears to be somewhat higher in the NHANES than the HRS,
but awareness of hypertension very close across the two samples; 83 percent of our sample is aware of having
hypertension vs. 81 percent in the NHANES. In the case of diabetes, the prevalence of illness is similar in the
NHANES, but awareness of diabetes appears to be somewhat higher in the NHANES compared to the HRS. These
differences may simply reflect the differences in the demographic characteristics of the two samples, and/or the
somewhat different blood analyses used to diagnose diabetes in the two surveys.

                                                                                                              13
       Our main definition of awareness follows the epidemiological literature in this area,

which considers an individual to be aware if s/he meets the “gold standard” criteria for disease

(based on objective measurement and usage of medication) and conditional on this fact, self-

reports having the disease. It is best understood in the context of the schematic diagram depicting

the flow of HRS respondents through the medical examination and self-reports (Figure 3). The

absolute counts and the percentages are also reported at each stage yielding the unawareness

rates of 17% for hypertension and 38% for diabetes under Group C. This definition focuses on

false-negative responses and does not consider respondents who give false-positives to be

unaware, even though this form of misreporting may be less relevant from the standpoint of

public health. In Table 4, we present a cross-classification table between self repots and medical

examination reports. In the context of this concordance table, the awareness is defined as {a/a+c},

which is the sensitivity of self-reports. In our sample, about 7 percent gives false-positives for

hypertension and about 3 percent give false positives for diabetes. These cases can arise if,

following a doctor’s report, the individual is controlling the disease by diet, exercise and other

healthy lifestyle changes such that the actual medical examination does not identify the disease.

In addition some errors in measurement can never be ruled out, particularly in case of

hypertension.


3.4    Concordance between “self-reports” and “medical examinations”


       Two types of mismatches between self reports and medically-tested objective

measurements are possible – an individual may fail to a report a disease that exists, or an

individual may incorrectly report a disease that does not exist (see Table 4). If there are a

reasonably small number of mismatched cases, the self-reported information has strong power to

predict actual chronic health conditions, and there is little room for improvement in the

                                                                                                     14
awareness of chronic conditions. In this section, we examine whether this is the case, and we

also test whether dependency between self-reports and objective measurements differs by

race/ethnicity.


        First, we proceed with the bellwether test for complete independence of self-report and

objective measurement using Chi-squared tests. If there is complete independence, self-reports

of chronic illness do not give us any information about whether individuals actually have disease.

The test statistics are shown in Table 5, and are based on the concordance tables such as Table 4.

Not surprisingly, we reject the null hypothesis of complete independence for all racial/ethnic

groups. More meaningfully, next we use an index of concordance proposed by Harding and

Pagan (2002) to test complete dependency between self-reports and objective measurements:


                          = {∑             +∑     (1 −    )(1 −     )}             (1)


where     takes value 1 if individual i is truly in the disease group ( i.e., hypertension or diabetes)

and 0 otherwise, and     is 1 if the same individual i self-reports having the disease and 0

otherwise. We use a t-test with null hypothesis      : = 1 which means that         and     are

completely dependent. Table 5 presents estimated indices , and associated t-test statistics by

race/ethnicity.


        For both hypertension and diabetes, indices of concordance by each racial/ethnic group

are significantly different from zero (hypertension: 0.86-0.88, and diabetes: 0.83-0.89), which

means that self-reports and objective measurements are not perfectly correlated. We also test

whether the dependency differs by race/ethnicity. If the index      for non-Latino whites is

significantly greater than the index for African-Americans (Latinos), the result supports the

idea that non-Latino whites are more aware of chronic conditions compared to African-

                                                                                                     15
Americans (Latinos). Let us denote          ,   , and   , as the indices for non-Latino whites,

African-Americans and Latinos, respectively. In Table 5 we find that the null hypotheses

  :     =       and   :   =     are not rejected for hypertension. For diabetes, however, the null

hypotheses for both African-Americans and Latinos are rejected against the alternatives           :   >

  and       :    >    . This finding suggests that non-Latino whites are more aware of their diabetic

conditions than African-Americans or Latinos.


        Even though the index of concordance is appropriate for testing complete dependency, it

does not provide information regarding whether the incomplete dependency comes from false-

negative or false-positive reporting, since both type of misreporting decrease concordance index.

A regression method proposed by Benitez-Silva et al. (2004) is as an alternate way to test for

complete dependency. This method has an advantage that it can distinguish the effects of false-

positives and false-negatives. This is because the procedure regresses         −    , which has a

different sign for false-positive and false-negative reporting, on a constant term and racial/ethnic

dummies. The results in Table 5 show the constant term is significantly positive, which shows

that there are more people in the false-negative reporting group than in the false-positive

reporting group for both hypertension and diabetes. The significantly positive coefficients on the

racial/ethnic dummy variables in the OLS model for diabetes support the idea that non-Latino

whites are more aware of diabetes than African Americans and Latinos. For hypertension, the

race-ethnic dummies are not statistically significance at even 10% significance level. These

results are consistent with the those related to the index .


        In sum, the analysis in this section suggests that the mismatch between self-reports and

objective measures of chronic illness in HRS is not ignorable because of the statistically

significant partial dependency between self-reports and objective measurements. In the case of

                                                                                                      16
hypertension, the dependency is not significantly different by race/ethnicity, but for diabetes, the

match is significantly higher among non-Latino whites compared to African-Americans and

Latinos. Furthermore, non-Latino whites are more aware of diabetes than African-Americans and

Latinos. In the sections that follow, we focus on racial/ethnic disparities in false-negative

reporting (e.g., unawareness) of chronic illness that will also correct for possible sample

selection problems.


4.0    Model and Methods


       As introduced in Figure 3, our definition of awareness implies a 3-step sequential model

in which HRS respondents potentially may be screened out at two steps. Figure 3 maps out this

model with sample sizes at different levels separately for hypertension and diabetes. In the first

step, HRS respondents either agree to participate in the medical examination or they refuse; if

they refuse, they are screened out at this stage since we do not have information on whether or

not they have the disease (Figure 3, Step 1: Accept medical exam). In the second step, HRS

respondents who participate either have the disease based on objective criteria or they do not

(Figure 3, Step 2: Have disease). At this stage, respondents who do not have the disease are

screened out since we cannot observe what their awareness status would have been if they had

the disease. Finally, in the third step, among those who have the disease, we can ascertain

awareness of disease status based on the respondent’s self-report of illness (Figure 3, Step 3:

Aware of disease). Respondents who self-report that they have the disease are aware, and those

who self-report not having the disease are unaware of illness.


       Essentially, we observe four mutually exclusive outcomes, labeled A, B, C and D in

Figure 3. The sets of sample individuals belonging to these outcomes are denoted by a, b, c, and


                                                                                                  17
d respectively. The outcome D includes respondents who do not agree to participate (ℎ = 0),

and the outcome B includes respondents who agreed to participate and do not have the disease

(ℎ = 1,       ℎ = 0 ). The outcome C includes respondents who agreed to participate, have the

disease, and are not aware of disease (ℎ = 1, ℎ = 1,               ℎ = 0), and finally, outcome A

includes respondents who agreed to participate, have the disease, and are aware of the disease

(ℎ = 1, ℎ = 1,         ℎ = 1). Although we observe binary outcome ℎ , the underlying latent

variable h∗ can be expressed as follows:


                          ℎ∗ =    ′     +                                                            (2)

for i=1,2, and 3. The vector x represents individual characteristics at step i, and j are individuals.

We call i=1 the “acceptance” step (i.e., agreeing to the medical examination), i=2 the “incidence

of disease” step and i=3 the “awareness” step. For i=1, ℎ equals 1 if ℎ ∗ ≥ 0 and h equals 0

otherwise. For i=2 and3, ℎ equals 1 if ℎ ∗ ≥ 0,         ℎ∗ ≥ 0       with all k<i and otherwise ℎ

equals 0. The probabilities of each outcome are written as:



Pr( ) = Pr ℎ∗ < 0 =         (− ′       )                                                                   (3)

Pr( ) = Pr ℎ∗ ≥ 0,          ℎ∗ < 0 =           ( ′    ,− ′     ,         )                                 (4)

Pr( ) = Pr ℎ∗ ≥ 0, ℎ∗ ≥ 0,             ℎ∗ < 0 =         ( ′    ,     ′       ,− ′        ,       )         (5)

Pr( ) = Pr ℎ∗ ≥ 0, ℎ∗ ≥ 0,             ℎ∗ ≥ 0 =         ( ′    ,     ′       ,   ′   ,       )             (6)


where the errors (ε , ε , ε ) are assumed to be normally distributed with mean zero and

                          1
correlation matrix     = ρ        1            . Ω2 is the 2x2 sub-matrix involving ρ21. The joint
                         ρ       ρ         1

log-likelihood function is given by:

                                                                                                            18
             L = jd ln P{ℎ∗ < 0} + jb ln P{ℎ∗ ≥ 0,                ℎ∗ < 0}

                   + jc ln P{ℎ∗ ≥ 0, ℎ∗ ≥ 0,             ℎ∗ < 0}

                   + ja ln P{ℎ∗ ≥ 0, ℎ∗ ≥ 0,             ℎ∗ ≥ 0}                                (7)

           Like many sequential response models, however, we have unequal observations across

steps. This gives rise to a multivariate probit model with partial observability. As a result, the

summation of the log-probability for each outcome is taken only over the sample cases that have

attained that final outcome, as denoted by the sets d, b, c, and a. The evaluation of the log-

likelihood function L in general involves higher-dimension multiple integrals of normal rectangle

probabilities unless  assumes a simplified structure. We use GHK Monte Carlo simulator to

simulate the probabilities and evaluate the log-likelihood function.10 Note that in expression (7),

each of the integration of the probabilities for different outcomes involves only a top-left subset

of , depending on the dimension of the integral. The advantage of the 3-step sequential probit

model is that we can maximize a joint likelihood function.


           Obviously, when  is an identity matrix, the log-likelihood function in (7) is equivalent

to that of a 3-stage step-wise sequential probit model:


                  L = (jd ln P{ℎ∗ < 0 } + jb c a ln P{ℎ∗ ≥ 0})

                    + (jb ln P{ℎ∗ < 0} + ja  c ln P{ℎ∗ ≥ 0})

                    + (jc ln P{ℎ∗ < 0} + ja ln P{ℎ∗ ≥ 0})                                     (8)

           Note that the expressions inside each pair of parentheses are independent of each other

and may be evaluated separately. However, it is reasonable to assume that common unmeasured

10
     We used the GAUSS code, available on the Internet, provided by Hajivassiliou, McFadden and Ruud (1996).

                                                                                                               19
factors exist which affect the errors in all equations. Health knowledge, for instance, may be

difficult to measure but it may affect both the 2nd and 3rd steps, by decreasing prevalence and

increasing awareness of chronic illnesses. Also, this factor also may affect the 1st step by

increasing the likelihood of participating in the medical examination. Thus, we need to maximize

joint likelihood function instead of maximizing separate likelihood functions.


       The equations also embody certain natural exclusion restrictions. Specifically, we

include three binary variables related to the HRS respondent’s behavior during the interview in

the “acceptance” step, but were not significant in the “disease” and “awareness” steps. These

three variables are the HRS interviewer’s observations about: (1) whether the respondent

appeared hostile during the interview; (2) whether the respondent was uncooperative during the

interview; and (3) whether the respondent expressed concerns about time during the interview.

The HRS respondent’s attitude during the interview is likely to influence whether the respondent

agrees to participate in the medical examination, a more invasive and time-intensive portion of

the interview. However, the respondent’s attitude during the HRS interview should not be

directly related to disease and disease awareness, after controlling for other factors.


       In addition, measures of obesity and overweight status are included only in the “has

disease” equation, and not in the “acceptance” and “awareness” steps. This exclusion is

reasonable since body weight has physiological influence on the likelihood of having disease but

does not directly affect awareness of disease and participation in the interview, after controlling

for other factors. Since obesity is a major risk factor for hypertension and diabetes, this

restriction is reasonable. The second restriction that obesity does not affect the awareness of

chronic conditions may seem less reasonable. Obesity could affect awareness of chronic

conditions if obese individuals have more opportunities to have blood pressure and/or blood

                                                                                                  20
sugar level measurement because of their bodyweight. However, obesity was insignificant in the

awareness level possibly because of other controls including self-assessed health and co-

morbidity in the specification.


           In order to establish the importance of self-selection and other unmeasured factors, we

need to test for the significance of non-diagonal terms in the correlation matrix of disturbances in

the hypertension and diabetes models. We amended an LM test statistic for a diagonal

correlation matrix ( =I) in a multivariate Probit model originally proposed by Kiefer (1982) for

our sequential model. 11


5.0        Results


           Tables 6 and 7 report the simulated maximum likelihood (SML) estimates using the GHK

simulator for the three-step sequential probit model for hypertension and diabetes respectively. 12

In both tables, Panel 1 shows estimates from the first stage (agreed to participate in the medical

exam), Panel 2 shows estimates from the second stage (has the disease, among those who agreed

to participate), and Panel 3 shows estimates from the third stage (aware of disease, among those

who agreed to participate and also have the disease). The final rows of each table show

estimates of the ρs, the estimated correlations between unmeasured factors affecting the

outcomes of interest. In both Tables 6 and 7, our primary interest is in the estimated coefficients

11
     For the 3-step sequential probit model, the LM statistic is as follows: LM=          +   +   ~   ,
                             (     ) (      )                      ( (   ) (   ))
where        =∑              (     ) (      )
                                                ,       =∑    (   ) (    ) (   ) (
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     )


      =         ,     = 2ℎ       − 1, and           =        , (i=1,…N and m=1,2 and3).
12
   The normalization that the diagonal elements of  are unity prevents us from directly using the convenient
derivatives of the multivariate normal rectangle probabilities in the GHK simulator as derived by Hajivassiliou,
McFadden and Ruud (1996) to estimate standard errors. Instead, we rely on the maximum likelihood algorithm to
generate standard errors for all parameters. We first used a sampling size of 50 for the GHK simulator to obtain
initial estimates and then fine-tuned the estimation finally with a sampling size of 500.


                                                                                                             21
on the race/ethnicity indicators and their marginal effects in Panel 3 of each table, since these

indicators provide information on the significance and direction of racial/ethnic disparities in

health awareness. In addition, the estimated coefficients on education and income in Panel 3 of

each table provide information regarding the SES gradient in health awareness.13


                In Panel 1 of Table 6, the estimates indicate that older individuals and Latinos are more

likely than others to participate in measurement of blood pressure, while those in worse self-

reported health status and smokers are less likely than others to agree to have a blood pressure

measurement. African-American race is not associated with participation. Individuals with self-

reported diabetes are less likely to participate, perhaps because they are aware of having diabetes

and regularly check their blood pressure as part of diabetes self-management. However,

individuals with self-reported elevated cholesterol are more likely to participate than others.

Notably, individuals who appeared to be non-cooperative, hostile, or concerned about the length

of the interview (based on HRS interviewer observation) were much less likely than others to

agree to have their blood pressure measured by the interviewer.




13
   The reported conditional marginal effects were calculated using the following formulas. (1st step is
unconditional.)

x is continuous:
                                                                                     [       ,         | ]                                                         [               ,       ,         | ]
     [   | ]           [         | ]           [       |           , ]                   [       | ]                 [   |           ,       , ]                           [           ,       | ]
               =                       ;                                 =                                   ;                                         =

x is binary:
     [   | ]                                                                                                 [   |       , ]             [         ,           |               ]           [         ,         |       ]
               = Pr[h = 1|x = 1] − Pr[h = 1|x = 0] ;                                                                             =           [             |           ]
                                                                                                                                                                                   −           [           |       ]

     [   |         ,       , ]         [           ,           ,         |       ]           [         ,         ,       |       ]
                                 =                                                   −
                                           [               ,        |        ]                   [           ,       |       ]


Greene and Hensher (2010, pp.83-96) present corresponding formulas for bivariate probit models with selection.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           22
       Panel 2 of Table 6 shows correlates of having hypertension, among those who

participated in hypertension measurement. African-American race is associated with a 14

percentage point higher probability of being hypertensive. However, Latinos are not statistically

different from non-Latino whites in their likelihood of being hypertensive. College education is

negatively associated with hypertension. As expected, older age, obesity, other health chronic

conditions, and worse self-reported health all are associated with having hypertension.

       Finally, in Panel 3 of Table 6, we examine awareness of hypertension among those who

have the disease and agreed to participate in hypertension measurement. Recent work (Hertz et

al., 2005; Ong et al., 2006; Howard et al., 2007) indicates that African-Americans are more

likely to be aware of their hypertension than non-Latino whites. Our results, in contrast, show no

statistically significant differences between racial/ethnic groups in awareness of hypertension

(Table 6, panel 3). Surprisingly, there is no income gradient in awareness of hypertension either.

However, we do see an awareness gradient in post-secondary education; individuals with more

than 12 years of education are more likely to be aware of their hypertension compared to less

educated individuals. In addition, chronic health conditions, worse self-reported health, and

female gender all are associated with higher likelihood of awareness of hypertension.


       Table 7 shows findings related to diabetes. Unlike hypertension, measurement of

diabetes involves a blood draw, making the first stage of the model (agreed to participate in

medical examination) potentially more important. Panel 1 in Table 7 indicates that African-

Americans are 8 percentage points less likely than non-Latino whites to participate in the blood

draw to measure diabetes. Similarly, individuals from the other race/ethnicity category are about

10 percentage points less likely to participate compared to non-Latino whites. These differences

may be due to factors such as mistrust of the US health care and research system, culture, and


                                                                                                  23
language. However, Latinos are just as likely to participate as non-Latino whites. Age,

employment, female gender, and income are all positively associated with participating, while

worse self-reported health is negatively associated with participating. As in the case of

hypertension, respondents who were hostile, uncooperative, or concerned about time during the

HRS interview were appreciably less likely to participate in a blood draw to measure diabetes.


        Panel 2 of Table 7 shows correlates of having diabetes. All minority individuals are more

likely to have diabetes than non-Latino whites. Respectively, African-Americans are 13

percentage points more likely, Latinos are 18 percentage points more likely, and individuals in

the other race/ethnicity category are 17 percentage points more likely to have diabetes compared

to non-Latino whites. As expected, age, other chronic illnesses, worse self-reported health, and

obesity are positively associated with diabetes. Higher income is associated with lower

likelihood of having diabetes.


        Finally, in Panel 3 of Table 7, we examine awareness of diabetes. African-Americans

and Latinos are less likely than non-Latino whites to be aware of having diabetes. We find no

education or income gradient in awareness of diabetes. Surprisingly, males are more likely than

females, and employed individuals are less likely than non-employed individuals to be aware of

having diabetes. As expected, individuals who self-report other chronic health conditions and

worse overall health are more likely to be aware of having diabetes.


        The estimated correlations of errors are shown in the bottom rows in Tables 6 and 7. The

results indicate that for hypertension, there is a large, statistically significant, negative correlation

between the error terms of the 2nd and 3rd equations (has the disease, aware of the disease). The

negative correlation suggests that there are unmeasured factors which decrease the likelihood of


                                                                                                      24
having the disease and increase awareness of the disease if one has it. The same is true for

diabetes.


       For hypertension, there are no statistically significant correlations between the error terms

in the first and second equations, and between the error terms in the first and third equations. In

the case of diabetes, however, there is a large negative correlation between the error terms in the

first and second equations. This finding suggests the existence of unmeasured factors that

increase the likelihood of participating in the medical exam (which involves a blood draw in the

case of diabetes), and decrease the likelihood of having the disease. The LM statistics show that

we can reject null hypothesis that the errors across are uncorrelated at the 1% significance level

for both hypertension (LM=168) and diabetes (LM=707).


       Next, we examine the impact, if any, of the selection problem on estimates of

racial/ethnic disparities in the awareness of hypertension and diabetes. In Table 8 we have

consolidated relevant results for Ω ≠I from Tables 6 and 7, and report comparable estimates that

we obtained when assumption Ω=I was imposed on the estimation inappropriately. We find that

the estimation results under the zero correlation assumption (Ω=I) and the non-zero correlation

assumption (Ω ≠I) are not significantly different from each other in the 1st and 2nd steps of both

the hypertension and the diabetes models. This result is consistent with the estimated correlation

matrix, which shows that there is zero correlation between the 1st and 2nd steps and the 1st and 3rd

steps in the diabetes and hypertension models.


       In the case of hypertension, Latinos are more likely to accept the medical exam than non-

Latino whites, and African-Americans and other minorities are not significantly different from

non-Latino whites in their acceptance of the medical exam, regardless of whether we assume


                                                                                                     25
Ω=I or Ω ≠I. In either model, African-Americans are more likely to have hypertension

compared to non-Latino whites, but Latinos and other minorities are not statistically different

from non-Latino whites in disease prevalence. Similarly, assumptions about Ω do not affect

estimation of racial/ethnic differences in the acceptance of the medical examination for diabetes,

or the likelihood of having diabetes. In both models, African-Americans are less likely than non-

Latino whites to accept the medical exam, and all minorities are more likely than non-Latino

whites to have diabetes.


       However, the findings in Table 8 show that accounting for selection does appear to affect

estimates of racial/ethnic disparities in awareness of chronic diseases. Under the assumption, Ω ≠

I, we find no differences across racial/ethnic groups in the awareness of hypertension, but we

find that African-Americans and Latinos are less likely to be aware of having diabetes than non-

Latino whites. If we had assumed that Ω=I, however, the findings in Table 8 would instead

suggest, as prior researchers have reported, African-Americans are significantly more aware of

hypertension than non-Latino whites. This assumption of no correlation between the error terms

of the equations also leads to the finding that there are no racial/ethnic differences in awareness

of diabetes. In sum, the findings in Table 8 indicate that if we ignore the correlation between

unmeasured determinants of accepting the medical exam, having the disease, and being aware of

the disease, we tend to underestimate racial/ethnic disparities in awareness of hypertension and

diabetes.


6.0    An alternative definition of awareness


       These estimates of disease awareness are based on a definition of awareness that has been

used extensively in prior work. In terms of Table 4, this definition of awareness is simply the


                                                                                                   26
sensitivity of self-reports, a/(a+c), that is the proportion of individuals who self-report illness in a

group that consists of individuals who meet objective criteria for that illness. The definition

stems from an epidemiological framework, in which objective measurement of disease would be

considered a clinical “gold standard.” From a clinician’s perspective, it makes sense to consider

objective measurement to be the first step. Given that a clinician has determined that a person

has the illness and is subsequently found to be ignorant of the illness, this suggests that the

patient needs intervention since “unaware” patients cannot effectively manage their conditions.

Note that this measure completely ignores the specificity of self reports, i.e., given that the

medical examination has determined that the subject does not have the disease, the probability

that the self report concords with the test result.


        An alternative definition of awareness may be more appropriate in certain cases, and can

help public health officials to target high risk populations for early testing. In particular, an

alternate definition of awareness could be the following: conditional on self-reporting not having

the disease, a respondent, based on objective measurement, actually does not have the disease,

i.e., b2/(b2+c) in Table 4. The proportion of unaware using this definition is c/(b2+c). These two

alternative measures of unawareness will give similar estimates if a and b2 are similar in

magnitude. On the other hand, in cases where b2 is considerably bigger (smaller) than a, this

alternative measure will yield a smaller (bigger) incidence of unawareness. The model structure

underlying this alternate definition of (un)awareness is mapped out in Figure 4, and the incidence

of unawareness for different race/ethnic groups based on our sample are reported in Table 9.


        As we expect, the incidence of unawareness is uniformly higher for hypertension and

lower for diabetes for all groups because the prevalence rate is higher for hypertension than for

diabetes. For costly but relatively rare chronic diseases, this alternative measure inappropriately

                                                                                                     27
dilutes the unaware percentage by bringing in the much larger healthy group in the denominator.

However, what is most remarkable in Table 9 is that with the alternative definition, the

percentage unaware is relatively much higher for the minorities compared to non-Latino whites.

For instance, the unaware percentage is only 11 percent for non-Latino whites but over 20

percent for African-Americans and Latinos. For hypertension, even though for Latinos it makes

no difference, the rate is 23 percent for non-Latino whites but 34 percent for African-Americans.


       The intuition behind this result can be derived from the way we slice the data in two

alternative sequential patterns as depicted in Figures 3 and 4. Note that prevalence includes both

objectively measured disease and/or medication use. In Figure 3, at step 3, a large portion of the

aware group (viz. Group A) includes people who are under treatment and take medication to

control their illness. By contrast, at step 3 of Figure 4, neither of the two groups is on medication.

These are the patients who reported in the survey that they were never told by a doctor of the

existence of either hypertension or blood pressure, yet the medical examination determined that a

portion of them in fact had the disease. Thus, in the alternative definition of awareness, the

people who are on medication are not included. However, in our sample we found (cf. Table 2)

that a disproportionate number of African-Americans are on hypertension medication (65%

African-Americans, 47% Latinos, and 48% non-Latino whites). With respect to diabetes patients,

while only 14% non-Latino whites are on medication, the percentages are 25% for African-

Americans and 27% for Latinos. Thus, even though a larger proportion of African-Americans are

treated with hypertension medication than non-Latino whites, there are even larger number of

undiagnosed African-American patients who are unaware of their disease, presumably because

they do not come in contact with the medical establishment.




                                                                                                   28
       Regarding diabetes, we find that compared to non-Latino whites, a much larger

percentage of both African-Americans and Latinos are on medication, but Table 9 reveals that

even then the incidence of unawareness among the remaining minorities is almost double that of

non-Latino whites. The fact that a higher percentage of minorities are on medication is simply

reflective of the reality that these minorities are more extensively and severely impaired by the

chronic diseases, possibly due to initial period unawareness, lack of early treatment, and the

resultant progression to the latter stages of the disease. The alternative definition of unawareness

leads us to the important realization that even though using the conventional definition of

awareness, studies routinely report that African Americans are more aware about hypertension

than non-Latino whites, we find this result is misleading about the true level of awareness in the

untreated African American population.


       From an alternate perspective, it may be more useful to employ a definition of awareness

which begins with individuals who self-report not having the illness, rather than starting with a

group that objectively meets criteria for illness. For example, a public health authority may not

have objective measures of illness for a large population. For diabetes, it is well known that a

mass unselective population based screening is not cost effective, and that it should be limited to

high risk groups, Bishop et al. (1998). Thus, the authority may use a survey to identify

individuals who report not having an illness, and then use further inference to determine whether

there are individuals in this group who actually have the illness but are unaware of it.


        However, these reported differences in unawareness are subject to selection biases. As

we have emphasized before, there may be unmeasured factors that are correlated with

race/ethnicity and that determine participation, self-reporting not having the illness, and actually

having the illness. Thus, in order to establish statistically if minorities are indeed less aware, we

                                                                                                    29
re-estimated the sequential probit model based on this alternative structure. The maximum

likelihood estimates for hypertension and diabetes are reported in Tables 10 and 11 respectively.

The estimates of the first two equations are very similar to those of equations 1 and 3 of the main

sequential model. Now the correlation in errors between the participation and awareness

equations for hypertension and between medical examination and self reports are highly

significant. Among those who participate in the survey and self-report not having hypertension,

African-Americans are more likely to actually have the disease compared to non-Latino whites.


       In the case of diabetes, all racial/ethnic minority groups are more likely to have the illness

compared to non-Latino whites, conditional on self-reporting not having the illness and agreeing

to participate in the medical examination. What is noteworthy is that the African American

dummy in the awareness equation for hypertension, and all minority dummies in the awareness

equation for diabetes are statistically significant, and suggests that these minorities are more

unaware of their chronic illnesses compared to non-Latino whites. The marginal effects are

substantial, around 10%. These results are consistent with Table 9 and indicate that despite a

higher proportion of minorities are treated for hypertension and diabetes, there are even higher

proportion minorities who are unaware of their chronic conditions, and needs to be identified and

medically treated.


7.0     Conclusions


       In this paper, we examine racial/ethnic disparities in the awareness of hypertension and

diabetes among older individuals in the US taking advantage of the biomarker data from the

2006 round of HRS that included blood pressure measurement and a blood draw for diabetes. We

characterize awareness in the context of a 3-step sequential probit model involving participation


                                                                                                   30
in the collection of biomarker data, having a chronic disease and finally being aware of it. The

rich socio-economic data available in the core part of the HRS survey together with the results

from an almost simultaneous medical examination help us to adjust for a range of individual-

level factors including disease severity that may be correlated with both race/ethnicity and

awareness. We account for the possibility that factors exist that affect both the likelihood of

having a chronic disease and the likelihood of being aware of the illness if it exists, and the

censoring resulting from respondents refusing to participate in the collection of health

examination and biomarker data.


       This paper has two broad messages for public health policy: First, based on a

conventional definition of awareness, i.e., conditional on having the disease as determined by

medical examination, respondent self-reports that s/he does indeed have the illness, we find that

awareness is higher among African-Americans compared to non-Latino whites, which is

consistent with previous studies. For diabetes, our raw counts indicate small differences in

awareness between racial and ethnic groups, which are also consistent with previous studies. We

supplement these estimates with two new tests of concordance and dependence between self

report and medical examination in order to establish the statistical significance of the sample

estimates.


       We, however, show that accounting for multiple selections affect estimates of

racial/ethnic disparities in awareness of chronic diseases. Allowing for a non-diagonal

correlation matrix of errors in the 3-equation sequential probit model, we find no differences

across racial/ethnic groups in the awareness of hypertension, but that African-Americans and

Latinos are less likely to be aware of having diabetes than non-Latino whites. Imposing the

assumption that the error correlation matrix is diagonal, we obtain the result that African-

                                                                                                   31
Americans are significantly more aware of hypertension than non-Latino whites and that there

are no racial/ethnic differences in awareness of diabetes, as prior researchers have reported. In

sum, our analysis clearly indicates that if we ignore the correlation between unmeasured

determinants of accepting the medical exam, having the disease, and being aware of the disease,

we tend to underestimate racial/ethnic disparities in awareness of hypertension and diabetes.


       Second, we explore an alternative definition of awareness under which the unaware

respondents are the ones who report in the survey that they were never told by a doctor of the

existence of a disease, yet the medical examination determined that they in fact have it.

Interestingly, we find that with this alternative definition, the percentage unaware is relatively

much higher for all minorities compared to non-Latino whites. Under this alternative definition,

people who are on medication are logically vetted out while distinguishing between aware and

unaware. In our sample, however, a disproportionate number of African-Americans and Latinos

are on medication for hypertension and diabetes. Thus, even though a larger proportion of

minorities are treated for hypertension and diabetes than non-Latino whites, there are even a

larger number of undiagnosed African-American and Latino patients who are unaware of their

chronic diseases. The fact that a higher percentage of minorities are on medication simply

reflects the reality that these minorities are more extensively and severely impaired. The

simulated maximum likelihood estimates of the alternative sequential probit model allowing for

selection suggest that the African-Americans are almost 10% less likely to be as aware as non-

Latino whites for hypertension, and that all minorities are significantly less aware for diabetes by

a similar magnitude. Presumably these minorities do not come in contact with the medical

establishment such that they can be aware of their existing medical conditions.




                                                                                                     32
       We conclude by noting that even though a higher proportion of minorities are treated for

hypertension and diabetes, among those who self-report not having disease, minorities are more

likely than non-Latino whites to be unaware of their chronic conditions. Under the conventional

definition of awareness, which includes people being treated by medication, the relatively large

number of treated minorities gives the impression that they as a group are more aware than non-

Latino whites. However, when examining the untreated, we find that significant racial/ethnic

disparities persist in the awareness of hypertension and diabetes.




                                                                                               33
References


Achter, Paul, Roxanne Parrott, and Kami Silk. 2005. “African Americans’ opinions about

human-genetics research.” Politics and the Life Sciences, 23(1): 60-66.


Adler, Nancy E., and Judith Stewart. 2010. “Health disparities across the lifespan: Meaning,

methods, and mechanisms.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1186: 5-23.


Aizer, Anna, and Laura Stroud. 2010. “Education, knowledge and the evolution of disparities in

health.” NBER Working Paper No.15840.


Alegria, Margarita, Glorisa Canino, Ruth Ríos, Mildred Vera, José Calderón, Dana Rusch, and

Alexander N. Ortega. 2002. “Inequalities in use of specialty mental health services among

Latinos, African Americans, and non-Latino whites.” Psychiatric Services, 53(12): 1547-1555.


Angell, Sonia Y., Renu K. Garg, R. Charon Gwynn, Lori Bash, Lorna E. Thorpe, and Thomas R.

Frieden. 2008. “Prevalence, awareness, treatment, and predictors of control of hypertension in

New York City.” Circulation, Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes, 1: 46-53.


Bahr, Peter R. 2007. “Race and nutrition: an investigation of Black-White differences in health-

repeated nutritional behaviours.” Sociology of Health & Illness, 29(6): 831-856.


Balsa, Ana I., and Thomas G. McGuire. 2003. “Prejudice, clinical uncertainty and stereotyping

as sources of health disparities.” Journal of Health Economics, 22: 89-116.


Balsa, Ana I., Thomas G. McGuire, and Lisa S. Meredith. 2005. “Testing for statistical

discrimination in health care.” Health Services Research, 40(1): 227-252.




                                                                                                 34
Benítez-Silva, Hugo, Moshe Buchinsky, Hiu Man Chan, Sofia Cheidvasser, and John Rust. 2004.

“How large is the bias in self-reported disability?” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19: 649-670.


Bishop, Donald B., Bruce R. Zimmerman, and Jon S. Roesler. 1998. “Chapter 14. Diabetes.” In

Chronic Disease Epidemiology and Control, ed. Ross C. Brownson, Patrick L. Remington, and

James R. Davis, 421-464. 2nd ed. Washington, DC.: American Public Health Association.


Buell, Catherine, Duclie Kermah, and Mayer B. Davidson. 2007. “Utility of A1C for diabetes

screening in the 1999-2004 NHANES Population.” Diabetes Care, 30 (9): 2233-2235.


Caillier, James G. 2006. “Race, gender, and cardiovascular disease: Do disparities exist at

hospitals that serve majority black populations when patients present with ischemic heart disease

and myocardial infarction?” Journal of Cultural Diversity, 13(4): 202-207.


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2003. “Prevalence of diabetes and impaired fasting

glucose in adults-United States, 1999-2000.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 52

(September (35)), 833-837.


Chandra, Amitabh, and Jonathan Skinner. 2003. “Geography and racial health disparities.”

NBER Working Paper No.9513.


Chobanian, Aram V., George L. Bakris, Henry R. Black, William C. Cushman, Lee A. Green,

Joseph L. Izzo, Jr., Daniel W. Jones, Barry J. Materson, Suzanne Oparil, Jackson T. Wright, Jr.,

Edward J. Roccella, and the National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating

Committee. 2003. “The seventh report of the joint national committee on prevention, detection,

evaluation, and treatment of high blood pressure (JNC 7)” Hypertension, 42: 1206-1252.




                                                                                               35
Cutler, David M., and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2010. “Understanding differences in health

behaviors by education.” Journal of Health Economics, 29: 1-28.


Danaei, Goodarz, Ari B. Friedman, Shefali Oza, Christopher JL. Murray, and Majid Ezzati. 2009.

“Diabetes prevalence and diagnosis in US states: analysis of health surveys.” Population Health

Metrics, 7(16).


Ginde, Adit A., Enrico Cagliero, David M. Nathan, and Carlos A. Camarga, Jr. 2008. “Value of

risk stratification to increase the predictive validity of HbA1C in screening for undiagnosed

diabetes in the US population.” Journal of General Internal Medicine, 23(9): 1346-1353.


Goldman, Dana P., and Darius N. Lakdawalla. 2005. “A theory of health disparities and medical

technology.” Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(1). Article 8.


Gray, Bradford H., Mark Schlesinger, Shannon M. Siegfried, and Emily Horowitz. 2009. “Racial

and ethnic disparities in the use of high-volume hospitals.” Inquiry, 46: 322-338.


Greene, William H., and David A. Hensher. 2010. Modeling ordered choices: A primer.

Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.


Hajivassiliou,Vassilis, Daniel McFadden, and Paul Ruud. 1996. “Simulation of multivariate
normal rectangle probabilities and their derivatives theoretical and computational results.”
Journal of Econometrics, 72(1-2): 85-134.


Halbert, Chanita H., Benita Weathers, Ernestine Delmoor, Brandon Mahler, James Coyne,

Hayley S. Thompson, Thomas T. Have, David Vaughn, S. Bruce Malkowicz, and David Lee.

2009. “Racial differences in medical mistrust among men diagnosed with prostate cancer.”

Cancer, June: 2553-2561.


                                                                                                36
Harding, Don, and Adrian Pagan. 2002. “Dissecting the cycle: a methodological investigation.”

Journal of Monetary Economics, 49: 365-381.


Health and Retirement Study, 2006 Biomarker data. Produced and distributed by the University

of Michigan with funding from the National Institute on Aging (grant number NIA

U01AG009740). Ann Arbor, MI, (2006).


Hertz, Robin P., Alan N. Unger, Jeffrey A. Cornell, and Elijah Saunders. 2005. “Racial

disparities in hypertension prevalence, awareness, and management.” Archives of Internal

Medicine, 165: 2098-2104.


Howard, George, Ron Prineas, Claudia Moy, Mary Cushman, Martha Kellum, Ella Temple,

Andra Graham, and Virginia Howard. 2006. “Racial and geographic differences in awareness,

treatment, and control of hypertension: The REasons for Geographic and racial differences in

stroke study.” Stroke, 37(5): 1171-1178.


Johnston, David W., Carol Propper, and Michael A. Shields. 2009. “Comparing subjective and

objective measures of health: Evidence from hypertension for the income/health gradient.”

Journal of Health Economics, 28: 540-552.


Kiefer, Nicholas M. 1982. “Testing for dependence in multivariate probit models.” Biometrika,

69 (1): 161-166.


LaVeist, Thomas A., Kim J. Nickerson, and Janice V. Bowie. 2000. “Attitudes about racism,

medical mistrust, and satisfaction with care among African American and White cardiac

patients.” Medical Care Research and Review, 57 Suppl1: 146-161.




                                                                                                37
LêCook, Benjamin, Thomas G. McGuire, Kari Lock, and Alan M. Zaslavsky. 2010. “Comparing

methods of racial and ethnic disparities measurement across different settings of mental health

care.” Health Services Research, 45(3): 825-847.


Meara, Ellen. 2001. “Why is health related to socioeconomic status? The case of pregnancy and

low birth weight.” NBER Working Paper No.8231.


Morenoff, Jeffrey D., James S. House, Ben B. Hansen, David R. Williams, George A. Kaplan,

and Haslyn E. Hunte. 2007. “Understanding social disparities in hypertension prevalence,

awareness, treatment, and control: The role of neighborhood context.” Social Science &

Medicine 65: 1853-1866.


National Healthcare Disparities Report, 2003. Full Report. Agency for Healthcare Research and

Quality, Rockville, MD. http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/nhdr03/fullreport/


Ong, Kwok Leung, Bernard M.Y. Cheung, Yu Bun Man, Chu Pak Lau, and Karen S.L. Lam.

2007. “Prevalence, awareness, treatment and control of hypertension among United States adults

1999-2004.” Hypertension, 49: 69-75. http://hyper.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/49/1/69.


Pierce, Mary B., Paola Zaninotto, Nicholas Steel, and Jennifer Mindell. 2009. “Undiagnosed

diabetes - data from the English longitudinal study of ageing.” Diabetic Medicine, 26: 679-685.


Primatesta, Paola, and Neil R. Poulter. 2006. “Improvement in hypertension management in

England: results from the Health Survey for England 2003.” Journal of Hypertension, 24(6):

1187-1192.




                                                                                                  38
Figure 1: Prevalence of hypertension by race/ethnicity and age


                                            100
                                            90
  Percentage with hypertension




                                            80
                                            70
                                            60
                                            50
                                                                                                                      non-Latino white
                                            40                                                                        African-American
                                            30                                                                        Latino
                                            20
                                            10
                                              -
                                                      Under   50-54   55-59   60-64   65-69   70-74   75-79   80-84
                                                       50
                                                                                  Age

Figure 2: Prevalence of diabetes by race/ethnicity and age

                                            100

                                             90

                                             80
                 Percentage with diabetes




                                             70

                                             60

                                             50
                                                                                                                      non-Latino white
                                             40
                                                                                                                      African-American
                                             30                                                                       Latino
                                             20

                                             10

                                                  -
                                                      Under 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 75-79 80-84
                                                       50
                                                                                Age




                                                                                                                                         39
Figure 3: Flow chart depicting awareness of chronic diseases, 2006 HRS



                                                  Medical
                                               Eligible forExamination Eligible
                                                             Medical Examination
                                                            (N=8,379)
                                                            (N=8,051)
                       Step 1: Participation

                                     Group E                                 Group D
                              Agreed to Participate                   Refused to Participate
                           Hypertension: 6,473 (80.4%)              Hypertension: 1,578 (19.6%)
                            Diabetes: 6,285 (78.1%)                  Diabetes: 1,766 (21.9%)

Step 2: Medical Examination

                                                                   Group B
                     Has Disease
              Hypertension: 4,121 (63.7%)                  B: Does not have Disease
               Diabetes: 1,787 (28.4%)                    Hypertension: 2,352 (36.3%)
                                                           Diabetes: 4,498 (71.6%)

 Step 3: Self report

             Group A                                    Group C
       Aware of Disease                          Unaware of Disease
   Hypertension: 3,436 (83.4%)                 Hypertension: 685 (16.6%)
    Diabetes: 1,139 (63.8%)                     Diabetes: 648 (38.2%)




                                                                                                  40
Figure 4: Flow chart for an alternative model of chronic disease awareness, 2006 HRS



                                            Medicalfor
                                           Eligible Examination  Eligible
                                                        Medical Examination
                                                       (N=8,379)
                                                     (N=8,051)
                   Step 1: Participation

                          Agreed to Participate                  Refused to Participate
                       Hypertension: 6,473 (80.4%)             Hypertension: 1,578 (19.6%)
                        Diabetes: 6,285 (78.1%)                 Diabetes: 1,766 (21.9%)

      Step 2: Self-report

            Does not self-report Disease                  Self-report Disease
            Hypertension: 2,865 (44.3%)               Hypertension: 3,608 (55.7%)
             Diabetes: 5,027 (80.0%)                   Diabetes: 1,258 (20.0%)

 Step 3: Medical
         Examination
      Does not have Disease                  Unaware of Disease
    Hypertension: 2,180 (76.1%)            Hypertension: 685 (23.9%)
     Diabetes: 4,379 (87.1%)                Diabetes: 648 (12.9%)




                                                                                             41
Table 1: Sample Characteristics (N = 8,051)

                                        (1)             Hypertension                             Diabetes
                                       Total       (2)       (3)               (4)      (5)         (6)       (7)
                                                  Agreed Refused             t-test   Agreed      Refused    t-test
Non-Latino white                        75.7        76.3       73.3           -2.48       77.5        69.4    -7.00
African-American                        13.8        13.0       17.1            4.29       12.2        19.5     7.98
Latino                                   8.2          8.5       7.0           -1.94        8.2         7.9    -0.43
Other race                               2.3          2.3       2.6            0.77        2.1         3.1     2.45
Male                                    41.2        41.4       40.3           -0.83       40.7        43.1     1.80
Average Age                            67.38       67.51     66.87            -2.11     67.12        68.32     4.12
High school dropout                     22.0        21.2       25.2            3.48       21.1        25.3     3.77
High school graduate                    33.8        33.8       33.5           -0.23       34.1        32.7    -1.11
Some college                            22.1        22.4       20.9           -1.32       22.5        21.1    -1.24
College graduate or more                22.1        22.5       20.3           -1.89       22.4        21.0    -1.26
Married                                 64.2        65.6       58.5           -5.30       65.6        59.1    -5.07
Currently Employed                      34.6        34.8       34.1           -0.51       36.1        29.6    -5.09
Household Income $                    69,922      72,123    60,894            -1.79    72,913      59,276     -2.27
Self-report hypertension                56.4        55.7       58.9            2.25       55.8        58.5     2.05
Self-report diabetes                    19.9        19.5       21.7            1.98       20.0        19.4    -0.55
Use cholesterol medication              39.0        39.6       36.6           -2.16       38.7        40.1     1.06
SAH=Excellent                           11.5        12.1        8.9           -3.64       12.2         9.1    -3.63
SAH=Very Good                           30.3        31.3       25.9           -4.26       31.3        26.4    -3.96
SAH=Good                                30.7        30.7       30.8            0.07       30.8        30.4    -0.39
SAH=Fair                                20.4        19.7       23.4            3.30       19.2        24.9     5.21
SAH=Poor                                 7.1          6.1      11.0            6.86        6.4         9.3     4.12
Overweight                              33.5        34.4       29.5           -3.75       33.7        32.6    -0.85
Obese                                   28.2        26.8       33.7            5.48       28.4        27.1    -1.09
No BMI information                      11.0        10.6       12.6            2.35       10.4        13.0     3.07
Private insurance only                  29.9        29.9       30.0            0.08       30.5        27.9    -2.05
Medicare only                           20.5        20.6       20.2           -0.36       19.6        23.7     3.76
Medicare & Private                      32.3        32.9       29.7           -2.43       32.9        30.2    -2.14
Other insurance                         16.1        15.4       19.0            3.53       15.9        16.7     0.80
Northeast                               15.6        15.9       14.4           -1.44       14.8        18.6     3.94
Midwest                                 24.6        24.2       26.2            1.66       25.2        22.5    -2.30
South                                   38.5        38.8       37.4            0.72       38.4        38.9    -1.55
West                                    21.3        21.1       21.9           -1.00       21.6        19.9     0.40
Current smoker                          14.0        11.6       24.3            13.2       13.6        14.7     0.92
Hostile                                  6.6          5.0      13.2            11.9        4.9        12.5    11.32
Uncooperative                            3.1          1.7       9.2            15.6        1.5         9.1    16.56
Concerned about time                    14.1        12.7       19.8             7.3       12.5        19.7     7.69
Note: Entries show mean percentages (except for household income and age).

                                                                                                               42
Table 2: Prevalence, awareness and treatment of chronic diseases by race (%)

                                                                     Non-
                                                                                    African-                              Other
                                                    Total            Latino                             Latino
                                                                                    American                              Race
                                                                     white
                       “Agreed to Participate” Sample (N=6,473)
                        Self-Reported 55.7 [52.4]     53.4    71.8[10.0] 54.4 [0.5] 49.7[-0.9]
                        Hypertension     (0.0062)   (0.0071)    (0.0156)  (0.0213)    (0.0414)
                          Objective    31.9 [30.8]    30.5    40.2 [5.6] 33.6 [1.5] 26.5[-1.0]
                        Hypertension     (0.0058)   (0.0066)    (0.0169)  (0.0202)    (0.0365)
                       Medication for 50.2 [46.7]     48.1    65.4 [9.4] 46.5[-0.7] 46.3[-0.4]
Hypertension            Hypertension     (0.0062)   (0.0071)    (0.0164)  (0.0213)    (0.0413)
                         Objective or  63.7 [60.8]    61.6    78.4 [9.5] 61.1[-0.2] 57.8[-0.9]
                         Medication      (0.0060)   (0.0069)    (0.0142)  (0.0208)    (0.0409)
                       “Has disease” (Objective measurement or Medication) Sample (N=4,121)
                                       83.4 [81.7]    82.5    87.8 [3.4] 83.3 [0.4] 82.3[-0.0]
                         Awareness
                                         (0.0058)   (0.0069)    (0.0128)  (0.0204)    (0.0416)
                                       78.8 [76.9]    78.0    83.4 [3.1] 76.1 [-0.8] 80.0 [0.4]
                         Medication
                                         (0.0064)   (0.0075)    (0.0145)  (0.0233)    (0.0436)
                       “Agreed to Participate” Sample (N=6,285)
                        Self-Reported 20.0 [18.2]     17.4    28.8 [9.8] 30.5 [8.1] 24.8[1.9]
                          Diabetes       (0.0050)   (0.0054)    (0.0164)  (0.0202)    (0.0376)
                          Objective    24.3 [22.3]    20.4    37.3 [7.6] 39.6 [9.6] 32.3[2.4]
                        measurement      (0.0054)   (0.0058)    (0.0175)  (0.0215)    (0.0407)
                       Medication for 16.5 [15.0]     13.9    25.1[10.6] 27.4 [9.0] 21.1[2.2]
   Diabetes               Diabetes       (0.0047)   (0.0050)    (0.0157)  (0.0204)    (0.0355)
                         Objective or  28.4 [26.0]    24.4    42.7[10.7] 43.6 [9.6] 36.8[3.3]
                         Medication      (0.0057)   (0.0061)    (0.0179)  (0.0218)    (0.0420)
                       “Has disease” (Objective measurement or Medication) Sample (N=1,787)
                                                63.7 [63.0]          62.9           64.1 [0.4]        67.3 [1.2]       65.3[0.3]
                          Awareness
                                                 (0.0114)          (0.0140)          (0.0266)          (0.0313)         (0.0687)
                                                58.2 [57.8]          57.2           58.9 [0.6]        62.8 [1.6]       57.1[-0.0]
                          Medication
                                                 (0.0117)          (0.0144)          (0.0273)          (0.0322)         (0.0714)
Notes: For total sample in the first column, weighted percentages are in square brackets. In the 3rd, 4th and 5th column, t-test
statistics are in square brackets. Baseline for the t-statistics is non-Latino white group. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                   43
Table 3: Comparison of prevalence and awareness rates from HRS and NHANES

                                                      2006 HRS*                    NHANES**
                        Has Disease                      60.8                        66.3
Hypertension
                      Aware of Disease                   81.7                        81.0
                      Has Disease***                     26.0                        23.6
   Diabetes
                      Aware of Disease                   63.0                        71.6
*We use Physical Measure weight for Hypertension and Biomarker weight for Diabetes which are provided by 2006 HRS tracker
file.

**For hypertension, estimates come from Ong et al. (2007) which used 2003-2004 NHANES. For diabetes, Danaei et al. (2009)
provide these estimates based on 2003-2006 NHANES. Both these studies use individuals over 60 years old. Thus, the survey
window and the age distribution in HRS and NHANES do not exactly match.

***For diabetes, the definition of “has disease” is self-reported usage of insulin or other medication for controlling diabetes or
A1C>6% in the 2006 HRS. Danaei et al. (2009), however, use an alternative definition that includes self-reported diagnosed
diabetes or FPG(Fasting Plasma Glucose level)>126mg/dL.




Table 4: Concordance Table for “Has Disease” and “Self-Reported Disease”

                                                   Medical Examination - Disease
                                                      1: yes           0: no
   Self-Reported                 1: yes                  a               b1
      Disease                    0: no                   c               b2
Note: The sum of b1 and b2 equals b in the text.




                                                                                                                                     44
Table 5: Dependency tests between “has disease” and “self-reported disease” by
race/ethnicity

                                                                                                           OLS Regression
                                                                    Index of Concordance
                                                                                                               Test
                                 Sample        χ2 test
                                                                         t-statistics       t-statistics
                                  Size          (χ )
                                                                             : =1             : =           Coeff.          z
                                                                             : ≠1             : >
               Non-Latino                                  0.8663
                                    4,939      2,700                      -27.60**          Reference         Reference
                 white                                    (0.0042)
                African                                    0.8760                                           -0.0159
                                      839       390                       -10.89**            -0.7647                   -1.20
               American                                   (0.0114)                                         (0.0133)
                                                           0.8631                                           -0.0151
                  Latino              548       290                        -9.31**             0.2106                   -0.94
                                                          (0.0147)                                         (0.0160)
 Hyper-
                                                                                                            -0.0010
 tension       Other Race             147         -            -                -                  -                    -0.03
                                                                                                           (0.0297)
                                                                                                           0.0826**
                Constant                  -       -            -                -                  -                    16.35
                                                                                                           (0.0050)
                                                           0.8676
                   Total            6,473      3,500                      -31.43**                 -            6,473
                                                          (0.0042)
               R-Squared                  -       -           -                 -                  -           0.0477
               Non-Latino                                  0.8889
                                    4,870      2,300                      -24.66**          Reference         Reference
                 white                                    (0.0045)
                African-                                   0.8324                                          0.0691**
                                      801       346                       -12.39**           4.4918**                      5.26
               American                                   (0.0135)                                         (0.0131)
                                                           0.8456                                          0.0617**
                  Latino              518       255                        -9.72**           2.9393**                      3.95
                                                          (0.0159)                                         (0.0156)
Diabetes                                                                                                    0.0507
               Other Race             196         -            -                -                  -                       1.71
                                                                                                           (0.0297)
                                                                                                           0.0696**
                Constant                  -       -            -                -                  -                    14.37
                                                                                                           (0.0048)
                                                           0.8780
                   Total            6,285      3,000                      -29.55**                 -            6,285
                                                          (0.0041)
               R-Squared                  -       -           -                 -                  -           0.0641
Notes: * P<0.05, ** P<0.01.   is concordance index of minorities. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                      45
Table 6: Effect of socio-demographic factors and selected risk factors on participation,
prevalence, and awareness of hypertension

                              Panel 1 (N=8,051)                  Panel 2 (N=6,473)                 Panel 3 (N=4,121)
                            Agreed to Participate                   Has Disease                    Aware of Disease
     African-               -0.0545      [-0.0148]              0.4122** [0.1428]                 0.1377      [0.0435]
     American               (0.0488)                            (0.0585)                         (0.0944)
      Latino                 0.1647**     [0.0413]              -0.0339    [-0.0158]              0.0085      [0.0020]
                            (0.0679)                            (0.0700)                         (0.1026)
    Other Race               -0.0785     [-0.0217]              -0.0262    [-0.0082]            -0.0764      [-0.0204]
                            (0.1090)                            (0.1106)                         (0.1631)
                              0.0272      [0.0072]               0.0371     [0.0132]            -0.3387** [-0.0768]
        Male
                            (0.0351)                            (0.0361)                         (0.0525)
        Age                   0.3850*    [0.0998]               0.8141** [0.0828]                 0.3763      [0.1334]
                            (0.1728)                            (0.2031)                       (0.3201)
   Age squared              -0.3886*     [-0.1008]             -0.5622** [-0.0858]              -0.4362      [-0.1351]
                             (0.1675)                           (0.1978)                       (0.3002)
  Some college                0.0494     [0.0130]              -0.0826     [-0.0319]              0.1383*     [0.0268]
                            (0.0535)                          (0.0559)                         (0.0797)
College or more              -0.0315     [-0.0085]             -0.2054** [-0.0771]                0.1502*     [0.0228]
                            (0.0563)                          (0.0595)                         (0.0829)
 Self-reported              -0.0805*     [-0.0220]              0.2817** [0.1021]                0.2661** [0.0649]
   diabetes                  (0.0438)                         (0.0489)                         (0.0766)
Uses cholesterol              0.0624*    [0.0166]               0.4032** [0.1452]                0.5278** [0.1378]
  medication                (0.0365)                          (0.0374)                         (0.0797)
SAH=Very Good                -0.0541     [-0.0146]              0.2285** [0.0843]                0.2282*      [0.0573]
                            (0.0602)                          (0.0567)                         (0.0998)
   SAH=Good                 -0.1371*     [-0.0375]              0.2495** [0.0933]                0.3909** [0.0896]
                            (0.0608)                          (0.0590)                         (0.1089)
    SAH=Fair                -0.2060** [-0.0580]                 0.2617** [0.0977]                0.5198** [0.1047]
                            (0.0668)                          (0.0684)                         (0.1206)
    SAH=Poor                -0.4051** [-0.1241]                 0.3122** [0.1165]                0.5809** [0.0990]
                            (0.0821)                          (0.0979)                         (0.1560)
       Obese                                                    0.5651** [0.1958]
                                                              (0.0483)
                                 -                 -                                                  -                -
   Overweight                                                   0.2058** [0.0753]
                                                              (0.0424)
      Hostile               -0.3589** [-0.1086]
                            (0.0653)
 Uncooperative              -0.7833** [-0.2668]
                                                                   -                                                   -
                            (0.0887)
Concerned about             -0.2154** [-0.0614]
     time                   (0.0456)
       ρ                  ρ 12=0.1359 (0.1847)  ρ 13=-0.1686 (0.2972)                        ρ 23= -0.5010**(0.1938)
Notes: *P<0.05, **P<0.01, Standard errors are in parentheses and marginal effects are in square bracket.
Coefficients on marital status, employment status, insurance status, region, smoking, and missing BMI are not shown in table.


                                                                                                                                46
Table 7: Effect of socio-demographic factors and selected risk factors on participation,
prevalence, and awareness of diabetes

                                   Panel 1(N=8,051)                      Panel 2 (N=6,285)                       Panel 3 (N=1,787)
                                Agreed to Participate                       Has Disease                          Aware of Disease
     African-                   -0.2718** [-0.0843]                      0.4035** [0.1263]                     -0.2793** [-0.0399]
     American                   (0.0479)                               (0.0542)                               (0.0946)
      Latino                    -0.0065      [-0.0019]                   0.4755** [0.1798]                     -0.1994*     [0.0034]
                                (0.0645)                               (0.0691)                               (0.1088)
    Other Race                  -0.3012** [-0.0963]                      0.5069** [0.1679]                     -0.2718     [-0.0181]
                                (0.1015)                               (0.1183)                               (0.1896)
                                -0.0883** [-0.0256]                      0.0594     [0.0137]                    0.1209*     [0.0673]
         Male
                                (0.0338)                               (0.0379)                               (0.0677)
          Age                     0.3339*    [0.0933]                    0.9096** [0.2079]                      0.0349      [0.2246]
                                (0.1734)                                (0.2391)                              (0.4435)
   Age squared                  -0.3891*     [-0.1087]                  -0.7536** [-0.2214]                    -0.1851     [-0.2481]
                               (0.1675)                                 (0.2305)                              (0.4239)
   Currently                     0.1320** [0.0374]                       0.0086     [0.0127]                   -0.1734* [-0.0791]
   Employed                     (0.0453)                               (0.0495)                               (0.0860)
  Self-reported                   0.0218     [0.0063]                    0.1952** [0.0679]                      0.1616*     [0.1168]
  Hypertension                   (0.0350)                              (0.0398)                               (0.0797)
 Use cholesterol                -0.0096      [-0.0028]                   0.3864** [0.1347]                      0.3077** [0.2206]
   medication                   (0.0351)                               (0.0397)                               (0.0930)
SAH=Very Good                    -0.0544     [-0.0158]                   0.2660** [0.0896]                      0.1583      [0.1191]
                                (0.0589)                               (0.0721)                               (0.1551)
    SAH=Good                    -0.1090*     [-0.0320]                   0.5134** [0.1764]                      0.3217*     [0.2344]
                                (0.0599)                               (0.0728)                               (0.1802)
     SAH=Fair                   -0.2272** [-0.0689]                      0.6252** [0.2157]                      0.4340*     [0.2840]
                                (0.0651)                               (0.0775)                               (0.2003)
    SAH=Poor                    -0.2646** [-0.0830]                      0.6745** [0.2395]                      0.5246*     [0.2780]
                                (0.0810)                               (0.0956)                               (0.2264)
                                  0.0451*    [0.0126]                   -0.0876** [0.0137]                     -0.0008     [-0.0207]
  Log of Income
                                (0.0224)                               (0.0259)                               (0.0459)
        Obese                                                            0.6019** [0.1507]
                                                                       (0.0560)
                                                         -                                                                     -
    Overweight                                                           0.2383** [0.0275]
                                                                       (0.0471)
       Hostile                 -0.2959** [-0.0937]
                               (0.0645)
  Uncooperative                -0.8972** [-0.3231]
                                                                       -                      -
                               (0.0883)
Concerned about                -0.2575** [-0.0796]
     time                      (0.0445)
       ρ                     ρ 12=-0.4708** (0.1582) ρ 13=0.2650 (0.2356) ρ 23=-0.6783** (0.1160)
Notes: *P<0.05, **P<0.01, Standard errors are in parentheses and marginal effects are in square bracket.
Coefficients on education, region, marital status, smoking, insurance status and missing BMI are not shown.



                                                                                                                                   47
Table 8: Racial/ethnic disparities in “Agreed to Participate”, “Has Disease” and “Aware of
Disease” outcomes under non-zero and zero error correlation assumption

Hypertension

                            Non-zero correlation  I                                  Zero correlation  = I
                         st
                       1 Step:       2nd Step:     3rd Step:                     st
                                                                               1 Step:       2nd Step:     3rd Step:
                      Agreed to        Has        Aware of                    Agreed to         Has       Aware of
                      Participate    Disease       Disease                    Participate    Disease       Disease
  African-              -0.0545       0.4122**      0.1377                      -0.0531       0.4260**      0.2508**
  American             (0.0488)     (0.0585)      (0.0944)                     (0.0488)     (0.0576)      (0.0838)
    Latino              0.1647**     -0.0339        0.0085                      0.1649**      -0.0415        0.0190
                       (0.0679)     (0.0700)      (0.1026)                     (0.0679)     (0.0683)      (0.1056)
                        -0.0785      -0.0262       -0.0764                      -0.0790       -0.0273      -0.1091
 Other Race
                       (0.1090)     (0.1106)      (0.1631)                     (0.1090)      (0.1110)      (0.1717)
Notes: *P<0.05, **P<0.01, Standard errors are in parentheses. All variables which are considered in Table 4 are controlled.

Diabetes

                            Non-zero correlation  I                                   Zero correlation  = I
                       1st Step:     2nd Step:     3rd Step:                   1st Step:      2nd Step:     3rd Step:
                      Agreed to        Has        Aware of                    Agreed to         Has        Aware of
                      Participate    Disease       Disease                    Participate     Disease       Disease
  African-              -0.2718**     0.4035**     -0.2793**                    -0.2748**      0.3649**     -0.0819
  American             (0.0479)     (0.0542)      (0.0946)                     (0.0479)      (0.0552)      (0.0961)
                        -0.0065       0.4755**     -0.1994*                     -0.0080        0.5026**       0.0100
    Latino
                       (0.0645)     (0.0691)      (0.1088)                     (0.0645)      (0.0689)      (0.1150)
                        -0.3012**     0.5069**     -0.2718                      -0.3039**      0.4688**     -0.0994
 Other Race
                       (0.1015)     (0.1183)      (0.1896)                     (0.1015)       (0.1228)      (0.2072)
Notes: *P<0.05, **P<0.01, Standard errors are in parentheses. All variables which are considered in Table 5 are controlled.




Table 9: Estimates of unawareness based on alternative definitions (%)

                                                        Non-Latino        African-
                                                                                                Latino                All
                                                          whites         Americans
  Main definition               Hypertension               18               12                    17                  17
       c/(c+a)                   Diabetes                  37               36                    33                  36
     Alternative                Hypertension               23               34                    22                  24
 Definition c/(c+b2)             Diabetes                  11               22                    21                  13
Note: See table 4 for the definitions of a, b2 and c.




                                                                                                                              48
Table 10: Effect of socio-demographic factors and selected risk factors on participation,
self-report, and unawareness of hypertension: Alternative Sequential Model
                            Agreed to Participate            Doesn’t self-report Disease              Unaware of Disease
                               (1), N=8,051                        (2), N=6,473                         (3), N=2,865
    African-                -0.0279    [-0.0075]     -0.4212**   [-0.1589]     0.3672** [0.0809]
    American               (0.0493)                 (0.0576)                   (0.0958)
     Latino                0.1685**     [0.0420]      0.0383     [0.0171]     -0.0494    [-0.0171]
                           (0.0682)                 (0.0696)                   (0.1032)
   Other Race                -0.0854   [-0.0235]      0.0793     [0.0303]     -0.0861    [-0.0170]
                           (0.1097)                 (0.1108)                   (0.1560)
                            0.0274      [0.0073]      0.1558**   [0.0618]      0.2205** [0.0930]
       Male
                           (0.0353)                 (0.0360)                   (0.0686)
        Age                 0.4021*    [0.1037]      -0.7644**   [0.1046]       0.5757*  [0.0899]
                           (0.1734)                 (0.2002)                 (0.2862)
  Age squared             -0.4285*     [-0.1105]      0.5975**   [-0.1126]    -0.3162    [-0.0229]
                           (0.1682)                 (0.1945)                 (0.2790)
  Some college              0.0468     [0.0123]      -0.0115     [-0.0040]    -0.1444* [-0.0501]
                           (0.0538)                 (0.0556)                 (0.0836)
College or more            -0.0523     [-0.0141]      0.1037*    [0.0404]     -0.2971** [-0.0829]
                           (0.0569)                 (0.0587)                 (0.0858)
 Self-reported             -0.0362     [-0.0097]     -0.3846**   [-0.1471]      0.1365   [0.0013]
   diabetes                (0.0447)                 (0.0471)                   (0.1059)
Use cholesterol             0.0699*    [0.0185]      -0.5547**   [-0.2126]      0.0311   [-0.0562]
  medication               (0.0367)                 (0.0367)                   (0.1169)
  SAH=Very                 -0.0289     [-0.0077]     -0.3390**   [-0.1312]
     Good                  (0.0606)                 (0.0585)
 SAH=Good                  -0.0984     [-0.0266]     -0.4559**   [-0.1748]
                           (0.0612)                 (0.0607)
                                                                                   -          -
    SAH=Fair              -0.1652** [-0.0458]        -0.5361**   [-0.2006]
                           (0.0669)                 (0.0691)
   SAH=Poor               -0.3592** [-0.1082]        -0.6205**   [-0.2220]
                           (0.0827)                 (0.0953)
                          -0.5100** [-0.1565]         0.1502*    [0.0525]     -0.0443    [0.0211]
Current Smoker
                           (0.0471)                 (0.0679)                 (0.0963)
      Obese               -0.2772** [-0.0776]        -0.4630**   [-0.1798]     0.4934** [0.1330]
                           (0.0479)                 (0.0537)                   (0.0916)
   Overweight             -0.0825** [-0.0222]        -0.2006**   [-0.0794]     0.1640** [0.0356]
                           (0.0455)                 (0.0439)                   (0.0658)
      Hostile             -0.3622** [-0.1094]
                           (0.0651)
 Uncooperative            -0.7876** [-0.2678]
                                                         -            -            -          -
                           (0.0890)
   Concerned              -0.2184** [-0.0621]
   about time              (0.0457)
       ρ                 ρ 12=-0.0787 (0.1922) ρ 13=0.2846 (0.2769) ρ 23=-0.5194** (0.1840)
Notes: *P<0.05, **P<0.01, Standard errors are in parentheses and marginal effects are in square bracket.
Coefficients on marital status, employment status, insurance status, regions and missing BMI are not shown in table.

                                                                                                                       49
Table 11: Effect of socio-demographic factors and selected risk factors on participation,
self-report, and unawareness of diabetes: Alternative Sequential Model
                   Agreed to Participate Doesn’t self-report Disease     Unaware of Disease
                         (1), N=8,051              (2), N=6,285             (3), N=5,027
     African-      -0.2718** [-0.0864]       -0.2033**      [-0.0442]    0.4513** [0.0980]
    American        (0.0482)                (0.0666)                   (0.0704)
      Latino       -0.0082       [-0.0024]   -0.3180**      [-0.0865]    0.4309** [0.1155]
                    (0.0646)                (0.0747)                   (0.0965)
   Other Race      -0.3011** [-0.0962]       -0.3379**      [-0.0838]    0.4486** [0.1003]
                    (0.1011)                (0.1344)                   (0.1480)
                   -0.0880** [-0.0255]       -0.1164**      [-0.0260]   -0.0235     [-0.0089]
      Male
                    (0.0341)                (0.0429)                   (0.0504)
       Age           0.3309*     [0.0924]    -0.9709**      [0.1017]     0.6471*    [0.1647]
                    (0.1737)                (0.2585)                   (0.2895)
  Age squared      -0.3825* [-0.1068]         0.9198**      [-0.1142]   -0.4428     [-0.1230]
                   (0.1680)                 (0.2776)                   (0.2759)
  Self-reported      0.0142      [0.0041]    -0.3448**      [-0.0815]    0.0600     [0.0156]
  Hypertension    (0.0351)                  (0.0457)                   (0.0580)
 Use cholesterol -0.0128         [-0.0037]   -0.5449**      [-0.1387]    0.0338     [0.0103]
   medication       (0.0351)                (0.0420)                    (0.0732)
   SAH=Very         -0.0387      [-0.0112]   -0.2751**      [-0.0655]
      Good          (0.0591)                (0.0916)
  SAH=Good          -0.0860      [-0.0251]   -0.6258**      [-0.1648]
                    (0.0602)                (0.0903)
                                                                            -            -
   SAH=Fair        -0.2076** [-0.0627]       -0.8242**      [-0.2429]
                    (0.0654)                (0.0954)
   SAH=Poor        -0.2524** [-0.0788]       -0.9264**      [-0.3008]
                    (0.0814)                (0.1122)
     No BMI        -0.1191* [-0.0356]        -0.2167**      [-0.0531]    0.1742*    [0.0344]
  Information      (0.0566)                 (0.0757)                   (0.0822)
                     0.0456*     [0.0127]     0.0972**      [0.0101]    -0.0685* [-0.0132]
 Log of Income
                    (0.0224)                (0.0293)                   (0.0365)
      Obese          0.0518      [0.0148]    -0.6055**      [-0.1660]    0.3283** [0.0857]
                  (0.0455)                  (0.0608)                   (0.0910)
   Overweight       -0.0003      [-0.0001]   -0.2367**      [-0.0591]    0.1324** [0.0304]
                  (0.0425)                  (0.0562)                   (0.0632)
     Hostile       -0.3032** [-0.0961]
                    (0.0649)
 Uncooperative     -0.8949** [-0.3221]
                                                 -               -          -            -
                    (0.0882)
   Concerned       -0.2589** [-0.0800]
   about time       (0.0445)
        ρ            ρ 12=0.2342 (0.1875) ρ 13= -0.5036** (0.1631) ρ 23=0.0304 (0.2192)
Notes: *P<0.05, **P<0.01, Standard errors are in parentheses and marginal effects are in square bracket.
Coefficients on education, region, marital status, employment status, smoking and insurance status are not shown in table.



                                                                                                                             50
