                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      CEO COMPENSATION

                                           Carola Frydman
                                             Dirk Jenter

                                        Working Paper 16585
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16585


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




We thank Jeffrey Coles, Alex Edmans, Eitan Goldman, Todd Milbourn, Kevin J. Murphy, Stew Myers,
David Yermack, and Jeff Zwiebel for helpful discussions and suggestions, and Francisco Guedes Santos
and Yesol Huh for assistance in preparing this manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Carola Frydman and Dirk Jenter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
CEO Compensation
Carola Frydman and Dirk Jenter
NBER Working Paper No. 16585
December 2010
JEL No. G30,J31,J33,M52

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper surveys the recent literature on CEO compensation. The rapid rise in CEO pay over the
past 30 years has sparked an intense debate about the nature of the pay-setting process. Many view
the high level of CEO compensation as the result of powerful managers setting their own pay. Others
interpret high pay as the result of optimal contracting in a competitive market for managerial talent.
We describe and discuss the empirical evidence on the evolution of CEO pay and on the relationship
between pay and firm performance since the 1930s. Our review suggests that both managerial power
and competitive market forces are important determinants of CEO pay, but that neither approach is
fully consistent with the available evidence. We briefly discuss promising directions for future research.


Carola Frydman
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-642
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
frydman@mit.edu

Dirk Jenter
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way L312
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
djenter@stanford.edu
1. Introduction

Executive compensation is a complex and contentious subject. The high level of CEO pay
in the United States has spurred an intense debate about the nature of the pay-setting
process and the outcomes it produces. Some argue that large executive pay packages are
the result of powerful managers setting their own pay and extracting rents from firms.
Others interpret the same evidence as the result of optimal contracting in a competitive
market for managerial talent. This survey summarizes the research on CEO compensation
and assesses the evidence for and against these explanations.

        Our review suggests that both managerial power and competitive market forces are
important determinants of CEO pay, but that neither approach alone is fully consistent with
the available evidence. The evolution of CEO compensation since World War II can be
broadly divided into two distinct periods. Prior to the 1970s, we observe low levels of pay,
little dispersion across top managers, and moderate pay-performance sensitivities. From
the mid-1970s to the early 2000s, compensation levels grew dramatically, differences in
pay across managers and firms widened, and equity incentives tied managers’ wealth
closer to firm performance. None of the existing theories offers a fully convincing
explanation for the apparent regime change that occurred during the 1970s, and all theories
have trouble explaining some of the cross-sectional and time-series patterns in the data.

        Many of the theoretical studies we review explore how various characteristics of
real-world compensation contracts can be consistent with either rent extraction or optimal
contracting. Although useful, demonstrating that a given compensation feature can arise in
an optimal contracting (or rent extraction) framework provides little evidence that the
feature is, in fact, used for efficiency reasons (or to extract rents). Partly as a result, there is
no consensus on the relative importance of rent extraction and optimal contracting in
determining the pay of the typical CEO. To help answer this question, models of CEO pay
will have to produce testable predictions that differ between the two approaches.

        We expect that the renewed interest in theoretical work on CEO pay and the
emergence of new data will deliver both the predictions and the testing opportunities
needed to resolve this debate. Promising recent contributions have examined the effects of

                                                                                                  2
exogenous changes in the contracting environment on CEO compensation, firm behavior,
and firm performance. For example, industry deregulations have been linked to higher
CEO compensation, suggesting that increased demand for CEO talent raises pay levels.
However, declines in CEO compensation observed after new regulations strengthen board
oversight suggest rent extraction.

       The literature on CEO compensation is vast, and this survey makes no attempt to be
comprehensive. Instead, we emphasize recent contributions, especially contributions made
since the comprehensive review by Murphy (1999). Our focus is on empirical work more
than theory, on U.S. rather than foreign evidence, and on public instead of private firms.
The large segments of the literature we ignore have been ably covered in other surveys,
starting with Rosen (1992) and followed by, among others, Finkelstein & Hambrick
(1996), Abowd & Kaplan (1999), Murphy (1999), Core et al. (2003), Aggarwal (2008),
Bertrand (2009), and Edmans & Gabaix (2009).

       The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the evidence on the level and
structure of CEO compensation. Section 3 examines the relationship between CEO pay and
firm performance and discusses the merits of different pay-for-performance measures.
Section 4 summarizes and critiques explanations for the rise in CEO pay. Section 5
discusses the effects of CEO pay on firm behavior and value. Section 6 presents our
conclusions.


2. The level and structure of CEO compensation

2.1 The Level of CEO Compensation

The increase in CEO pay over the past 30 years, particularly its rapid acceleration in the
1990s, has been widely documented and analyzed. Using data from Frydman and Saks
(2010), Figure 1 provides a longer-run perspective on the evolution of annual
compensation for the three highest-paid executives in large U.S. firms from 1936 to 2005.
Total annual compensation is measured as the sum of the executive’s salary, current




                                                                                         3
bonuses and payouts from long-term incentive plans (paid in cash or in stock), and the
Black-Scholes value of stock option grants.1

         Figure 1 reveals a J-shaped pattern in executive compensation over the 1936--2005
period. Following a sharp decline during World War II and a further slow decline in the
late 1940s, the real value of top executive pay increased slowly from the early 1950s to the
mid-1970s (averaging approximately 0.8% growth per year). The rapid growth in
executive pay only started in the mid-1970s and continued almost until the end of the
sample in 2005. The increase in compensation was most dramatic in the 1990s, with
annual growth rates that reached more than 10% by the end of the decade. Figure 1 also
shows that CEO pay grew more rapidly than the pay of other top executives during the past
30 years, but not before. The median ratio of CEO compensation to that of the other
highest-paid executives was stable at approximately 1.4 prior to 1980 but has since then
risen to almost 2.6 by 2000-2005.

         The surge in executive pay in the past 30 years has been replicated in larger cross
sections by many other studies (see, for example, Jensen & Murphy 1990a, Hall &
Liebman 1998, Murphy 1999, and Bebchuk & Grinstein 2005). Table 1 zooms in on the
evolution of compensation levels from 1992 to 2008 for CEOs and other top executives in
S&P 500 firms, in a sample of mid-cap firms, and in a sample of small-cap firms.
Executive compensation has increased for firms of all sizes. For CEOs of S&P 500 firms,
the median level of pay climbed rapidly from $2.3 million in 1992 to a peak of $7.2
million in 2001. CEO pay did not resume its rise after 2001, and median pay in the S&P
500 has remained stable at levels between $6 million and $7 million throughout the 2000s.

         Beyond the overall rise in pay, Table 1 reveals three important facts. First, changes
in CEO pay are amplified when focusing on average instead of median compensation,
because the distribution of compensation has become more skewed over time. For
example, median CEO pay in the S&P 500 grew by 213% from 1992 to its peak in 2001,
while the increase in average pay was a much steeper 310%. Focusing on medians is

1
  Black-Scholes values are likely to overstate both the cost of option compensation to the firm and its value to
the executive (Lambert et al. 1991, Carpenter 1998, Meulbroek 2001, Hall & Murphy 2002, Ingersoll 2006,
Klein & Maug 2009, Carpenter et al. 2010).

                                                                                                              4
therefore important if the goal is to analyze the experience of a typical CEO. Second,
comparing executive pay in large-cap, mid-cap, and small-cap firms reveals interesting
differences. Although executive pay has increased across the board, the growth has been
much steeper in larger firms. As a result, the compensation premium for managing a larger
firm has increased. Finally, the growth in pay has been larger for CEOs than for other top
executives, raising the compensation premium for CEOs.


2.2 The Main Components of CEO Pay

Despite substantial heterogeneity in pay practices across firms, most CEO compensation
packages contain five basic components: salary, annual bonus, payouts from long-term
incentive plans, restricted option grants, and restricted stock grants. In addition, CEOs
often receive contributions to defined-benefit pension plans, various perquisites, and, in
case of their departure, severance payments. The relative importance of these
compensation elements has changed considerably over time.

        Figure 2a illustrates the importance of the major pay components for CEOs of
large firms from 1936 to 2005, using again the Frydman & Saks (2010) data. From 1936 to
the 1950s, CEO compensation was composed mainly of salaries and annual bonuses. As
today, bonuses were typically non-discretionary, tied to one or more measures of annual
accounting performance, and paid in either cash or stock. Payments from long-term
incentive plans, which are bonus plans based on multi-year performance, started to make a
noticeable impact on CEO pay in the 1960s. These long-term rewards are often paid out
over several years, again with payment in either cash or stock.

        The most striking pattern in Figure 2 is the surge in stock option compensation
starting in the early 1980s. The purpose of option compensation is to tie remuneration
directly to share prices and thus give executives an incentive to increase shareholder value.
The use of stock options was negligible until 1950, when a tax reform permitted certain
option payoffs to be taxed at the much lower capital gains rate rather than at the labor
income tax rate. Although many firms responded by instituting stock option plans, the
frequency of option grants remained too small to have much of an impact on median pay
levels until the late 1970s.
                                                                                           5
       During the 1980s and especially the 1990s, stock options surged to become the
largest component of top executive pay. Figure 2b illustrates this development for S&P
500 CEOs from 1992 to 2008. Option compensation comprised only 20% of CEO pay in
1992 but rose to a staggering 49% in 2000. Thus, a significant portion of the overall rise in
CEO pay is driven by the increase in option compensation, and any theory that attempts to
explain the growth in CEO pay needs to account for this important change in the structure
of pay as well. The growth in stock option use did not occur at the expense of other
components of pay; median salaries rose from $0.8 to $0.9 million, and short- and long-
term bonuses from $0.6 to $1 million over the same period. After the stock market decline
of 2000-2001, stock options seem to have lost some of their luster, both in relative and
absolute terms, and restricted stock grants replaced them as the most popular form of
equity compensation by 2006. This evolution in the structure of pay was similar for non-
CEO top executives in S&P 500 firms, as well as for all top executives in S&P MidCap
and S&P SmallCap firms.

       Explaining the stark changes in the structure of compensation since the 1980s
remains an open challenge. It is possible that the explosion in option use was prompted by
tax policies that made performance-based pay advantageous and by accounting rules that
downplayed the cost of option compensation to the firm (Murphy 2002, Hall & Murphy
2003). Moreover, it is likely that both the prior decline in the stock market and the advent
of option expensing in 2004 have contributed to the declining popularity of stock options
in recent years.2 This intriguing shift away from options has not yet attracted much
attention in the academic literature, and further research is needed to determine its causes
and consequences.


2.3 Other Forms of Pay

Three important components of CEO compensation that have received less attention in the
literature are perquisites, pensions, and severance pay. Obtaining comprehensive
information on these forms of pay has been difficult until recent years. Because of the


2
 Hall & Murphy (2003) and Bergman & Jenter (2007) argue that managers are more willing to accept
options after stock market booms.

                                                                                              6
insufficient disclosure, perquisites, pensions, and severance pay have often been labeled
“stealth” compensation that may allow executives to extract rents surreptitiously (Jensen &
Meckling 1976, Jensen 1986, Bebchuk & Fried 2004). However, these forms of pay may
also arise as the result of optimal contracting. For example, perks may be optimal if the
cost of acquiring goods and services that the manager desires is lower for the firm (Fama
1980) or if they aid managerial productivity and thereby increase shareholder value (Rajan
& Wulf 2006). Because most defined benefit pensions are unsecured and unfunded claims
against the firm, these retirement benefits can be justified as a form of “inside debt” that
mitigates risk-shifting problems by aligning executives’ incentives with those of other
unsecured creditors (Sundaram & Yermack 2007, Edmans & Liu 2010).

       The evidence on the size of perquisites is limited, and empirical work on their
effects and determinants has found mixed results. Perks encompass a wide variety of goods
and services provided to the executive, including the personal use of company aircraft,
club memberships, and loans at below-market rates. Consistent with the rent-extraction
hypothesis, shareholders react negatively when firms first disclose the personal use of
company aircraft by the CEO (Yermack 2006a). Average disclosed perquisites increased
by 190% following an improvement in the SEC’s disclosure rules in December 2006,
suggesting that firms previously found ways to obfuscate the reporting of perks (Grinstein
et al. 2009). Perks appear to be a more general signal of weak corporate governance, as
reductions in firm value upon the revelation of perks substantially exceed their actual cost
(Yermack 2006a, Grinstein et al. 2009). Thus, the available evidence indicates that at least
some perk consumption is a reflection of managerial excess and reduces shareholder value.
By contrast, Rajan & Wulf (2006) provide evidence that perks are used consistently with
their productivity-enhancement hypothesis, e.g., to help the most productive employees
save time. The extent to which perks are justified by the efficient mechanisms proposed by
Fama (1980) or Rajan & Wulf (2006) remains an open question.

       The empirical evidence on pensions is even sparser than for perquisites. Prior to
December 2006, SEC disclosure rules did not require firms to report the actuarial values of
executive pensions. In their absence, Sundaram & Yermack (2007) use their own
calculations and estimate annual increases in pension values to be approximately 10% of

                                                                                          7
total pay for Fortune 500 CEOs. Similarly, Bebchuk & Jackson (2005) find large pension
claims in a small sample of S&P 500 CEOs. Conditional on having a pension plan, the
median actuarial value at retirement is around $15 million, which corresponds to roughly
35% of the CEO’s total compensation throughout her tenure. These findings suggest that
ignoring pensions can result in a significant underestimation of total CEO pay.

       A lack of readily available data has also hampered the study of severance pay.
Researchers have collected information from employment contracts, separation
agreements, and other corporate filings for usually small samples of firms. Yermack
(2006b) finds that golden handshakes (that is, separation pay that is awarded to retiring or
fired CEOs) are common, but usually moderate in value. Rusticus (2006) shows that ex-
ante separation agreements signed when CEOs are hired are also common and are
equivalent to two years of cash compensation for the typical CEO. Finally, many CEOs
receive a substantial special severance payment, called a golden parachute, if they lose
their job as a result of their firm being acquired. The stock market tends to react positively
to the adoption of golden-parachute provisions (Lambert & Larcker 1985), and such
provisions became widespread during the 1980s and 1990s (Hartzell et al. 2004). As with
perks and pensions, research has not yet conclusively determined whether severance pay is
a form of rent extraction or part of an optimal contract.3


2.4 Brief Summary

Both the level and the composition of CEO pay have changed dramatically over time. The
post-World War II era can be divided into at least two distinct periods. Prior to the 1970s,
we observe low levels of pay, little dispersion across top managers, and only moderate
levels of equity compensation. From the mid-1970s to the end of the 1990s, all
compensation components grew dramatically, and differences in pay across executives and
firms widened. By far, the largest increase was in the form of stock options, which became
the single largest component of CEO pay in the 1990s. Finally, average CEO pay declined
from 2000 to 2008, and restricted stock grants have replaced stock options as the most


3
  See Almazan & Suarez (2003), Manso (2009), and Inderst & Mueller (2009) for models of optimal
severance pay.

                                                                                             8
popular form of equity compensation. It is arguably too early to judge whether the post-
2001 period constitutes a third regime in CEO compensation or just a temporary anomaly
caused by the technology bust of 2000-2001 and the financial crisis of 2008.


3. The sensitivity of CEO wealth to firm performance

The principal-agent problem between shareholders and executives has been a central
concern ever since the separation of corporate ownership from corporate control at the turn
of the twentieth century (Berle & Means 1932). If managers are self-interested and if
shareholders cannot perfectly monitor them (or do not know the best course of action),
executives are likely to pursue their own well-being at the expense of shareholder value.
Anecdotal and quantitative evidence on executives’ perquisite consumption, empire
building, and preference for a quiet life suggests that the principal-agent problem is
potentially highly detrimental to firm values (Jensen & Meckling 1976, Jensen 1986,
Morck et al. 1990, Bertrand & Mullainathan 2003).

        Executive compensation can be used to alleviate the agency problem by aligning
managers’ interests with those of shareholders (Jensen & Meckling 1976). In principle, an
executive’s pay should be based on the most informative indicator(s) for whether the
executive has taken actions that maximize shareholder value (Holmström 1979, 1982). In
reality, because shareholders are unlikely to know which actions are value maximizing,
incentive contracts are often directly based on the principals’ ultimate objective, i.e.,
shareholder value.4

        By effectively granting the executive an ownership stake in her firm, equity-linked
compensation creates incentives to take actions that benefit shareholders. The optimal
contract balances the provision of incentives against exposing risk-averse managers to too
much volatility in their pay. The data reviewed in this section show that the sensitivity of
CEO wealth to firm performance surged in the 1990s, mostly owing to rapidly growing



4
  In practice, CEO compensation is linked to both stock prices and accounting performance. Because stock
prices are a noisy measure of CEO performance, it can be optimal to supplement them with other variables
that inform about CEO actions (Holmström 1979, Lambert & Larker 1987, Baker 1992).

                                                                                                      9
option holdings. At the same time, most CEOs’ fractional equity ownership remains low,
which suggests that moral hazard problems remain relevant.


3.1 Quantifying Managerial Incentives

Measuring the incentive effects of CEO compensation has been a central goal of the
literature since at least the 1950s. Early studies focused on identifying the measure of firm
scale or performance (e.g., sales, profits, or market capitalization) that best explains
differences in the level of pay across firms (Roberts 1956, Lewellen & Huntsman 1970).
The next generation of studies tried to quantify managerial incentives by relating changes
in executive pay to stock price performance (Murphy 1985, Coughlan & Schmidt 1985).
Although these studies found the predicted positive relationship between executive
compensation and shareholder returns, they systematically underestimated the level of
incentives by focusing on current pay (Benston 1985, Murphy 1985). Most executives
have considerable stock and option holdings in their employer, which directly tie their
wealth to their employer’s stock price performance. For the typical executive, the direct
wealth changes caused by stock price movements are several times larger than the
corresponding changes in their annual pay.

       A comprehensive measure of incentives should take all possible links between firm
performance and CEO wealth into account. These links include the effects of current
performance on current and future compensation, on the values of stock and option
holdings, on changes in nonfirm wealth, and on the probability that the CEO is dismissed.
Jensen & Murphy (1990a) are the first to integrate most of these effects in a study of large
publicly traded U.S. firms for the 1974-1986 period. They find an increase in CEO wealth
of only $3.25 for every $1000 increase in firm value and conclude that corporate America
pays its CEOs like bureaucrats (Jensen & Murphy 1990b).

       Table 2 reproduces the Jensen & Murphy (1990a) result using data from 1936 to
2005 for the top three executives in large U.S. firms. To calculate the Jensen-Murphy
measure of incentives (the “dollar change in wealth for a dollar change in firm value”, or
simply the fractional equity ownership, we follow the literature and use two
approximations: First, we consider only changes in executive wealth that are driven by
                                                                                          10
revaluations of stock and option holdings. This channel has swamped the incentives
provided by annual changes in pay for most of the twentieth century (Hall & Liebman
1998, Frydman & Saks 2010). Second, we follow Core & Guay (2002a) and use an
approximation to measure the sensitivity of executives’ option portfolios to the stock
price.5

          Column 1 of Table 2 shows that the fractional equity ownership of the median
executive declined sharply in the 1940s, recovered in the next two decades, and shrank
again in the 1970s. Although this measure of incentives has increased rapidly since the
1980s, its level has yet to recover its pre-World War II value. Figure 3 zooms in on the
more recent evolution of median CEO incentives in S&P 500 firms from 1992 to 2005.
Consistent with the long-run sample, the Jensen-Murphy fractional ownership statistic has
steadily increased: In 1992, a typical S&P 500 CEO received approximately $3.70 for a
$1000 increase in firm value; by 2005, her gain was almost $6.40.

          In contrast to Jensen & Murphy (1990a), Hall & Liebman (1998) dispute the view
that CEO incentives are widely inefficient on two grounds. First, the increase in stock
option compensation since the 1980s has substantially strengthened the link between CEO
wealth and performance. Second, they argue that the changes in wealth caused by typical
changes in firm value are in fact large. Even though executives’ fractional equity holdings
are small, the dollar values of their equity stakes are not. As a result, the typical executive
stands to gain millions from improving firm performance. Hall & Liebman (1998) propose
the “dollar change in wealth for a percentage change in firm value”, i.e., the value of
equity-at-stake, as a measure of CEO incentives. Column 2 of Table 2 reports the median
equity-at-stake statistic for the top three executives in large U.S. firms from 1936 to 2005.
Although Hall-Liebman’s equity-at-stake follows a similar pattern of ups and downs as the
Jensen-Murphy measure over time, it paints a very different picture of the strength of
incentives toward the end of the sample period. Based on equity-at-stake, incentives have
been higher than their 1930s level in every decade since the 1960s, reaching a peak in the

5
  Jenter (2002) shows shat measuring incentives as the sensitivity of option values to performance is
problematic for risk-averse CEOs. Options tend to pay off in states in which CEOs’ marginal utility is
already low, which means that the actual incentives created for a given sensitivity are much smaller for
options than for stock.

                                                                                                     11
2000-2005 period at 12 times their level in the 1936-1940 period. The sharpest increase in
incentives occurred during the 1990s and 2000s. For S&P 500 firms, Figure 3 shows that
the value of equity-at-stake for a typical CEO increased more than fourfold, from $144,000
per 1% increase in firm value in 1992 to $683,000 in 2005.

        The juxtaposition of the findings by Jensen & Murphy (1990a) with those by Hall
& Liebman (1998) highlights that alternative measures of pay-performance sensitivities
can lead to very different views on the magnitude of incentives. The divergence in the level
of these two incentive measures in recent years is mostly due to the growth in firm values
over time: Executives tend to own smaller percentage (and larger dollar) stakes in larger
firms, with the result that firm growth leads to lower fractional ownership incentives but
higher equity-at-stake incentives (Garen 1994, Schaefer 1998, Baker & Hall 2004, Edmans
et al. 2009).6 Nevertheless, both measures rose from the 1970s to the 2000s despite further
increases in firm size, mostly as a result of rapidly increasing option holdings. By 2000-
2005, the median large-firm executive holds stock options worth $7.2 million, significantly
larger than her stock holdings of $5 million, and almost 30 times her option holdings in
1970-1979 (columns 3 and 4 of Table 2).

        To summarize, executives’ monetary gains from a typical improvement in firm
value were sizeable for most of the twentieth century and increased rapidly in the past
three decades. By contrast, executives’ fractional equity ownership has always been low
and is even lower today than in the 1930s. Because of these conflicting signals about
executives’ incentives, we examine the merits of the different incentive measures in more
detail next.


3.2 What Is the Right Measure of the Wealth-Performance Relationship?

The “right” measure of CEO incentives has been the subject of a long debate in the
academic literature.7 In recent theoretical work, Baker & Hall (2004) show that the correct
measure of incentives depends on how CEO behavior affects firm value. In a modified

6
  Controlling for firm size leads to an increasing pattern in both incentive measures over time (Hadlock &
Lumer 1997, Frydman & Saks 2010).
7
  See, among others, Jensen & Murphy (1990a), Joskow & Rose (1994), Garen (1994), Hall & Liebman
(1998), Murphy (1999), Baker & Hall (2004), and Edmans et al. (2009).

                                                                                                       12
agency model that allows the marginal product of CEO actions to vary with the value (or
size) of the firm, the level of CEO incentives depends on the type of CEO activity
considered.

The Jensen-Murphy statistic is the right measure of incentives for activities whose dollar
impact is the same regardless of the size of the firm, such as acquiring an unnecessary
corporate jet or overpaying for an acquisition. Conversely, the value of equity-at-stake is
the right measure of incentives for actions whose effect scales with firm size, such as a
corporate reorganization. Because CEOs engage in both types of activities, both measures
of incentives are important and should be looked at independently.8 The high values of
equity-at-stake and the low fractional ownership levels in Figure 3 suggest that today’s
CEOs are well motivated to optimally reorganize their firm but may still find it optimal to
waste money on corporate jets.


3.3 Are Incentives Set Optimally?

Determining whether observed compensation contracts optimally address the moral hazard
problem between shareholders and CEOs is difficult.9 The optimal incentive strength
depends on parameters that are unobservable, such as the marginal product of CEO effort,
the CEO’s risk aversion, the CEO’s cost of effort, and the CEO’s outside wealth. These
free variables make it easy to develop versions of the principal-agent model that are
consistent with a wide range of empirical patterns. For example, Garen (1994) and
Haubrich (1994) show that the low fractional ownership stakes lamented by Jensen &
Murphy (1990a) are consistent with optimal contracting if CEOs are sufficiently risk


8
  A third incentive measure is the elasticity of CEO wealth to performance (i.e., the percentage change in
wealth for a one-percent improvement in firm value). This statistic has the attractive feature of not being
sensitive to changes in firm size (Murphy 1985, Rosen 1992), and is the correct measure of incentives when
the effort choice of the CEO has a multiplicative effect on both CEO utility and firm value (Edmans et al.
2009). With CEOs’ non-firm wealth unobservable, the elasticity has the disadvantage of being mechanically
close to one when only considering the revaluations of stock and stock option holdings as sources of change
in CEO wealth. In the extreme, this measure is zero for an executive with no equity holdings, and equal to
one (or the option delta) if the executive holds at least one share (one option). In practice, researchers resort
to approximations to this elasticity by scaling the absolute change in wealth by annual pay (Edmans et al.
2009) or by the sum of pay and the equity portfolio held (Hall & Liebman 1998, Frydman & Saks 2010).
9
  The determination is made more difficult by the fact that executive pay may be linked to firm performance
for other reasons, including sorting of executives (Lazear 2004) and efficient bargaining over profits
(Blanchflower et al. 1996).

                                                                                                             13
averse. Given the flexibility of the agency model, most empirical studies focus instead on
testing predictions about cross-sectional determinants of CEO incentives or about the
model’s comparative statics.

        In the basic principal-agent model, the optimal level of incentives declines with the
cost of managerial effort, the noise-to-signal ratio of the performance measure, and the
executive’s risk aversion. Consistent with these comparative statics, the variation in CEO
incentives across firms appears to be partly explained by the variance in stock returns,
arguably a proxy for the noise in the outcome measure (Garen 1994, Aggarwal & Samwick
1999a, Himmelberg et al. 1999, Jin 2002, Garvey & Milbourn 2003).10 Moreover,
wealthier CEOs, who are likely to be less risk averse, have higher-powered incentives
(Garen 1994, Becker 2006).

        Empirical evidence on other predicted determinants of CEO incentives is
inconclusive. Lambert & Larcker (1987) argue that compensation should be more closely
tied to stock prices when accounting performance is relatively noisier. Even though there is
consistent evidence for salaries and bonuses (Lambert & Larcker 1987) and option pay
(Yermack 1995, Bryan et al. 2000), Core et al. (2003) find the opposite result for total
CEO pay. Gibbons & Murphy (1992) predict that incentives should be strongest for CEOs
close to retirement to substitute for declining career concerns, and they find consistent
evidence for cash compensation. By contrast, Yermack (1995) and Bryan et al. (2000) find
no evidence that CEOs near retirement receive or hold more stock options. John & John
(1993) predict a negative relation between executive incentives and leverage as firms try to
avoid agency costs of debt, but Yermack (1995) finds no empirical relation between stock
option grants and leverage. Finally, some studies report evidence consistent with the
conjecture that incentives, and especially equity incentives, should be stronger in firms
with greater growth opportunities (Smith & Watts 1992, Gaver & Gaver 1995), whereas
others report a negative correlation between these two variables (Bizjak et al. 1993,
Yermack 1995).



10
   In contrast, Core & Guay (2002b) find a positive correlation between stock-price variance and pay-
performance sensitivity, contrary to the predictions of the basic model.

                                                                                                  14
        A central prediction of the principal-agent model is the use of relative performance
evaluation for CEOs. Holmström (1982) and Diamond & Verrecchia (1982) argue that
contracts should filter out any systematic (e.g., market or industry) components in
measured performance, as executives cannot affect these components but suffer from
bearing the associated risk. Consistent with this prediction, bonus plans frequently link
their payouts to the performance of the firm relative to an industry benchmark. However,
the overall evidence for the effective use of relative performance evaluation is weak.11 The
reason for the overall lack of benchmarking is that wealth-performance sensitivities are
driven by revaluations of (nonindexed) stock and option holdings.12 As a result, CEO
wealth is strongly and seemingly unnecessarily affected by aggregate performance shocks.
Several recent papers, however, have proposed theories that explain the lack of
benchmarking as an efficient contracting outcome.13


3.4 Brief Summary

Since Jensen & Murphy (1990a), our understanding of the link between firm performance
and CEO compensation has improved substantially. The long-run evidence shows that
compensation arrangements have served to tie the wealth of managers to firm
performance—and perhaps to align managers’ with shareholders’ interests—for most of
the twentieth century. Much of the effect of performance on CEO wealth works through
revaluations of stock and option holdings, rather than through changes in annual pay. The
sensitivity of CEO wealth to performance surged in the 1990s, mostly owing to rapidly
growing option portfolios. In contrast, the typical CEO’s fractional equity ownership
remains low, suggesting a continued need for direct monitoring by boards and investors.




11
   See, among others, Murphy (1985), Coughlan & Schmidt (1985), Antle & Smith (1986), Gibbons &
Murphy (1990), Janakiraman et al. (1992), Garen (1994), Aggarwal & Samwick (1999a,b), and Murphy
(1999).
12
   Recent evidence shows that some firms link the vesting of option and stock awards to firm performance
relative to a peer group (Bettis et al. 2010a).
13
   Aggarwal & Samwick (1999b), Himmelberg & Hubbard (2000), and Gopalan et al. (2009) argue that
benchmarking may not be optimal, and Jin (2002), Jenter (2002), and Garvey & Milbourn (2003) that it may
be unnecessary.

                                                                                                     15
4. Explaining CEO compensation: Rent extraction or competitive pay?

The rapid rise in CEO pay over the past 30 years has sparked a lively debate about the
determinants of executive compensation. At one end of the spectrum, the high levels of
CEO pay are seen as the result of executives’ ability to set their own pay and extract rents
from the firms they manage. At the other end of the spectrum, CEO pay is viewed as the
efficient outcome of a labor market in which firms optimally compete for managerial
talent. Many other explanations for the rise in CEO pay have emerged in recent years, and
the debate is too extensive to do it justice in this review. Instead, we divide the theories
into those that view rising compensation as a rent-extraction problem and those that view it
as the efficient outcome of a market mechanism. We briefly summarize the main
theoretical arguments for these two views and then discuss the empirical evidence.


4.1 Theoretical Explanations for the Rise in CEO Pay

The rent extraction view of executive pay posits that weak corporate governance and
acquiescent boards allow CEOs to (at least partly) determine their own pay, resulting in
inefficiently high levels of compensation. This theory, summarized as the “managerial
power hypothesis” by Bebchuk & Fried (2004), also predicts that much of the rent
extraction occurs through forms of pay that are less observable or more difficult to value,
such as stock options, perquisites, pensions, and severance pay. Although this argument is
intuitive, recent theoretical work explores how inefficient compensation can be sustained
in market equilibrium. Kuhnen & Zwiebel (2009) model CEOs who set their own pay,
with both observable and unobservable components, subject to the constraint that too much
rent extraction will get them ousted. Rent extraction survives in equilibrium because firing
is costly and because a replacement CEO can also extract rents. Others have explored how
CEO compensation is determined if firms with strong and weak governance coexist in the
economy. Acharya & Volpin (2010) and Dicks (2010) show that firms with weak
governance (and therefore higher compensation) impose a negative externality on better-
governed firms through the competition for managers, inducing inefficiently high levels of
pay in all firms.



                                                                                         16
       In contrast to the managerial power hypothesis, a growing literature argues that the
growth in CEO pay is the efficient result of increasing demand for CEO effort or scarce
managerial talent. One set of theories in this vein attributes the rise in CEO pay to
increasing firm sizes and scale effects. If higher CEO talent is more valuable in larger
firms, then larger firms should offer higher levels of pay and be matched with more able
CEOs by an efficient labor market (Rosen 1981, 1982). Small increments in CEO talent
can imply large increments in firm value and compensation because of the scale of
operations under the CEO’s control (Himmelberg & Hubbard 2000). Gabaix & Landier
(2008) and Terviö (2008) develop this idea further by solving competitive and frictionless
assignment models for CEOs under the assumption that managerial talent has a
multiplicative effect on firm output. In this framework, and using specific assumptions
about the distribution of CEO talent, Gabaix & Landier show that CEO pay should move
one-for-one with changes in the size of the typical firm. Thus, they argue that the sixfold
increase in average CEO pay between 1980 and 2003 can be fully explained by the sixfold
increase in average market capitalization over that period.

       A second set of theories proposes that changes in firms’ characteristics,
technologies, and product markets over the past 30 years have increased the effect of CEO
effort and talent on firm value and, therefore, also led to higher optimal levels of incentives
and pay. For example, an increase in firm size raises the optimal level of CEO effort, and
thus incentives, if the marginal product of CEO effort increases with the size of the firm
(Himmelberg & Hubbard 2000, Baker & Hall 2004). Alternatively, the productivity of
managerial effort and talent may have increased because of more intense competition due
to deregulation or entry by foreign firms (Hubbard & Palia 1995; Cuñat & Guadalupe
2009a, 2009b), because of improvements in the communications technologies used by
managers (Garicano & Rossi-Hansberg 2006) or because of higher volatility in the
business environment (Dow & Raposo 2005, Campbell et al. 2001). Finally, moral hazard
problems may be more severe in larger firms, resulting in stronger incentives for CEOs as
firms grow (Gayle & Miller 2009). Independently of their cause, higher-powered
incentives have to be accompanied by higher levels of expected pay to compensate
managers for the greater risk in their compensation.


                                                                                            17
       A third market-based explanation for the growth in CEO pay is a shift in the type of
skills demanded by firms from firm-specific to general managerial skills. Such a shift
intensifies the competition for talent, improves the outside options of executives, and
allows managers to capture a larger fraction of their firms’ rents (Murphy & Zábojník
2004, 2007; Frydman 2007). This theory predicts an increase in the level of CEO pay,
rising inequality among executives within and across firms, and a higher fraction of CEOs
hired from outside the firm.

       Finally, a fourth market-based explanation proposes that the growth in CEO pay is
the result of stricter corporate governance and improved monitoring of CEOs by boards
and large shareholders. Hermalin (2005) shows that, if CEO job stability is negatively
affected by an increase in monitoring intensity, firms optimally respond by increasing the
level of CEO pay. According to this theory, the observed rise in pay should be
accompanied by higher CEO turnover, a stronger link between CEO turnover and firm
performance, and more external CEO hires. However, an economy-wide strengthening of
governance may not lead to higher pay in equilibrium if the change also causes CEOs’
outside opportunities to become less appealing (Edmans & Gabaix 2010).


4.2 The Empirical Evidence

Many of the theories described above have been developed to explain the rise in CEO
compensation and the use of equity-linked pay since the 1970s. It is therefore not
surprising that many of them do a good job fitting some of the major stylized facts and
cross-sectional patterns over this period. However, as we argue in this section, these
theories have trouble explaining CEO compensation in earlier decades as well as recent
cross-sectional patterns they were not designed to match.


4.2.1 Evidence for and against the managerial power hypothesis

The managerial power view of CEO compensation is supported by several pieces of
anecdotal and systematic evidence. For example, the widespread use of “stealth”
compensation is difficult to explain if compensation were simply the efficient outcome of
an optimal contract. Even though perks, pensions, and severance pay can be part of optimal

                                                                                        18
compensation, hiding these compensation elements from shareholders is suggestive of rent
extraction (Bebchuk & Fried 2004, Kuhnen & Zwiebel 2009). Similarly, the widespread
practice of executives hedging exposures to their own firm, again with minimal disclosure,
is difficult to justify (Bettis et al. 2001, 2010b). Rent extraction is also suggested by the
observation that CEOs are frequently rewarded for lucky events that are not under their
control (such as an improving economy) but not equally penalized for unlucky events
(Bertrand & Mullainathan 2001, Garvey & Milbourn 2006).14 Finally, CEO pay increases
following exogenous reductions in takeover threats (Bertrand & Mullainathan 1998) and
decreases following regulatory changes that strengthen board oversight (Chhaochharia &
Grinstein 2009).

        A further suggestive piece of evidence for the managerial power hypothesis is the
revelation of widespread options backdating and spring loading. Yermack (1997) observes
that stock prices tend to rise subsequent to option grants, suggesting that powerful CEOs
are awarded options right before the release of positive news (so called spring loading).
Recent evidence shows that spring loading alone is not sufficient to explain the stock price
patterns around option grants. Instead, many grants must have had their “grant dates”
chosen ex post to minimize the strike price of at-the-money options and maximize their
value to executives (Lie 2005, Heron & Lie 2007, Narayanan & Seyhun 2008). Such
backdating of options appears to have been widespread, affecting approximately 30% of
firms from 1996 to 2005 (Heron & Lie 2009), and was more prevalent in firms with weak
boards and strong chief executives (Bebchuk et al. 2010). However, option backdating may
also arise as a consequence of boards’ desire to avoid accounting charges and earnings
dilution. It remains to be shown whether backdating was in fact associated with rent
extraction by CEOs.

        A potent criticism of the managerial power hypothesis is that it is unable to explain
the steady increase in CEO compensation since the 1970s. There is scant evidence that
corporate governance has weakened over the past 30 years; instead, most indicators show
that governance has considerably strengthened over this period (Holmström & Kaplan

14
  Jenter & Kanaan (2010) show that CEOs are more likely to be fired after bad industry or bad market
performance, which indicates that some CEOs are penalized for bad luck.

                                                                                                 19
2001, Hermalin 2005, Kaplan 2008). Moreover, “awarding” pay by allowing managers to
extract some rents can be optimal if monitoring is costly. In equilibrium, rent extraction
may be compensated for through reductions in other forms of pay, thus not leading to
higher total compensation. Consequently, observing that a CEO receives forms of pay
usually associated with rent extraction does not necessarily imply that the CEO’s
compensation exceeds the competitive level.

        In defense of the managerial power hypothesis, it is possible that the desire or
ability of managers to extract rents (and increase their total pay) emerged only as social
norms against unequal pay weakened. Piketty & Saez (2003) argue that such a shift in
social norms helps explain the rise in CEO pay and the widening income inequality in the
past three decades, and Levy & Temin (2007) relate this change in norms to the
dismantling of institutions and government policies that prevented extreme pay outcomes
from World War II to the 1970s.15 Alternatively, the increasing popularity of stock options,
coupled with boards’ limited understanding of option valuation, may have allowed
managers to camouflage their rent extraction as efficient incentive compensation (Hall &
Murphy 2003, Bebchuk & Fried 2004).


4.2.2 Evidence for and against competitive pay

Market-based and optimal contracting explanations for the rise in CEO pay have also
received considerable empirical support. For example, the stock market tends to react
positively to announcements of compensation plans that introduce long-term incentive pay
or link pay to stock prices (Larcker 1983, Morgan & Poulsen 2001). Consistent with a
competitive labor market, CEOs of higher ability (identified through better performance)
tend to receive higher compensation (Graham et al. 2009). Moreover, changes in product
markets appear to have increased the demand for managerial talent and raised CEO pay.
Hubbard & Palia (1995) and Cuñat & Guadalupe (2009a) document higher pay levels and
pay-performance sensitivities following industry deregulations, and Cuñat & Guadalupe
(2009b) show that pay levels and incentives increase when firms face more import


15
  However, Frydman and Molloy (2010) suggest that changes in the high tax rates prevalent during this
period had at most modest short-run effects on executive pay.

                                                                                                  20
penetration. Although these exogenous changes in the contracting environment have the
predicted effects on managerial pay, the estimated magnitudes are modest, leaving a large
fraction of the sharp rise in CEO pay unexplained.

       The idea that firms’ demand for CEO skills has shifted from firm-specific to
general managerial human capital has the advantage of predicting not only an increase in
compensation, but also changes in pay dispersion and managerial mobility that are
consistent with the empirical evidence. As described in Section 2, the past three decades
have seen a marked increase in the differences in executive pay between large and small
firms, and between CEOs and other top executives. Over the same period, the ratio of new
CEOs appointed from outside the firm has risen sharply, top executives have become more
mobile across sectors, their business experiences have become more diverse, and the
fraction of CEOs with an MBA has risen (Murphy & Zábojník 2007, Frydman 2007,
Schoar 2008). However, these changes in managers’ backgrounds and skills appear to have
occurred slowly over time (Frydman 2007), and the magnitude and timing of the changes
may not be large or quick enough to explain the rapid acceleration in CEO compensation
since the 1980s.

       As detailed in Section 4.1, Hermalin (2005) argues that rising CEO pay is the result
of stricter monitoring of CEOs by boards and large shareholders. This view is broadly
consistent with the empirical evidence. The fraction of outside directors on boards and the
level of institutional stock ownership have increased since the 1970s (Huson et al. 2001),
while CEO turnovers have become more frequent (Kaplan & Minton 2008) and closely
linked to firm performance (Jenter & Lewellen 2010). Although these trends are
suggestive, there is no direct evidence that changes in governance caused the surge in CEO
pay or that added pressure on CEOs can account for the magnitude of the pay increase.

       Finally, theories based on the interaction of firm scale with the demand for CEO
talent find their strongest empirical support in the correlated increases in firm value and
CEO pay since the 1970s. Gabaix & Landier (2008) calibrate their competitive model of
CEO talent assignment and find that the growth in the size of the typical firm (measured by
the market value of the median S&P 500 firm) can explain the entire growth in CEO


                                                                                        21
compensation from 1980 to the present. However, this result has been criticized in several
studies. Frydman & Saks (2010) show that the relationship between firm size and CEO pay
is highly sensitive to the time period chosen, as this correlation is almost nonexistent from
the 1940s to the early 1970s. Moreover, the post-1970s relationship may not be robust to
different sample-selection choices (Nagel 2010). Finally, because both the size of the
typical firm and CEO compensation have trended upwards since the 1970s, it is difficult to
determine whether the relationship between these two variables is causal.

       A second difficulty for models of frictionless CEO assignment is the empirical
scarcity of CEOs moving between firms. The models of Gabaix & Landier (2008) and
Terviö (2008) predict that, at any point in time, a more talented CEO should run a larger
firm. Consequently, any changes in the size rank of firms should lead to CEOs switching
firms. In reality, CEOs stay at one firm for several years and rarely move directly from one
CEO position to the next. Although it is straightforward to augment a competitive
assignment model with a fixed cost of CEO replacement, the fixed cost would need to
exceed the effects of differences in CEO talent. A large fixed cost of CEO replacement
creates large match-specific rents that a powerful CEO could capture, fundamentally
changing the explanation for high levels of CEO pay to one related to managerial power
(Bebchuk & Fried 2004, Kuhnen & Zwiebel 2009).


4.3 Brief Summary

Our reading of the evidence suggests that both managerial power and competitive market
forces are important determinants of CEO pay and that neither approach alone is fully
consistent with the available evidence. On the one hand, several compensation practices, as
well as specific cases of outrageous and highly publicized pay packages, indicate that (at
least some) CEOs are able to extract rents from their firms. On the other hand, efficient
contracting explanations are arguably more successful at explaining differences in pay
practices across firms and at explaining the evolution of CEO pay since the 1970s.
However, none of these theories provides a fully convincing explanation for the apparent
regime change in CEO compensation that occurred during the 1970s. Moreover, both
approaches fail to explain the explosive growth of options in the 1990s and their recent

                                                                                          22
decline in favor of restricted stock, which may be, in part, a response to changes in
accounting practices. Although a combination of the proposed explanations may explain
the changes in CEO pay in recent decades, the relative importance of the different theories
remains an open question.


5. The effect of compensation on CEO behavior and firm value

The debate about the nature of the pay-setting process and the recent financial crisis has
created renewed interest in the effects of compensation on CEO behavior and firm
performance. Most concerns about managerial pay would be alleviated if high levels of
CEO pay and high wealth-performance sensitivities led to better performance and higher
firm values. However, providing convincing evidence on the effects of executive pay is
extraordinarily difficult.

        The main problem with measuring the effects of compensation is one of
identification. Compensation arrangements are the endogenous outcome of a complex
process involving the CEO, the compensation committee, the entire board of directors,
compensation consultants, and the managerial labor market. As a result, compensation
arrangements are correlated with a large number of observable and unobservable firm and
CEO characteristics. This makes it extremely difficult to interpret any observed correlation
between executive pay and firm outcomes as evidence of a causal relationship. For
example, CEO pay and firm performance may be correlated because compensation affects
performance, because firm performance affects pay, or because an unobserved firm or
CEO characteristic affects both variables.


5.1 The Relation Between CEO Incentives and Firm Value

The relation between managerial incentives and firm value is one of the fundamental issues
in compensation research. Most studies focus on whether managerial equity incentives
affect firm value, often measured as Tobin’s Q. In an influential study, Morck et al. (1988)
document that firm value increases with managerial ownership if managers own between
0% and 5% of the firm’s equity, decreases if managers own between 5% and 25%, and


                                                                                         23
increases again (weakly) for holdings above 25%. One interpretation of their findings is
that the initial positive effect reflects improving incentives while the subsequent negative
effect is the result of increasing managerial entrenchment and actions adverse to minority
shareholders. Using two larger cross-sections of firms, McConnell & Servaes (1990) find
that firm value increases until the equity ownership by managers and directors exceeds 40-
50% of shares outstanding.

       Subsequent studies have examined how different aspects of executives’ equity
incentives relate to firm value, with mixed results. For example, Mehran (1995) finds that
firm value is positively related to managers’ fractional stock ownership and to the fraction
of equity-based pay. Habib & Ljungqvist (2005) observe a positive association of firm
value with CEO stock holdings, but a negative one with option holdings. Many other
studies fail to find any relationship between firm value and executives’ equity stakes (e.g.,
Agrawal & Knoeber 1996, Himmelberg et al. 1999, Demsetz & Villalonga 2001). Because
equity holdings are the decision of managers and boards, none of these correlations can be
interpreted as causal.

       Several studies use instrumental variables to address the endogeneity of managers’
equity incentives (e.g., Hermalin & Weisbach 1991, Himmelberg et al. 1999, Palia 2001).
However, as Himmelberg et al. (1999) point out, valid instruments for managerial
ownership are extremely difficult to obtain, because all known determinants of ownership
are also likely determinants of Tobin’s Q. As an alternative strategy, some papers account
for the endogeneity of managerial ownership by estimating a simultaneous equation
system. However, this approach requires at least as many exogenous as endogenous
variables in the model, leaving the challenges in finding valid instruments unsolved.
Because of the lack of credible instruments, this literature has been unable to identify the
causal effects of managerial incentives on firm value.


5.2 The Relation Between CEO Incentives and Firm Behavior

Incentive compensation should motivate managers to make sound business decisions that
increase shareholder value. To assess whether existing compensation arrangements achieve


                                                                                          24
this goal, a large literature studies the relationship between executive compensation and
companies’ investment decisions and financial policies.

        Many of the early studies in this literature focus on accounting-based long-term
incentive plans. The introduction of such plans has been linked to, among others, increases
in capital investment (Larcker 1983) and improvements in profitability (Kumar &
Sopariwala 1992). More recent studies shift their focus to managers’ stock and option
holdings. Equity incentives have been connected to a wide variety of outcomes, including
better operating performance (Core & Larcker 2002), more and better acquisitions (Datta
et al. 2001, Cai & Vijh 2007), larger restructurings and layoffs (Dial & Murphy 1995,
Brookman et al. 2007), and more voluntary liquidations (Mehran et al. 1998). Executive
stock options, which are usually not dividend protected, have also been linked to lower
dividends (Lambert et al. 1989) and to a shift from dividends to share repurchases (Fenn &
Liang 2001). Finally, a sizeable literature studies the relationship between managerial
incentives and corporate risk taking. The results suggest that stronger equity incentives are
associated with less risk taking, whereas convexity in executives’ portfolios due to options
is correlated with more risk taking.16


5.3 Incentive Compensation and Manipulation

Any form of incentive compensation entails the danger that managers may manipulate the
performance measure.17 Consistent with this prediction, several studies link earnings-based
bonus plans to earnings management, especially if realized earnings are close to floors and
caps in the bonus schedule (Healy 1985, Holthausen et al. 1995). Firms also seem to
manipulate the disclosure of information around CEO option awards, delaying the release
of good news and accelerating the disclosure of bad news (Aboody & Kasznik 2000).
Finally, a series of recent studies document a positive correlation between CEOs’ equity
incentives and earnings manipulation (Cheng & Warfield 2005, Bergstresser & Philippon
2006, Burns & Kedia 2006, Efendi et al. 2007, Peng & Röell 2008, Johnson et al. 2009).


16
   See, for example, Tufano (1996), Guay (1999), Rajgopal & Shevlin (2002), Lewellen (2006), and Coles et
al. (2006).
17
    See Bolton et al. (2006), Goldman & Slezak (2006), and Benmelech et al. (2010) for models of
performance manipulation.

                                                                                                      25
However, there is disagreement about which part of CEOs’ equity incentives is the culprit,
with some studies linking manipulation to option (but not stock) incentives, and others
linking manipulation to stock holdings (but not options). Moreover, the evidence for a
connection between equity incentives and accounting irregularities is not unanimous.
Erickson et al. (2006) find that executives’ equity incentives are unrelated to accusations of
accounting fraud by the SEC, whereas Armstrong et al. (2009) find that CEO equity
incentives have, if anything, a modestly negative effect on restatements, SEC enforcement
releases, and class action lawsuits.


5.4 Brief Summary

The literature provides ample evidence that CEO compensation and portfolio incentives
are correlated with a wide variety of corporate behaviors, from investment and financial
policies to risk taking and manipulation. Arguably, the widespread use of incentive
compensation and the large cross-sectional differences in managerial contracts would make
little sense if compensation had no effect on CEO behavior. However, because
compensation arrangements are endogenous and correlated with many unobservables,
measuring their causal effects on behavior and firm value is extremely difficult and
remains one of the most important challenges for research on executive pay.


6. Conclusion

Both the executive compensation literature and our understanding of pay practices have
grown tremendously in recent years. Yet, many important questions remain unanswered.
For example, the causes of the apparent regime change in CEO compensation that occurred
during the 1970s remain largely unknown. The relative importance of rent extraction and
optimal contracting in determining pay for the typical CEO is still to be determined, and
even less is known about the causal effects of CEO pay on behavior and firm value.
Finding answers to these questions will require a combination of new theory predictions;
the creative use of exogenous changes in the contracting environment; and new data from
other countries, prior decades, and different types of firms. The progress made by recent



                                                                                           26
studies on all these dimensions is cause for optimism and suggests that answers may not be
far off.




                                                                                       27
Literature Cited
Aboody D, Kasznik R. 2000. CEO stock option awards and the timing of corporate
   voluntary disclosures. J. Account. Econ. 29(1):73--100
Abowd JM, Kaplan DS. 1999. Executive compensation: six questions that need answering.
   J. Econ. Perspect. 13(4):145--68
Acharya AV, Volpin PF. 2010. Corporate governance externalities. Rev. Financ. 14(1):1--
   33
Aggarwal RK, Samwick AA. 1999a. The other side of the trade-off: the impact of risk on
   executive compensation. J. Polit. Econ. 107(1):65--105
Aggarwal RK, Samwick AA. 1999b. Executive compensation, relative performance
   evaluation, and strategic competition: theory and evidence. J. Financ. 54(6):1999--
   2043
Aggarwal RK. 2008. Executive compensation and incentives. In Handbook of Corporate
   Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, ed. BE Eckbo, pp. 497--538. Amsterdam:
   Elsevier/North-Holland
Agrawal A, Knoeber CR. 1996. Firm performance and mechanisms to control agency
   problems between managers and shareholders. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 31(3):377--97
Almazan A, Suarez J. 2003. Entrenchment and severance pay in optimal governance
   structures. J. Financ. 58(2):519--47
Antle R, Smith A. 1986. An empirical investigation of the relative performance evaluation
   of corporate executives. J. Account. Res. 24(1):1--39
Armstrong CS, Jagolinzer AD, Larcker DF. 2009. Chief executive officer equity incentives
   and accounting irregularities. Work. Pap., Stanford Univ.
Baker GP. 1992. Incentive contracts and performance measurement. J. Polit. Econ.
   100(3):598--614
Baker GP, Hall BJ. 2004. CEO incentives and firm size. J. Labor Econ. 22(4):767--98
Bebchuk LA, Fried JM. 2004. Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of
   Executive Compensation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press
Bebchuk LA, Grinstein Y. 2005. The growth of executive pay. Oxford Rev. Econ. Policy
   21(2):283-303
Bebchuk LA, Grinstein Y, Peyer UC. 2010. Lucky CEOs and lucky directors. J. Financ.
   Forthcoming
Bebchuk LA, Jackson RJ. 2005. Executive pensions. J. Corp. Law 30:823--56
Becker B. 2006. Wealth, risk aversion and CEO compensation. J. Financ. 61(1):379--97
Benmelech E, Kandel G, Veronesi P. 2010. Stock-based compensation and CEO
   (dis)incentives. Q. J. Econ. Forthcoming
Benston G. 1985. The self-serving management hypothesis: some evidence. J. Account.
   Econ. 7(1--3):67-83

                                                                                       28
Bergman NK, Jenter D. 2007. Employee sentiment and stock option compensation. J.
   Financ. Econ. 84(3):667--712
Bergstresser D, Philippon T. 2006. CEO incentives and earnings management. J. Financ.
   Econ. 80(3):511--29
Berle AA, Means GC. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New York:
   Macmillan
Bertrand M. 2009. CEOs. Annu. Rev. Econ. 1:121--49
Bertrand M, Mullainathan S. 1998. Executive compensation and incentives: the impact of
   takeover legislation. Work. Pap., NBER
Bertrand M, Mullainathan S. 2001. Are CEOs rewarded for luck? The ones without
   principals are. Q. J. Econ. 116(3):901--32
Bettis JC, Bizjak JM, Coles JL, Kalpathy S. 2010. Stock and option grants with
   performance-based vesting provisions. Work. Pap., Arizona State Univ.
Bettis JC, Bizjak JM, Kalpathy S. 2010a. Why do insiders hedge their ownership and
   options? An empirical examination. Work. Pap., Arizona State Univ.
Bettis JC, Bizjak JM, Lemmon ML. 2001b. Managerial ownership, incentive contracting,
   and the use of zero-cost collars and equity swaps by corporate insiders. J. Financ.
   Quant. Anal. 36(3):345--70
Bizjak JM, Brickley JA, Coles JL. 1993. Stock-based incentive compensation and
   investment behavior. J. Account. Econ. 16(1--3):349--72
Blanchflower DG, Oswald AJ, Sanfey P. Wages, profits, and rent-sharing. Q. J. Econ.
   111(1):227--51
Bolton P, Scheinkman JA, Xiong W. 2006. Executive compensation and short-termist
   behavior in speculative markets. Rev. Econ. Stud. 73(3):577--610
Brookman JT, Chang S, Rennie CG. 2007. CEO equity portfolio incentives and layoff
   decisions. J. Financ. Res. 30(2):259--81
Bryan S, Hwang L, Lilien S. 2000. CEO stock-based compensation: an empirical analysis
   of incentive-intensity, relative mix, and economic determinants. J. Bus. 73(4):661--93
Burns N, Kedia S. 2006. The impact of performance-based compensation on misreporting.
   J. Financ. Econ. 79(1):35--67
Cai J, Vijh AM. 2007. Incentive effects of stock and option holdings of target and acquirer
   CEOs. J. Financ. 62(4):1891--933
Campbell JY, Lettau M, Malkiel BG, Yexiao X. 2001. Have individual stocks become
  more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. J. Financ. 56(1):1--43
Carpenter JN. 1998. The exercise and valuation of executive stock options. J. Financ.
   Econ. 48(2):127--58
Carpenter JN, Stanton R, Wallace N. 2010. Optimal exercise of executive stock options
   and implications for firm cost. J. Financ. Econ. Forthcoming


                                                                                        29
Cheng Q, Warfield T. 2005. Equity incentives and earnings management. Account. Rev.
   80(2):441--76
Chhaochharia V, Grinstein Y. 2009. CEO compensation and board oversight. J. Financ.
   64(1):231--61
Coles JL, Daniel ND, Naveen L. 2006. Managerial incentives and risk-taking. J. Financ.
   Econ. 79(2):431--68
Core JE, Guay WR. 2002a. Estimating the value of employee stock option portfolios and
   their sensitivities to price and volatility. J. Account. Res. 40(3):613--30
Core JE, Guay WR. 2002b. The other side of the trade-off: the impact of risk on executive
   compensation---a revised comment. Work. Pap., Univ. Penn.
Core JE, Guay WR, Larcker DF. 2003. Executive equity compensation and incentives: a
   survey. Fed. Reserve Bank New York Econ. Policy Rev. 9(1):27--50
Core JE, Guay WR, Verrecchia R. 2003. Price versus non-price performance measures in
   optimal CEO compensation contracts. Account. Rev. 78(4):957--81
Core JE, Larcker DF. 2002. Performance consequences of mandatory increases in
   executive stock ownership. J. Financ. Econ. 64(3):317--40
Coughlan A, Schmidt R. 1985. Executive compensation, management turnover, and firm
   performance: an empirical investigation. J. Account. Econ. 7(1--3):43--66
Cuñat V, Guadalupe M. 2009a. Executive compensation and competition in the banking
   and financial sectors. J. Bank. Financ. 33(3):495--504
Cuñat V, Guadalupe M. 2009b. Globalization and the provision of incentives inside the
   firm: the effect of foreign competition. J. Labor Econ. 27(2):179--212
Datta S, Iskandar-Datta M, Raman K. 2001. Executive compensation and corporate
   acquisition decisions. J. Financ. 56(6):2299--336
Demsetz H, Villalonga B. 2001. Ownership structure and corporate performance. J. Corp.
  Finance 7(3):209--33
Dial J, Murphy KJ. 1995. Incentives, downsizing, and value creation at General Dynamics.
   J. Financ. Econ. 37(3):261--314
Diamond DW, Verrecchia R. 1982. Optimal managerial contracts and equilibrium security
   prices. J. Financ. 37(2):275--87
Dow J, Raposo CC. 2005. CEO compensation, change, and corporate strategy. J. Financ.
  60(6):2701--27
Edmans A, Gabaix X. 2009. Is CEO pay really inefficient? A survey of new optimal
   contracting theories. Eur. Financ. Manage. 15(3):486--96
Edmans A, Gabaix X. 2010. The effect of risk on the CEO market. Work. Pap., New York
   Univ.
Edmans A, Gabaix X, Landier A. 2009. A multiplicative model of optimal CEO incentives
   in market equilibrium. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22(12):4881--917


                                                                                      30
Edmans A, Liu Q. 2010. Inside debt. Rev. Financ. Forthcoming
Efendi J, Srivastava A, Swanson EP. 2007. Why do corporate managers misstate financial
   statements? The role of option compensation and other factors. J. Financ. Econ.
   85(3):667--708
Erickson M, Hanlon M, Maydew EL. 2006. Is there a link between executive equity
    incentives and accounting fraud? J. Account. Res. 44(1):113--43
Fama E. 1980. Agency problems and the theory of the firm. J. Polit. Econ. 88(2):288--307
Fenn GW, Liang N. 2001. Corporate payout policy and managerial stock incentives. J.
   Financ. Econ. 60(1):45--72
Finkelstein S, Hambrick D. 1996. Strategic Leadership: Top Executives and Their Effects
   on Organizations. Minneapolis, MN: West
Frydman C. 2007. Rising through the ranks: the evolution of the market for corporate
   executives, 1936--2003. Work. Pap., MIT
Frydman C, Molloy R. 2010. Does tax policy affect executive compensation? Evidence
   from postwar tax reforms. Work. Pap., MIT
Frydman C, Saks RE. 2010. Executive compensation: a new view from a long-term
   perspective, 1936--2005. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23(5):2099--138
Gabaix X, Landier A. 2008. Why has CEO pay increased so much? Q. J. Econ. 123(1):49--
   100
Garen J. 1994. Executive compensation and principal-agent theory. J. Polit Econ.
   102(6):1175--99
Garicano L, Rossi-Hansberg E. 2006. Organization and inequality in a knowledge
   economy. Q. J. Econ. 121(4):1383--435
Garvey GT, Milbourn TT. 2003. Incentive compensation when executives can hedge the
   market: evidence of relative performance evaluation in the cross section. J. Financ.
   58(4):1557--81
Garvey GT, Milbourn TT. 2006. Asymmetric benchmarking in compensation: executives
   are rewarded for good luck but not penalized for bad. J. Financ. Econ. 82(1):197--225
Gaver JJ, Gaver KM. 1995. Compensation policy and the investment opportunity set.
   Financ. Manage. 24(1):19--32
Gayle GL, Miller RA. 2009. Has moral hazard become a more important factor in
   managerial compensation? Am. Econ. Rev. 99(5):1740--69
Gibbons R, Murphy KJ. 1990. Relative performance evaluation for chief executive
   officers. Indiv. Labor Relat. Rev. 43(3):30S--51S
Gibbons R, Murphy KJ. 1992. Optimal incentive contracts in the presence of career
   concerns: theory and evidence. J. Polit. Econ. 100(3):468--505
Goldman E, Slezak SL. 2006. An equilibrium model of incentive contracts in the presence
   of information manipulation. J. Financ. Econ. 80(3):603--26


                                                                                      31
Gopalan R, Milbourn T, Song F. 2009. Strategic flexibility and the optimality of pay for
   sector performance. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23(5):2060--98
Graham JR, Li S, Qiu J. 2009. Managerial attributes and executive compensation. Work.
   Pap., Duke Univ.
Grinstein Y, Weinbaum D, Yehuda N. 2009. The economic consequences of perks
   disclosure. Work. Pap., Cornell Univ.
Guay WR. 1999. The sensitivity of CEO wealth to equity risk: an analysis of the
   magnitude and determinants. J. Financ. Econ. 53(1):43--71
Habib MA, Ljungqvist A. 2005. Firm value and managerial incentives: a stochastic frontier
   approach. J. Bus. 78(6):2053--94
Hall B, Liebman J. 1998. Are CEOs really paid like bureaucrats? Q. J. Econ. 113(3):653--
   91
Hall B, Murphy KJ. 2002. Stock options for undiversified executives. J. Account. Econ.
   33(1):3--42
Hall B, Murphy KJ. 2003. The trouble with stock options. J. Econ. Perspect. 17(3):49--70
Hartzell JC, Ofek E, Yermack, D. 2004. What’s in it for me? Private benefits obtained by
   CEOs whose companies are acquired. Rev. Financ. Stud. 17(1):37--61
Haubrich JG. 1994. Risk aversion, performance pay, and the principal-agent problem. J.
   Polit. Econ. 102(2):258--76
Healy P. 1985. The effect of bonus schemes on accounting decisions. J. Account. Econ.
   7(1--3):85--107
Hermalin BE. 2005. Trends in corporate governance. J. Financ. 60(5):2351--84
Hermalin BE, Weisbach MS. 1991. The effects of board composition and direct incentives
   on firm performance. Financ. Manage. 20(4):101--12
Heron RA, Lie E. 2007. Does backdating explain the stock price pattern around executive
   stock option grants? J. Financ. Econ. 83(2):271--95
Heron RA, Lie E. 2009. What fraction of the stock option grants to top executives have
   been backdated or manipulated? Manage. Sci. 55(4):513--25
Himmelberg CP, Hubbard RG. 2000. Incentive pay and the market for CEOs: an analysis
   of pay-for-performance sensitivity. Work. Pap., Columbia Univ.
Himmelberg CP, Hubbard RG, Palia D. 1999. Understanding the determinants of
   managerial ownership and the link between ownership and performance. J. Financ.
   Econ. 53(3):353--84
Holmström B. 1979. Moral hazard and observability. Bell J. Econ. 10(1):74--91
Holmström B. 1982. Moral hazard in teams. Bell J. Econ.13(2):324--40
Holmström B, Kaplan SN. 2001. Corporate governance and merger activity in the United
   States: making sense of the 1980s and 1990s. J. Econ. Perspect. 15(2):121--44
Holthausen RW, Larcker DF, Sloan RG. 1995. Annual bonus schemes and the

                                                                                      32
   manipulation of earnings. J. Account. Econ. 19(1):29--74
Hubbard RG, Palia D. 1995. Executive pay and performance: evidence from the US
   banking industry. J. Financ. Econ. 39(1):105--30
Huson MR, Parrino R, Starks LT. 2001. Internal monitoring mechanisms and CEO
   turnover: a long-term perspective. J. Financ. 56(6):2265--97
Inderst R, Mueller HM. 2009. CEO replacement under private information. Rev. Financ.
   Stud. Forthcoming
Ingersoll J. 2006. The subjective and objective evaluation of incentive stock options. J.
   Bus. 79(2):453--87
Janakiraman S, Lambert RA, Larcker DF. 1992. An empirical investigation of the relative
   performance evaluation hypothesis. J. Account. Res. 30(1):53--69
Jensen MC. 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers. Am.
   Econ. Rev. 76(2):323--29
Jensen MC, Meckling WH. 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs
   and ownership structure. J. Financ. Econ. 3(4):305--60
Jensen MC, Murphy KJ. 1990a. Performance pay and top management Incentives. J. Polit.
   Econ. 98(2):225--64
Jensen MC, Murphy KJ. 1990b. CEO incentives: It’s not how much, but how. Harvard
   Bus. Rev. 68(3):138--53
Jenter D. 2002. Executive compensation, incentives, and risk. Work. Pap., MIT
Jenter D, Kanaan F. 2010. CEO turnover and relative performance evaluation. J. Financ.
    Forthcoming
Jenter D, Lewellen K. 2010. Performance-induced CEO turnover. Work. Pap., Stanford
    Univ.
Jin L. 2002. CEO compensation, diversification, and incentives. J. Financ. Econ. 66(1):29-
    -63
John T, John K. 1993. Top-management compensation and capital structure. J. Financ.
   48(3):949--74
Johnson SA, Ryan HE, Tian YS. 2009. Managerial incentives and corporate fraud: the
   sources of incentives matter. Rev. Financ. 13(1):115--45
Joskow P, Rose N. 1994. CEO pay and firm performance: dynamics, asymmetries, and
   alternative performance measures. Work. Pap. 4976, NBER
Kaplan SN. 2008. Are U.S. CEOs overpaid? Acad. Manage. Perspect. 22(2):5--20
Kaplan SN, Minton B. 2008. How has CEO turnover changed? Increasingly performance
   sensitive boards and increasingly uneasy CEOs. Work. Pap., Univ. Chicago
Klein D, Maug E. 2009. How do executives exercise their stock options? Work. Pap., Univ.
   Mannheim


                                                                                       33
Kuhnen CM, Zwiebel J. 2009. Executive pay, hidden compensation and managerial
   entrenchment. Work. Pap., Northwest. Univ.
Kumar R, Sopariwala PR. 1992. The effect of adoption of long-term performance plans on
  stock prices and accounting numbers. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 27(4):561--73
Lambert RA, Lanen WN, Larcker DF. 1989. Executive stock option plans and corporate
   dividend policy. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 24(4):409--25
Lambert RA, Larcker DF. 1985. Golden parachutes, executive decision-making, and
   shareholder wealth. J. Account. Econ. 7(1--3):179--203
Lambert RA, Larcker DF. 1987. An analysis of the use of accounting and market measures
   of performance in executive compensation contracts. J. Account. Res. 25:85--125
Lambert RA, Larcker DF, Verrecchia RE. 1991. Portfolio considerations in valuing
   executive compensation. J. Account. Res. 29(1):129--49
Larcker DF. 1983. The association between performance plan adoption and corporate
   capital investment. J. Account. Econ. 5(1):3--30
Lazear EP. 2004. Output-based pay: incentives or sorting? In Research in Labor
   Economics, 23, Accounting For Worker Well-Being, ed. SW Polachek, pp. 1--25.
   Oxford: JAI/Elsevier
Levy FS, Temin P. 2007. Inequality and institutions in 20th century America. Work. Pap.,
   MIT
Lewellen K. 2006. Financing decisions when managers are risk averse. J. Financ. Econ.
   82(3):551--89
Lewellen W, Huntsman B. 1970. Managerial pay and corporate performance. Am. Econ.
   Rev. 60(4):710--20
Lie E. 2005. On the timing of CEO stock option awards. Manage. Sci. 51(5):802--12
Manso G. 2009. Motivating innovation. Work. Pap. MIT
McConnell JJ, Servaes H. 1990. Additional evidence on equity ownership and corporate
  value. J. Financ. Econ. 27(2):595--612
Mehran H. 1995. Executive compensation structure, ownership, and firm performance. J.
  Financ. Econ. 38(2):163--84
Mehran H, Nogler GE, Schwartz KB. 1998. CEO incentive plans and corporate liquidation
  policy. J. Financ. Econ. 50(3):319--49
Meulbroek L. 2001. The efficiency of equity-linked compensation: understanding the full
  cost of awarding stock options. Financ. Manage. 30(2):5--30
Morck R, Shleifer A, Vishny RW. 1988. Management ownership and market valuation: an
  empirical analysis. J. Financ. Econ. 20(1--2):293--315
Morck R, Shleifer A, Vishny RW. 1990. Do managerial objectives drive bad acquisitions?
  J. Financ. 45(1):31--48
Morgan AG, Poulsen AB. 2001. Linking pay to performance—compensation proposals in

                                                                                     34
   the S&P 500. J. Financ. Econ. 62(3):489--523
Murphy KJ. 1985. Corporate performance and managerial remuneration: an empirical
  analysis. J. Account. Econ. 7(1--3):11--42
Murphy KJ. 1999. Executive compensation. In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3B,
  ed. O Ashenfelter, D Card, pp. 2485--563. Amsterdam: Elsevier/North-Holland
Murphy KJ. 2002. Explaining executive compensation: managerial power versus the
  perceived cost of stock options. Univ. Chicago Law Rev. 69(3):847--69
Murphy KJ, Zábojník J. 2004. CEO pay and appointments: a market-based explanation for
  recent trends. Am. Econ. Rev. 94(2):192--96
Murphy KJ, Zábojník J. 2007. Managerial capital and the market for CEOs. Work. Pap.,
  Univ. South. Calif.
Nagel GL. 2010. The effect of labor market demand on U.S. CEO pay since 1980. Financ.
   Rev. Forthcoming
Narayanan MP, Seyhun HN. 2008. The dating game: Do managers designate option grant
   dates to increase their compensation? Rev. Financ. Stud. 21(5):1907--45
Palia D. 2001. The endogeneity of managerial compensation in firm valuation: a solution.
    Rev. Financ. Stud. 14(3):735--64
Peng L, Röell A. 2008. Executive pay and shareholder litigation. Rev. Financ. 12(1):141--
   84
Piketty T, Saez E. 2003. Income inequality in the United States, 1913--1998. Q. J. Econ.
   118(1):1--39
Rajan RG, Wulf J. 2006. Are perks purely managerial excess? J. Financ. Econ. 79(1):1--33
Rajgopal S, Shevlin T. 2002. Empirical evidence on the relation between stock option
   compensation and risk taking. J. Account. Econ. 33(2):145--71
Roberts DR. 1956. A general theory of executive compensation based on statistically
   tested propositions. Q. J. Econ. 70(2):270--94
Rosen S. 1981. The economics of superstars. Am. Econ. Rev. 71(5):845--58
Rosen S. 1982. Authority, control, and the distribution of earnings. Bell J. Econ.
   13(2):311--23
Rosen S. 1992. Contracts and the market for executives. In Contract Economics, ed. L
   Wein, H Wijkander. Cambridge: Blackwell
Rusticus TO. 2006. Executive severance agreements. Work. Pap., Univ. Penn.
Schaefer S. 1998. The dependence of pay-performance sensitivity on the size of the firm.
   Rev. Econ. Stat. 80(3):436--43
Schoar A. 2008. CEO careers and style. Work. Pap., MIT
Smith CW, Watts RL. 1992. The investment opportunity set and corporate financing,
   dividend and compensation policies. J. Financ. Econ. 32(3):263--92


                                                                                      35
Sundaram RK, Yermack DL. 2007. Pay me later: inside debt and its role in managerial
   compensation. J. Financ. 62(4):1551--88
Terviö M. 2008. The difference that CEOs make: an assignment model approach. Am.
   Econ. Rev. 98(3):642--68
Tufano P. 1996. Who manages risk? An empirical examination of risk management
   practices in the gold mining industry. J. Financ. 51(4):1097--137
Yermack D. 1995. Do corporations award CEO stock options effectively? J. Financ. Econ.
   39(2--3):237--69
Yermack D. 1997. Good timing: CEO stock option awards and company news
   announcements. J. Financ. 52(2):449--76
Yermack D. 2006a. Flights of fancy: corporate jets, CEO perquisites, and inferior
   shareholder returns. J. Financ. Econ. 80(1):211--42
Yermack D. 2006b. Golden handshakes: separation pay for retired and dismissed CEOs. J.
   Account. Econ. 41(3):237--56




                                                                                   36
Figure 1: Median Compensation of CEOs and Other Top Officers from 1936 to 2005
Figure 1 shows the median level of total compensation in a sample of the three highest-paid officers in the
largest 50 firms in 1940, 1960 and 1990 (for a total of 101 firms). Firms are selected according to total
sales in 1960 and 1990, and according to market value in 1940. Compensation data is hand-collected for all
available years from 1936 to 1992; the S&P ExecuComp database is used to extend the data to 2005
(Frydman & Saks 2010). Total compensation is composed of salary, bonuses, long-term bonus payments
(including grants of restricted stock), and stock option grants (valued using Black-Scholes). The CEO is
identified as the president of the company in firms where the CEO title is not used. “Other top officers”
include any executives among the three highest paid who are not the CEO. All dollar values are in
inflation-adjusted 2000 dollars.
           Executive compensation in 2000 dollars (log scale)




                                                                2.5
                                                                2.4
                                                                 10
                                                                2.3
                                                                2.2
                                                                  8
                                                                2.1
                                                                  2
                                                                  6
                                                                1.9
                                                                1.8
                                                                1.7
                                                                1.6
                                                                  4
                                                                1.5
                                                                1.4
                                                                1.3
                                                                1.2
                                                                1.1
                                                                  2
                                                                  1
                                                                0.9
                                                                0.8
                                                                0.7
                                                                0.6
                                                                0.5
                                                                0.4
                                                                0.3
                                                                      1940   1950     1960   1970     1980      1990       2000

                                                                                    CEOs            Other top executives




                                                                                                                                  37
Figure 2: The Structure of CEO Compensation

Panel A: The structure of CEO compensation from 1936 to 2005
The diagram shows the median level and the average composition of CEO pay in the 50 largest firms in
1940, 1960, and 1990 (for a total of 101 firms). Compensation data are hand-collected from proxy statements
for all available years from 1936 to 1992; the S&P ExecuComp database is used to extend the data to 2005
(Frydman & Saks 2010). The figure depicts total compensation and the three main components that can be
separately tracked over the sample period: salaries and current bonuses, payouts from long-term incentive
plans (including the value of restricted stock), and the grant-date values of option grants (calculated using
Black-Scholes). The component percentages are calculated by computing the percentages for average CEO
pay in each period and then applying them to median CEO pay, as in Murphy (1999). All dollar values are in
inflation-adjusted 2000 dollars. Note that the vertical axis is on a log scale.


                                                       2.50
                                                    $10,000                                                                                   $9.2m


                                                    $8,000
     CEO compensation in 2000 dollars (log scale)




                                                      2.00
                                                    $6,000                                                                                      37%     Options
                                                                                                                                    $4.1m
                                                    $4,000
                                                      1.50
                                                                                                                                     32%


                                                                                                                                                23%
                                                                                                                                                        LTIP &
                                                                                                                          $1.8m                         Stock
                                                     $2,000
                                                       1.00                                                                 19%
                                                                                                                                      15%

                                                                                                                $1.2m
                                                              $1.1m     $1.1m
                                                                                            $1.0m     $1.0m                  7%

                                                                                  $0.9m                           11%


                                                    $1,000
                                                       0.50    100%       99%       99%       93%      87%        84%       74%      53%        40%
                                                                                                                                                        Salary &
                                                                                                                                                        Bonus



                                                       0.00
                                                              1936-39   1940-45   1946-49   1950-59   1960-69   1970-79   1980-89   1990-99   2000-05




                                                                                                                                                                 38
Panel B: The structure of CEO compensation from 1992 to 2008
The diagram shows the median level and the average composition of CEO pay in S&P 500 firms from 1992
to 2008 and is based on ExecuComp data. The figure depicts total compensation and its main components:
salaries, bonuses and payouts from long-term incentive plans, the grant-date values of option grants
(calculated using Black-Scholes), the grant-date values of restricted stock grants, and miscellaneous other
compensation (perquisites, contributions to benefit plans, discounts on stock purchases, etc.). The component
percentages are calculated by computing the percentages for average CEO pay in each period and then
applying them to median CEO pay. All dollar values are in inflation-adjusted 2000 dollars. This figure is an
expanded version of Figure 2 in Murphy (1999).


                                        $8,000

                                                                                                         $7.0m
                                        $7,000                                                             5%
                                                                                 $6.4m           $6.5m
                                                                                         $6.3m
                                                                                  6%
                                                                                                   5%            $6.1m
     CEO compensation in 2000 dollars




                                                                                          5%
                                        $6,000                                    7%
                                                                                                                   5%    Other
                                                                                          8%      15%     26%


                                                                         $4.9m
                                        $5,000
                                                                          6%
                                                                                                                  32%    Stock
                                                                          7%

                                                                                  49%     47%     36%
                                        $4,000                   $3.6m                                    25%


                                                                          39%

                                        $3,000           $2.8m                                                    25%    Options
                                                                  33%
                                                 $2.3m
                                                          27%                                     27%     27%
                                        $2,000    20%                             21%
                                                                                          21%
                                                                                                                         Bonus &
                                                                          25%                                     21%
                                                                  28%
                                                  28%     27%                                                            LTIP
                                        $1,000
                                                  42%     34%     28%     23%     17%     20%     17%     16%
                                                                                                                  17%    Salary
                                           $0
                                                 1992    1994    1996    1998    2000    2002    2004    2006    2008




                                                                                                                                  39
Figure 3: CEO Incentives in S&P 500 Firms from 1992 to 2005
The diagram shows the median equity incentives of CEOs in S&P 500 firms from 1992 to 2005 and is based
on ExecuComp data. The Jensen-Murphy statistic is the dollar change in executive wealth for a $1,000
change in firm value and is calculated as the executive’s fractional equity ownership [(number of shares held
+ number of options held * average option delta) / (number of shares outstanding)] multiplied by $1,000.
Option deltas and holdings are computed using the Core & Guay (2002a) approximation as implemented by
Edmans et al. (2009). Equity-at-stake is the dollar change in executive wealth for a 1% change in firm value
and is the product of the executive’s fractional equity ownership (defined as in the Jensen-Murphy statistic)
and the firm’s equity market capitalization. All dollar values are in inflation-adjusted 2000 dollars.


                                                                                                      21
                                      0.70


                                                                                                      18
                                      0.60




                                                                                                           Jensen-Murphy Statistic ($)
       Equity-at-Stake ($ millions)




                                                                                                      15
                                      0.50


                                      0.40                                                            12



                                      0.30                                                            9



                                      0.20                                                            6


                                      0.10                                                            3
                                             1992   1994    1996      1998   2000     2002     2004

                                                           Equity-at-stake          Jensen-Murphy




                                                                                                                                         40
Table 1: Executive Compensation Levels from 1992 to 2008
The two panels show the median (Panel A) and mean (Panel B) annual pay for CEOs and non-CEO top
executives from 1992 to 2008 in S&P 500, S&P MidCap 400, and S&P SmallCap 600 firms. The panels are
based on ExecuComp data and include the CEO and the three highest-paid executives for each firm-year.
Annual compensation is the sum of salaries, bonuses, payouts from long-term incentive plans, the grant-date
values of option grants (calculated using Black-Scholes), the grant-date values of restricted stock grants, and
miscellaneous other compensation. All dollar values are in inflation-adjusted 2000 dollars. Non-CEOs
include any executives among the three highest-paid who are not the CEO.

         Panel A: Median compensation levels from 1992 to 2008 ($ millions)
                          S&P 500                  MidCap 400                  SmallCap 600
        Year         CEO Non-CEOs                CEO Non-CEOs                CEO Non-CEOs
        1992          2.3       1.2                —       —                  —         —
        1993          2.2       1.2                —       —                  —         —
        1994          2.8       1.4               1.4      0.8                0.9       0.5
        1995          3.1       1.5               1.4      0.8                0.9       0.5
        1996          3.6       1.8               1.7      0.9                1.0       0.6
        1997          4.2       2.1               2.2      1.1                1.2       0.7
        1998          4.9       2.4               2.2      1.2                1.3       0.7
        1999          5.8       2.8               2.4      1.3                1.3       0.7
        2000          6.4       3.2               2.6      1.4                1.4       0.8
        2001          7.2       3.2               2.5      1.3                1.4       0.7
        2002          6.3       2.7               2.8      1.3                1.3       0.7
        2003          6.2       2.7               2.5      1.2                1.4       0.7
        2004          6.5       2.9               2.9      1.2                1.6       0.8
        2005          6.3       2.8               2.9      1.3                1.7       0.8
        2006          7.0       3.0               2.9      1.3                1.5       0.8
        2007          6.9       3.1               3.3      1.4                1.5       0.7
        2008          6.1       2.7               3.0      1.3                1.4       0.7

         Panel B: Average compensation levels from 1992 to 2008 ($ millions)
                          S&P 500                  MidCap 400                  SmallCap 600
        Year         CEO Non-CEOs                CEO Non-CEOs                CEO Non-CEOs
        1992          3.0       1.6                —       —                  —         —
        1993          3.2       1.9                —       —                  —         —
        1994          3.9       2.0               2.2      1.3                1.4       0.8
        1995          4.3       2.3               2.4      1.3                1.3       0.8
        1996          6.2       2.9               3.0      1.6                1.6       0.9
        1997          7.6       4.0               3.6      1.8                1.9       1.1
        1998          9.6       4.7               4.0      1.8                2.0       1.1
        1999          10.       5.6               4.6      2.2                2.0       1.1
        2000          14.       7.3               4.4      2.4                2.2       1.2
        2001          12.       6.0               4.2      1.9                2.2       1.1
        2002          9.1       4.5               3.9      1.9                2.0       1.0
        2003          8.3       3.9               3.5      1.6                1.9       1.0
        2004          8.9       4.2               4.0      1.8                2.2       1.1
        2005          8.9       4.2               4.1      1.8                2.5       1.2
        2006          9.5       4.7               3.9      1.7                2.0       1.0
        2007          8.9       4.6               3.9      1.8                2.1       1.1
        2008          8.2       3.9               3.6      1.7                2.0       1.0


                                                                                                           41
Table 2: Managerial Incentives and Equity Holdings from 1936 to 2005
Based on the three-highest paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960, and 1990. Firms are selected
according to total sales in 1960 and 1990, and according to market value in 1940. Compensation data is
hand-collected from proxy statements for all available years from 1936 to 1992; the S&P ExecuComp
database is used to extend the data to 2005 (Frydman & Saks 2010). Each column shows the median across
all executives in each decade. The Jensen-Murphy statistic is the dollar change in executive wealth for a
$1,000 change in firm value, and is calculated as the executive’s fractional equity ownership [(number of
shares held + number of options held * average option delta) / (number of shares outstanding)] multiplied by
$1,000. Option deltas are computed using the Core & Guay (2002a) approximation. Equity-at-Stake is the
dollar change in executive wealth for a 1% change in firm value, and is the product of the executive’s
fractional equity ownership (defined as in the Jensen-Murphy statistic) and the firm’s equity market
capitalization. The Value of Stock Holdings is the number of shares owned at the beginning of the year
multiplied by the stock price. The Value of Option Holdings is the Black-Scholes value of stock options held
at the beginning of the year. All dollar values are in inflation-adjusted 2000 dollars.


                            Managerial incentives
                                                                          Dollar value of equity held
                      ( from stock & option holdings)
            Jensen-Murphy statistic Value of equity-at-stake
                                                                      Value of stock      Value of option
             (dollar gain for $1000       (dollar gain for 1%
                                                                       holdings ($)        holdings ($)
             increase in firm value)    increase in firm value)
                       (1)                        (2)                       (3)                 (4)
 1936-40             1.350                       18,670                   1,566,287                  0
 1941-49             0.399                        6,814                     679,429                  0
 1950-59             0.452                       13,975                   1,169,857                  0
 1960-69             0.675                       38,978                   2,333,663            212,150
 1970-79             0.470                       21,743                   1,281,266            244,082
 1980-89             0.551                       34,679                   1,604,861            926,869
 1990-99             0.946                      120,342                   4,068,013          3,622,806
 2000-05             1.080                      227,881                   4,966,035          7,160,898




                                                                                                            42
