NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY HAVE ECONOMIC REFORMS IN MEXICO NOT GENERATED GROWTH?
Timothy J. Kehoe
Kim J. Ruhl
Working Paper 16580
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16580

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

This work was undertaken with the support of the National Science Foundation under grant SES-09-62865.
The paper was prepared for a mini-symposium in the Journal of Economic Literature on lack of economic
growth in Mexico following its economic reforms. The editor, Janet Currie, provided several very
helpful suggestions. José Asturias and Sewon Hur provided extraordinary research assistance. We
thank Tom Holmes, Ellen McGrattan, Ed Prescott, and Jaime Serra-Puche for helpful discussions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The data used in this paper are available at www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe and at www.kimjruhl.com.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Timothy J. Kehoe and Kim J. Ruhl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Why Have Economic Reforms in Mexico Not Generated Growth?
Timothy J. Kehoe and Kim J. Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 16580
December 2010
JEL No. F43,O47,P52
ABSTRACT
Following its opening to trade and foreign investment in the mid-1980s, Mexico’s economic growth
has been modest at best, particularly in comparison with that of China. Comparing these countries
and reviewing the literature, we conclude that the relation between openness and growth is not a simple
one. Using standard trade theory, we find that Mexico has gained from trade, and by some measures,
more so than China. We sketch out a theory in which developing countries can grow faster than the
United States by reforming. As a country becomes richer, this sort of catch-up becomes more difficult.
Absent continuing reforms, Chinese growth is likely to slow down sharply, perhaps leaving China
at a level less than Mexico’s real GDP per working-age person.
Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
tkehoe@umn.edu
Kim J. Ruhl
NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Economics
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 7-86
New York, NY 10012-1126
kruhl@stern.nyu.edu

1. Introduction
During the decade that followed its severe economic crisis of 1982–85, the Mexican government
implemented a series of market-oriented reforms that culminated in the implementation of the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994. These reforms included fiscal
reforms, privatization of government operated firms, and opening the economy to trade and
foreign investment. In spite of these reforms, Mexico’s economic growth since 1985 has been
modest, at best. This growth is especially disappointing if we compare it with that of China,
another large, less developed country that started opening itself to the rest of the world after
Mexico.
In this paper, we ask why Mexico’s reforms did not result in higher rates of economic
growth. We focus on the reforms that opened Mexico to trade and foreign investment. It is
worth noting that one of the authors was a proponent of these reforms as a means for achieving
higher growth in Mexico (see Timothy J. Kehoe 1992, 1994). Figure 1 presents data on
Mexico’s trade in goods and services as a percentage of its GDP, while figure 2 presents data on
inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI). Notice that Mexico’s apertura, or opening, resulted
in large increases in trade and FDI. (See Kehoe 1995 for the details of the reforms involved in
the apertura.) In particular, Mexico’s trade and inward FDI as shares of its GDP reached levels
comparable to those achieved by China. Figure 3 presents the disappointing data on economic
growth in Mexico. While real GDP per working-age person (15–64 years old) grew by 510
percent (8.2 percent per year) in China over the period 1985–2008, it grew by only 10 percent
(0.4 percent per year) in Mexico.1 Notice that the vertical axis in figure 3 has a log base 2 scale,
so that China’s relatively constant growth shows up as being close to linear.
[Figures 1, 2, and 3 here]
China and Mexico are major exporters and importers in the world economy. In 1995, China
had the largest merchandise trade among countries classified by the International Monetary Fund
as emerging and developing, accounting for 12.7 percent of emerging and developing trade,
while Mexico was second, accounting for 7.0 percent. In 2008, China is still the largest trader at

1

We use real GDP per working-age person, rather than real GDP per capita, because it measures better an
economy’s ability to produce goods and services, especially in the context of the neoclassical growth model that we
discuss in section 4. When we discuss welfare in section 3, we use real GDP per capita. Another measure
appropriate for welfare would be real GDP per adult equivalent. All of the data used in this paper are available at
www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe and at www.kimjruhl.com.

1

22.3 percent, while Mexico has dropped to third, at 5.4 percent, slightly behind Russia. China
and Mexico had some of the largest receipts of FDI among emerging and developing economies.
In 1995, China was the largest recipient of FDI to emerging and developing economies,
accounting for 33.4 percent, while Mexico was second, accounting for 8.5 percent. By 2008,
China has remained the largest recipient of FDI to emerging and developing economies, at 14.8
percent, but Mexico has fallen to seventh, at 3.2 percent, falling behind Russia, Hungary, Brazil,
India, and Saudi Arabia.2
We begin by reviewing the existing literature, asking whether it provides a convincing
answer to the question of why Mexico stagnated after opening itself to trade while China grew
rapidly. Although a number of studies are informative, we do not find an answer to this
question. As Claustre Bajona, Mark J. Gibson, Kehoe, and Kim J. Ruhl (2010) argue, standard
trade models do not imply that opening to trade increases productivity or real GDP, but that it
increases welfare. Examining the mechanisms through which opening to trade increases welfare,
we find evidence that welfare increased more in Mexico than the real GDP data indicate and that
the growth gap between Mexico and China is not as large. Nonetheless, a large growth gap
remains, and, to account for this growth gap, we need to identify a critical factor that impeded
growth in Mexico but not in China, or a different factor that spurred growth in China but not in
Mexico. Performing a simple growth accounting exercise, we find that this sort of factor, when
inserted into a growth model, would need to explain why total factor productivity (TFP)
stagnated in Mexico while it grew rapidly in China. We review a number of possible factors
suggested by the literature — some associated with trade and foreign investment policies and
others associated with domestic policies.
We conclude by suggesting directions for future research. In particular, we sketch out a
theory suggested by the research of Stephen L. Parente and Edward C. Prescott (1994, 2002) and
Kehoe and Prescott (2002, 2007). In this theory, technology in the form of the stock of useable
knowledge in the industrial leader — which we identify as being the United States over the past
century — grows at a constant rate. If institutions and economic policies are constant, this
implies a constant rate of growth of real GDP per working-age person. Developing economies
like Mexico and China can grow faster than this rate by improving institutions and reforming
policies. The possibilities for such catch-up growth depend on the distance of the developing
2

FDI inflows are more volatile than merchandise trade, so the list of leaders changes more frequently.

economy from the frontier, the level of real GDP per working-age person in the United States.
In Mexico — which, in spite of its slower growth, is still closer to the United States in terms of
real GDP per working-age person than is China — this catch-up growth is more difficult. Our
theory suggests that the factors that currently impede growth in Mexico, such as inefficient
financial institutions, and insufficient rule of law, and rigidities in the labor market, do not yet do
so in China because China has not yet reached a sufficient level of economic development. We
hypothesize that, as China grows, these factors will become more important and, absent
significant reforms, growth in China will slow down sharply, as it has in Mexico.
2. Literature review
We now survey the existing literature related to our question of why Mexico stagnated after
opening itself to trade and foreign investment while China grew rapidly. Since this literature is
large, we focus on those studies particularly relevant to the theory that we sketch out in section 5.
2.1. Cross-country growth regressions
In contrast with the approach of this paper, which compares the experience of Mexico after it
opened itself to foreign trade and investment with that of China, there is a large literature that
includes measures of openness in cross-country growth regressions. The literature on the
empirical relationship between trade policy regimes and economic performance goes back to the
1970s. Sebastian Edwards (1989) provides a comprehensive summary of the early work. It is
worth noting that Edwards criticizes much of the previous literature, and in particular the World
Bank (1987), for employing univariate measures of policies that divide countries into open or
closed, noting that such divisions are often highly subjective and run the risk of simply verifying
the policy preferences of the researchers doing the study.
We focus on the seminal work of Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner (1995), who construct a
univariate measure of openness that classifies a country as closed if it had any one of five
characteristics: (1) a high average tariff rate, (2) nontariff barriers on a large fraction of imports,
(3) a socialist economic system, (4) a state monopoly over major exports, or (5) a high blackmarket premium during either the 1970s or the 1980s. Sachs and Warner find that countries that
are open, in that they have none of these characteristics, have on average 2.4 percent per year
higher growth in real GDP per capita than those that were closed. Of particular relevance to the

comparison between Mexico and China is Sachs and Warner’s classification of Mexico as closed
up until 1986 but open thereafter and their classification of China as being closed. They classify
China as a socialist economy and note that, although China has progressively liberalized since
1978, its trading system was still rife with quantitative restrictions at least as of 1994. Updating
the Sachs-Warner classification, Romain Wacziarg and Karen Horn Welch (2008) classify
Mexico as open but China as still closed because of its socialist regime and its black market
premium.
Francisco Rodríguez and Dani Rodrik (2000) criticize Sachs and Warner, pointing out that
the power of the openness variable in their regressions derives mostly from the state-monopolyof-exports and the black-market-premium criteria. These criteria, Rodríguez and Rodrik argue,
are not measures of trade policy per se and, overall, the Sachs-Warner openness variable serves
as a proxy for a very broad range of institutional and policy variables. Warner (2003) responds
to this criticism by showing that the average tariff on imports of capital and intermediate goods
has a significantly negative effect on growth and that the state-monopoly-of-exports and the
black-market-premium criteria can be dropped as long as he controls for initial GDP per capita.
It should be noted that, in Warner’s data set, Mexico has lower than average tariffs on capital and
intermediate goods and China has higher than average tariffs. As Rodríguez (2007) points out,
the message of Warner (2003) is much more nuanced than that of Sachs and Warner (1995) and,
in particular, openness seems to have a more positive effect on poorer countries than on middle
income countries.
Another attempt to respond to Rodríguez and Rodrik’s (2000) criticism of Sachs and Warner
(1995) is that of David Dollar and Aart Kraay (2004), who examine the impact of first
differences in openness to trade on growth. They identify “globalizers” as countries that
significantly increased their ratios of trade to GDP between the late 1970s and the late 1990s.
Dollar and Kraay find that globalizers experienced large increases in their growth of real GDP
per capita, while non-globalizers saw their growth rates decline. According to the Dollar-Kraay
criterion, both Mexico and China are globalizers.
Three general aspects of the literature are worth noting:
First, there is a positive and robust relationship between a country’s trade as a share of GDP
and its growth rate, as established in the work of such researchers as Jeffrey A. Frankel and
David Romer (1999), Francisco Alcalá and Antonio Ciccone (2004), and Dollar and Kraay

(2004). As a number of researchers, including Rodríguez and Rodrik (2000) and Rodríguez
(2007), have pointed out, however, the trade share is not a direct measure of policy and the
causal relation between the trade share and growth is problematical. Howard L. M. Nye, Sanjay
Reddy, and Kevin Watkins (2002), for example, argue that Dollar and Kraay’s attempt to relate
their results involving changes in trade shares to changes in tariffs is highly sensitive to the years
chosen for tariff changes and the years chosen for growth rates and that Dollar and Kraay’s
results are not robust.
Second and relatedly, the relationship between measures of policies related to openness and
growth does not seem to be robust: A number of researchers — including Ann Harrison (1996)
and Edwards (1998) in addition to those whose work we have already discussed — find a large
and significantly positive relationship between policies related to openness and growth. Other
researchers — like Ha Yan Lee, Luca A. Ricci, and Roberto Rigobon (2004) — find a positive,
but small, relationship. Still others — including Rodrik, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco
Trebbi (2004) in addition to those whose work we have already discussed — do not find a
significant relationship between policies related to openness and economic growth. Other
researchers find more nuanced results: In addition to, and in contrast with, the work of Warner
(2003), Steve Dowrick and Jane Golley (2004) and David N. DeJong and Marla Ripoll (2006)
find that openness has a significantly positive impact on growth only for developed countries,
while Halit Yanikkaya (2003) actually finds that openness has a negative effect on economic
growth for less developed countries.
Third, many of the researchers who study the relationship between openness and growth do
so without being closely guided by a theoretical model. Other researchers, particularly those
working in the 1990s, are guided by the theoretical work on endogenous growth by researchers
such as Luis A. Rivera-Batiz and Paul M. Romer (1991). In this sort of model, there are
typically scale effects from positive externalities in production. That is, everything else being
equal, larger countries should grow more rapidly. International trade can allow a small country
to benefit from these positive externalities. This sort of theory indicates that well-specified
growth regressions need to control for an appropriate measure of country size when studying the
impact of openness. Typically, in these theories, a smaller country benefits more from opening
to international trade than does a larger country. Once again, the empirical results are mixed:
Frankel and Romer (1999) and Alcalá and Ciccone (2004) find a positive relationship between

population size and economic growth. Alberto Alesina, Enrico Spolaore, and Wacziarg (2000)
and Spolaore and Wacziarg (2005) find the same relationship and also find a negative (although
statistically insignificant) coefficient for the interaction term of population size with their
measure of openess. On the other hand, Chris Milner and Tony Westaway (1993), Harrison
(1996), and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1997) find no significant link between measures of population
size and growth. David A. Backus, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Kehoe (1992) similarly find that
growth and size of GDP are largely uncorrelated, but they do find evidence of significant scale
effects in manufacturing, and evidence that these effects are larger and more significant when
they control for a measure of openness suggested by the theory of Rivera-Batiz and Romer
(1991).
2.2. Studies of Mexico’s stagnation
We are by no means the first researchers to study why Mexico has stagnated in spite of its
reforms. In this section we review the research that identifies factors believed to impede growth
in Mexico. For each of these factors we ask: Does China share this characteristic? And, if so,
why has it not impeded growth in China? In many cases we find that the factors associated with
slow growth in Mexico are also present in China, so we are left to ask: Why do these factors
impact growth differently in the two countries?
The most popular set of theories for Mexico’s stagnation focuses on its inefficient financial
system and lack of contract enforcement. Raphael Bergoeing, Raimundo Soto, Kehoe, and
Kehoe (2002, 2007), for example, compare the growth experiences of Mexico and Chile
following their economic crises in the early 1980s. While Mexico stagnated, Chile grew rapidly.
After examining fiscal reforms, privatization, and reforms of policies related to trade and foreign
investment policy in Mexico and Chile, these researchers conclude that the crucial difference
between policies in Mexico and Chile are those related to the financial system and to bankruptcy
proceedings. They sketch out a model of firms with heterogeneous productivity and argue that
an inefficient financial system can misallocate labor and capital, leading to a low measure of
TFP. Furthermore, inefficient bankruptcy proceedings can keep inefficient firms alive and
impede the entry of new, more efficient firms, slowing down the growth of TFP.
Anne Krueger and Aaron Tornell (1999) and Tornell, Frank Westermann, and Lorenza
Martinez (2003) study the recovery of the Mexican economy following the financial crisis of

1994–1995. They find that, while the traded goods sector grew rapidly, the nontraded sector
recovered sluggishly. They argue that this occurred because domestic bank lending dried up
after the crisis, and traded goods firms were able to obtain financing from abroad while
nontraded goods firms were not. One of the reasons that lending dried up was that poor contract
enforcement — such as the inefficient bankruptcy procedures identified by Bergoeing et al.
(2002, 2007) — generated a large quantity of nonperforming loans. Tornell, Westermann, and
Martinez (2003) develop a model in which rapid GDP growth cannot be sustained over a long
period if it is driven only by growth in the traded goods sector, because firms producing traded
goods need nontraded inputs.
The problem with identifying a poorly functioning financial system and lack of contract
enforcement as the factors that differentiate Mexico from China is that China also has a poorly
functioning financial system and lack of contract enforcement. Thomas G. Rawski (1994) and
Franklin Allen, Jun Qian, and Meijun Qian (2005) establish that China has been able to achieve
phenomenal economic growth with a poorly functioning financial system and legal system and
without any significant reforms to these systems. Studying the Chinese experience, Alessandra
Guariglia and Sandra Poncet (2008) go so far as to question whether an efficient financial system
is necessary for growth at all.
Other researchers identify other possible impediments to growth in Mexico. Gueorgui
Kambourov (2009), for example, argues that a rigid labor market kept Mexico from benefiting as
much from opening to trade as Chile did. Nora Lustig (2001) identifies an institutional vacuum
in the agricultural sector after government intervention there was reduced as leaving many
producers with less access to credit and technical assistance. Juan Carlos Moreno-Brid, Jesus
Santamaria, and Juan Carlos Rivas Valdivia (2005) identify a sharp fall in public investment. It
is worth noting that Lustig and Moreno-Brid et al. also identify problems in the financial system
as being significant barriers to growth in Mexico.
The conclusion that we draw from these studies is that factors like an inefficient financial
sector, lack of contract enforcement, and rigidities in the labor market kept Mexico from
benefiting from its reforms to policies involving foreign trade and investment. China also has
these same problems, but we will argue that these did not impede growth as they did in Mexico
because China is at a lower level of development. Perhaps China’s growth is even part of
Mexico’s problem. M. Ayhan Kose, Guy Meredith, and Christopher Towe (2005), for example,

identify increased competition from China in its export markets, as well as problems in the legal
system and rigidities in the labor and telecommunications markets, as barriers to growth in
Mexico.
2.3. Studies of China’s fast growth
A number of researchers have identified rapid TFP growth as the driving force behind Chinese
economic growth. Loren Brandt and Xiaodong Zhu (2009) find that about half of Chinese TFP
growth was due to productivity differences between entering and exiting firms during 19982005. Chang-Tai Hsieh and Peter J. Klenow (2009) identify reallocation of resources from
inefficient firms to efficient firms as a significant determinant of this TFP growth. We ask: Why
have these factors not been at work in Mexico?
Policies related to foreign trade and investment played significant roles in the reallocation of
resources that led to TFP growth. Bajona and Tianshu Chu (2010) argue that China’s 2001
accession protocol to the World Trade Organization forced the Chinese government (or gave
reformers inside the government the political clout) to drastically cut subsidies to the stateowned sector and show that this generated a reallocation from inefficient state-owned firms to
efficient private firms. Zuliu F. Hu and Mohsin S. Khan (1997) argue that reforms that led to
FDI attracted efficient foreign firms to invest in China. Zheng Song, Kjetil Storesletten, and
Fabrizio Zilibotti (forthcoming) build a model to account for China’s recent growth experience,
which is characterized by substantial reallocation within the manufacturing sector in an economy
with large financial imperfections.
It would be tempting to hypothesize that the mechanisms that generated TFP growth in
manufacturing in China were not present in Mexico, but this does not seem to be the case. In
particular, using firm level data for Mexico, Ernesto López-Córdova (2003) finds that trade and
foreign investment reforms resulted in large increases in productivity in the manufacturing sector
in Mexico, especially in the machinery and equipment, computing equipment, and precision
instruments industries. This suggests that problem in Mexico is lack of productivity growth, not
in manufacturing, but in the rest of the economy. It further suggests that we should look at lack
of competition in other sectors in Mexico — such as petroleum extraction, electricity,
telecommunications, and transportation — for the factors inhibiting productivity growth.

We could also hypothesize that China has been able to grow because it has a strong central
government that has been able to overcome some of the problems associated with poorly
functioning markets, while Mexico has not been able to do this. This hypothesis is worth
exploring, but it is worth pointing out two reasons for doubting it: First, Mexico became a
democracy only in the mid-1990s; previously it had a one-party system that was in many ways as
strong and centralized as that in China. Furthermore, the Mexican government controlled the
banking system from 1982 through 1991, and Bergoeing et al. (2002, 2007) identify the
inefficient allocation of credit during this period as a major factor in Mexico’s poor economic
performance. Second, Bajona and Chu (2010) argue that until China joined the WTO, the
banking system there served mostly to funnel savings into investment in inefficient state-owned
enterprises. Allocation of credit by the government seems to have been the major problem in the
financial systems in both Mexico and in China, not a remedy for other problems.
3.

Gains from trade and real GDP

The empirical evidence on the link between trade and growth is inconclusive. What do
theoretical models of international trade predict should happen when a country liberalizes trade?
Perhaps surprisingly, the workhorse models of trade — such as the Ricardian models of Rudiger
Dornbusch, Stanley Fischer, and Paul A. Samuelson (1977) and Jonathan Eaton and Samuel S.
Kortum (2002), or the imperfect competition models of Paul Krugman (1980) and Marc J. Melitz
(2003) — do not yield a clear relationship between trade and real GDP. In these models, real
GDP can increase, can remain unchanged, and can even decrease after tariffs are reduced!
This result follows from the way in which changes in the terms of trade are incorporated into
real GDP. Bajona et al. (2010) show that the change in real GDP from a change in tariffs can be
decomposed into two parts: the change in real GDP at factor prices and the change in real tariff
revenues,
(1)

GDP ( t , pt ( t ))  GDP F ( t , pt ( t ))  T ( t , pt ( t )) ,

where pt is the terms of trade, and  is an ad valorem tariff. If decreasing tariffs changes the
country’s terms of trade, real GDP at factor prices will weakly decrease. The lower tariffs also
generate an increase in imports, and the tariff revenue associated with those imports, computed at
the base period (higher) tariff rate, increases. The change in real GDP is the net effect. If real
tariff revenues increase enough to offset the decline in real GDP at factor prices, real GDP

increases; if the change in tariff revenues is small, real GDP decreases. The effect of the terms
of trade on real GDP in a country without tariffs is addressed in Ulrich Kohli (2004), and in
models with tariffs, in Kehoe and Ruhl (2008) and Robert C. Feenstra, Benjamin R. Mandel,
Marshall B. Reinsdorf, and Matthew J. Slaughter (2009).
The ambiguous impact of trade liberalization on real GDP does not imply an ambiguous
impact of liberalization on welfare: All of the models considered by Bajona et al. predict that
trade reform increases welfare. Accurately measuring the gains from trade for Mexico and
China is an inherently model specific exercise. Costas Arkolakis, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés
Rodríguez-Clare (2010), for example, show that, for a class of models, the change in real income
in a country is a function of the import penetration ratio and a parameter related to the elasticity
of substitution between imports and domestic goods. Changes in import penetration ratios are
similar in Mexico over 1990–2000 and China over 1998–2008, suggesting that, as fractions of
real GDP terms, the gains from trade in China and Mexico are similar, although in absolute
terms, Mexico’s gains are much larger than China’s. Rather than go into model specific details
here, we consider two other measures: an adjustment to real GDP to account for terms of trade
effects and a measure that accounts for the gains from the greater varieties available through
trade. These measures indicate that Mexico has gained more from trade than has China.
It is worth noting that this comparison assumes, for the moment, that China’s higher GDP
growth was not itself a gain from trade. We could restate our comparison as saying the gains
from trade identified by standard models have been higher in Mexico than in China.
3.1. Gains from the terms of trade

Trade liberalization — and, more broadly, globalization — brings about changes in the terms of
trade. Changes in the terms of trade impact welfare in the country but will generally not translate
into changes in real GDP, as discussed above. Kohli (2004) argues that the invariance of real
GDP to changes in the terms of trade makes real GDP a poor measure of country progress;
Kehoe and Ruhl (2008) and Feenstra et al. (2009) study the impact (or lack thereof) of the terms
of trade on measures of productivity. These authors suggest several alternatives to real GDP;
here we use the real gross domestic income (GDI) of a country, as defined by the United
Nations’ System of National Accounts, to capture the impact of changes in the terms of trade on
welfare and productivity.

Real GDI treats the domestic components of expenditure in the same way that real GDP
does — the components are deflated by their respective price indices — but it differs in the
deflation of the trade balance. To compute real GDI, we deflate the trade balance by the import
price deflator: Exports are valued in terms of the amount of imports they could purchase,
GDI t 

(2)

Ct
I
G
X M
 tI  Gt  t M t .
C
Pt
Pt
Pt
Pt

In figure 4 we plot the percentage deviation of real GDI from real GDP for Mexico and China.
We refer to this measure as the terms of trade premium: the gain, relative to real GDP, that
accrues to a country because of changes in the terms of trade. In Mexico, the average terms of
trade premium is 0.17 percent per year, but the crisis in 1994–1995 was accompanied by a sharp
deterioration in the terms of trade; the impact of the financial crisis was worse than real GDP
indicated, and the recovery more robust. In China, the terms of trade have steadily deteriorated
and the resulting adjustment to GDP is striking: Chinese real GDP overstates the growth in real
gross domestic income by almost 8 percentage points over the decade considered. The intuition
for this results is simple: The policies that keep the relative price of imports in China high make
Chinese consumers worse off than the real GDP data indicate.
[Figure 4 here]
3.2. Gains from new varieties

The “new trade models” based on differentiated varieties and increasing returns to scale (for
example, Krugman 1980 and Melitz 2003) imply that trade liberalization not only changes the
prices of goods that were already available for consumption, but also changes the composition of
varieties that are available for consumption. Kehoe and Ruhl (2003) show that, following trade
liberalization, newly traded goods can significantly change the composition of trade between
countries. Capturing the impact of changing varieties is difficult with standard measurements
because it is difficult to account for a good when its initial price is not observed. The seminal
contribution in Feenstra (1994) is a result that, for constant elasticity of substitution (CES)
preferences, the impact of new varieties on prices can be measured despite the absence of initial
prices for some goods.
We apply the technique developed in Feenstra (1994) to compute the gains from the
importation of new varieties for China and Mexico. In what follows, we construct a measure of

the bias in import prices that exists when the changing composition of varieties is ignored in
price indices. This bias allows us to compute the gains from the greater varieties that can be
consumed with trade in China and Mexico. Our approach follows Christian Broda and David E.
Weinstein (2006), which measures the gains from new varieties in the United States.
We classify imports into goods, which are collections of varieties. Goods and varieties enter
utility through a nested CES utility function. The set of all imported goods is G , and for each

g  G , the set of all varieties available at time t is I gt . Note that we have assumed the set of
goods is constant over time, while the set of varieties can change. The sub-utility of imported
good g at time t is an aggregation of varieties,

M gt    d git xgit
 iI
 gt

 g 1
g

(3)





g
 g 1

,

where xgit is the consumption of variety i of good g and d git is a variety specific demand
shifter. All of the varieties of a good have the same elasticity of substitution,  g  1 , but this

elasticity may differ by good. Goods are aggregated into a composite import good in a second
CES aggregator, and, finally, the composite import good and a composite domestic good are
combined in the utility function.
We would like to price the composite import good. Feenstra (1994) shows that, given the
vectors of prices and quantities, p gt and x gt , the exact price index is

(4)

 gt 


gG  gt 1 

 M (p gt , p gt 1 , x gt , x gt 1 , I g )   PgM (p gt , p gt 1 , x gt , x gt 1 , I g )   
gt

gG

 gt
 g 1

.

The index PgM is the CES ideal price index, for good g , computed over the varieties present in
both periods, I g  I gt  I gt 1 , as derived in Kazuo Sato (1976) and Yrjö O. Vartia (1976). gt is
the ideal log change weight, and gt is the share of the common varieties in total expenditure on
good g ,
(5)

gt 




iI g

pgit xgit

cI gt

pgit xgit

.

This is an important result: it allows us to compute the change in the price index even though we
do not have prices for all varieties in all periods. Further details are available in Feenstra (1994)
and Broda and Weinstein (2006).
The second product on the right hand side of equation (4) is the contribution of new
varieties to the price index — what Broda and Weinstein name the aggregate import bias. The
lambda ratio, gt gt 1 , measures the extent to which the changing varieties impact expenditure
on the common set of goods. If the new varieties have small expenditure shares, the lambda
ratio is close to one, and the bias is small. The lambda ratio is weighted by a term that involves
both the good’s elasticity of substitution and the good’s weight in total import expenditure.
Goods with fewer substitutable varieties, or goods with larger weights, have larger impacts on
the bias.
To compute the aggregate import bias, we define a good to be a three-digit category of the
Harmonized System (HS). We define a variety to be a six-digit HS code – country pair. A good,
for example, would be 090, “Coffee, tea, mate, and seed spices,” while a variety would be
090111-Colombia, “Coffee, not roasted, not decaffeinated” from Colombia, which is a different
variety than 090111-Costa Rica. We have 164 goods. In China, the median number of varieties
per good was 300.5 in 1998 and grew to 406.0 in 2008. In Mexico, the median number of
varieties per good rose from 150.5 in 1990 to 230.5 in 2000.
We use the country-specific elasticities estimated in Broda, Joshua Greenfield, and
Weinstein (2006) in our calculations for China and Mexico. The mean and median elasticities
are reported in table 1. Table 1 also summarizes the lambda ratios in the two countries. The
distributions of the lambda ratios are similar; the median lambda ratios are near 0.95 and the 95th
percentile ratio is about 1.03. The bias in the aggregate import price index, over the 11-year
period, is 0.94 for Mexico: the price of a unit of the composite import in Mexico has fallen by 6
percent over the period because of the increase in imported varieties. The composite import
price in China fell by about 5 percent.
[Table 1 here]
We can put these numbers into perspective by calculating the amount of extra income a
consumer would need in order to achieve the same increase in utility over the period without the
new varieties. This equivalent variation is computed as the inverse of the aggregate import
price bias, weighted by the share of imports in total expenditure. We report the import weights

and the equivalent variation in table 1. The consumer in Mexico needs an extra 1.42 percent of
his or her 1990 income — and in China, 1.01 percent of his or her 1998 income — to be
indifferent to the new varieties of imports accumulated over the next ten years.
In table 2 we summarize the impact of trade on real income growth. Column 2 reports the
annual growth rate of the terms of trade premium that we calculated in the previous section. For
China, this implies that real GDP overstates the growth in real income by 0.76 percent per year
due to the deterioration of the terms of trade. Accounting for both the gain in varieties and the
adjustment for the terms of trade, the growth rate of real income per capita in China is 8.33
percent, compared with the 8.99 percent growth in real GDP. In Mexico, the gains from trade
imply that real income has grown about 0.30 percent per year faster than real GDP. As reported
in the World Bank, in Mexico, real GDP per capita at purchasing power parity (PPP) is 10,121
2005 U.S. dollars in 1990 and 2,325 dollars for China in 1998. The absolute gain from these two
adjustments is 319 dollars per capita for Mexico in 2000, and a loss of 148 dollars per capita for
China in 2008.
[Table 2 here.]
Our measurements suggest that Mexico, despite slow growth in GDP, has reaped substantial
benefits from liberalization. We should be clear, however, that our measurements are only
capturing the improvement in welfare that comes from consuming less expensive goods — or
from consuming new varieties of goods — as a result of lower trade barriers. The gains from
trade measured here do not account for other channels through which trade can impact welfare,
such as technology that may be embodied in imported capital goods or spillovers from the
operations of multinational firms. We discuss these possibilities below.
4. Neoclassical growth model and power of productivity

We now argue that a successful theory of why Mexico stagnated even as it opened itself to trade
and foreign investment while China grew rapidly needs to focus on why productivity stagnated
in Mexico while it grew rapidly in China. To do so, we employ the growth accounting
developed by Kehoe and Prescott (2002, 2007). Kehoe and Prescott use the neoclassical growth
model to guide their view of economic data. The model features an aggregate Cobb-Douglas
production function,
(6)


Yt  At K t L
,
t

where Yt is output, At is TFP, K t is capital, and Lt is labor input. If the working-age population
grows at a constant rate, N t  N 0 t , and TFP grows at a constant rate, At  A0 1 t , then the
economy has a balanced growth path in which all quantities per working-age person grow at the
rate   1 except for hours worked per working-age person, which is constant. In our growth
accounting for Mexico and China, we assume that hours worked per worker is constant, which
allows us to use the number of workers as a measure to the labor input. We do this because we
do not have data on hours worked for China. Although we have such data for Mexico, we do not
use them to be consistent. (The results change very little, however, if we use Mexican hours
data.)
Kehoe and Prescott (2002, 2007) rewrite the production function (6) as
Yt / N t  At1/(1 )  K t / Yt 

 /(1 )

(7)

 Lt / Nt  .

They note that, along a balanced growth path, when At grows at a constant rate, the capitaloutput ratio K t / Yt and the participation rate Lt / N t are constant. Kehoe and Prescott show that
U.S. data over the period 1960–2000 are close to a balanced growth path. Here we show that
Chinese data over the period 1985–2008 are close to a balanced growth path, albeit at a very high
rate of growth. Figure 5 decomposes the growth in output, Yt / N t , measured as real GDP per
working-age person in China into a productivity factor, At1/(1 ) , a capital factor,  K t / Yt 

 /(1 )

,

and a labor factor Lt / N t . Once again the scale on the vertical axis is log base 2. Notice that the
Chinese growth is close to balanced in that the growth in Yt / N t is close to that in At1/(1 ) , and

 Kt / Yt 

 /(1 )

and Lt / N t are close to constant. To be sure, there are deviations from balanced

growth behavior. In the mid-1990s, growth in output Yt / N t accelerates, and much of this
acceleration is due to growth in the capital factor  K t / Yt 

 /(1 )

and, especially, the labor factor

Lt / N t .
[Figures 5 and 6 here]
Figure 6 presents the growth accounting for Mexico. The poor performance in terms of real
GDP growth is driven by an even worse performance in terms of TFP growth. Since 1995,
however, there has been some GDP growth, and that growth has been driven by TFP growth.

Between 1995 and 2000, real GDP per working-age person grew by 3.2 percent per year, while
overall, between 1995 and 2008, it grew by 1.7 percent per year.
In our growth accounting, growth in human capital shows up as growth in TFP.
Fluctuations in factor utilization also show up as fluctuations in TFP, although this is probably
more important in studying business cycle moments, like the 1994–1995 financial crisis in
Mexico, than it is in studying growth over a decade or longer. The Kehoe-Prescott growth
accounting in equation (7), in contrast to that of Robert M. Solow (1957) and Edward F. Denison
(1962), takes into account the feature of the neoclassical growth model that, in a balanced growth
path, as technological growth occurs, consumers will save so as to keep the capital-output ratio
constant. Researchers like José De Gregorio and Jong-Wha Lee (2004) and Barry Bosworth and
Susan M. Collins (2008), who use a growth accounting that looks at increases in output per
worker as a function of variables that include capital per worker, typically find increases in TFP
and increases in capital roughly equally important in accounting for growth. Our growth
accounting — which imputes to the productivity factor the increase in capital necessary to keep
the capital-output ratio constant and imputes to the capital factor only the increases in the capitaloutput ratio, that is, capital deepening — finds that capital is much less important and that
increases in productivity are typically the driving force of economic growth.
Understanding that it is the growth in TFP that is essential for accounting for why some
countries grow faster than others allows us to reassess some of the research that employs growth
regressions. Of the research that we have discussed, Backus et al. (1992), Edwards (1998), and
Alcalá and Ciccone (2004) directly address the need to account for TFP growth, making some
measure of productivity growth, not growth in real GDP per capita, the dependent variable in
their regressions.
Many other authors, going back to the late 1950s, have realized that understanding TFP
growth is essential for understanding economic growth. Of particular relevance for the
theoretical framework that we sketch out in the next section are William W. Lewis (2004) and
Parente and Prescott (2002). Lewis (2004) uses case studies of different countries to show that
productivity in other sectors, besides just manufacturing, is essential for determining relative
income levels across countries. He also uses anecdotal evidence to argue that it is government
policies that discourage the adoption of the best available technologies from the rest of the world
that keep countries relatively poor. Parente and Prescott (2002) develop a model in which it is

government policies and institutions like monopolies that impede new technology adoption that
keep productivity, and therefore income per capita, low.

5. Directions for future research and a proposed theoretical framework
It is very possible that there are other aspects of openness — besides those emphasized by
standard trade models — that generate growth. Researchers like Natalia Ramondo and Andrés
Rodríguez-Clare (2009) and Ellen R. McGrattan and Prescott (2009) have stressed the role of
FDI in transferring technology from one country to another. Researchers like Thomas J. Holmes
and James A. Schmitz, Jr. (2001), Schmitz (2005), Gibson (2007), and James A. Costantini and
Melitz (2008) have stressed the role of international trade in giving firms the incentives to pay
the costs of adopting new technology.
Given our question of why Mexico stagnates while China grows, we need to ask of all of
these papers why the mechanisms that they study worked in China but not in Mexico. A
potential answer is that most of Mexico’s trade and FDI inflows are with the United States. It
may be that the predominance of intrafirm trade between Mexico and the United States reduces
the incentives toward competition and innovation that would arise from trade and foreign
investment reforms. Furthermore, Mexican manufacturing seems to be complementary with
U.S. manufacturing, while Chinese manufacturing is a substitute for both Mexican and U.S.
manufacturing. The emergence of China may have reduced the incentives toward innovation in
both the United States and Mexico. These are possibilities worth studying, but it may be, as the
work of researchers like López-Córdova (2003) suggests, that it is not the manufacturing sector
— or at least those subsectors most involved in trade — that is responsible for Mexico’s
stagnation, but other sectors.
We propose a theoretical framework for studying these sorts of hypotheses as well as for
reconciling some of the contradictory evidence on openness and growth in the empirical
literature. We follow Kehoe and Prescott (2007) in using the economic performance of the
United States over the past century as the starting point for our theory. Figure 7 presents the data
on real GDP per working-age person in the United States, 1900–2008. Notice how close these
data are to a constant growth path with 2 percent growth per year. The average growth rate
during this period was 1.99 percent per year. There are small business cycle fluctuations around
the constant growth path, and there is the major deviation during the Great Depression of 1929–

39 and the subsequent World War II buildup. The United States has been the industrial leader,
the richest major country in the world, since the early twentieth century, when it took over this
role from the United Kingdom. We follow Kehoe and Prescott in hypothesizing that the near
constant growth in the United States since then is driven by a near constant growth rate in the
stock of knowledge useful in production. It should be stressed that this stock of knowledge is not
measured TFP. Measured TFP depends on the stock of knowledge but also depends on the
efficiency with which factors of production are allocated across firms and sectors in the
economy.
[Figure 7 here]
The data in figure 7 are fascinating and invite speculation and theorizing. It is difficult, for
example, to reconcile them with the once popular endogenous growth theories of authors like
Romer (1986). As we have mentioned, the United Kingdom was the industrial leader during the
nineteenth century, and it is possible that the European Union or even China might assume that
role later in the twenty-first century. It is also possible that the technological progress may be
slowly accelerating: According to Angus Maddison (1995), the average growth in the United
Kingdom of real GDP per capita 1820–1900 was 1.2 percent per year. While all of this is
interesting, it is largely irrelevant to our question involving growth in Mexico and China,
countries that are far behind the industrial leader.
[Figure 8 here]
We hypothesize that the stock of knowledge, which has increased very smoothly over the
past century or more, can be adopted, perhaps at some cost by countries that are behind the
industrial leader. This would give rise to trend growth of close to 2 percent per year, at least
after capital and labor have had time to adjust. The absolute level that a specific country is at
compared to the industrial leader depends on its institutions and economic policies. Changes in
these institutions and economic policies can cause depressions or booms. Eventually, however,
if institutions and policies stabilize, and after capital and labor have adjusted, the country returns
to trend growth. Figure 8 presents data on real GDP per working-age person in Mexico, 1900–
2008 (except for 1910–1920 during the Mexican Revolution). After a period of slow growth
involving the Revolution and the Great Depression of the 1930s and its aftermath, Mexico began
to grow rapidly during the early 1950s. Between 1953 and 1981, Mexican real GDP per
working-age person grew by 3.8 percent per year. From 1981 through 1995, Mexico suffered the

great depression analyzed by Bergoeing et al. (2002, 2007), contracting by 1.7 percent per year.
From 1995 to 2008, Mexico returned to close to trend growth, growing by 1.7 percent per year.
[Figure 9 here]
To compare China with Mexico in terms of absolute level of income, we use the PPP real
GDP data published by the World Bank (2008). Figure 9 depicts the data. China has been
growing more rapidly than Mexico but is still substantially poorer in 2008. Specifically, China’s
GDP per working-age person in 2008 is 7,986 2005 U.S. dollars, which is only 38.5 percent of
Mexico’s 20,755 dollars, and its GDP per capita in 2008 of 5,712 dollars is only 42.5 percent of
Mexico’s 13,434 dollars. In terms of our theoretical framework, Mexico is not experiencing the
rapid catch-up growth that China is experiencing now because it already had this sort of catch-up
during the period 1953–1981.
In the theory that we propose, it is easier to grow faster than the industrial leader when an
economy is far behind. An economy like China — or Mexico in 1953–1981 — can grow rapidly
even with an inefficient financial system, lack of rule of law, and rigidities in the labor market.
As the country gets closer to the industrial leader, however, rapid growth stops and the country
levels off at the trend growth rate of GDP per working-age person of 2 percent per year or a little
less. This seems to have occurred in Western Europe in the early 1970s, in Japan in the early
1990s, and in Chile in the late 1990s, to mention a few cases. How far short of the industrial
leader the country levels off depends on its institutions and economic policies. Chile, for
example, after spectacular growth following its great depression in the early 1980s, has had a
level of real GDP per working-age person and a growth rate similar to those in Mexico since
about 1998. Unless China continues to reform, we can expect economic growth there to slow
down sharply at some point. It is an open question whether or not this slowdown will occur
when China is still behind Mexico in terms of real GDP per working-age person.3
Many open questions remain to be resolved for our theory to be useful in accounting for the
economic development of countries like Mexico and China: How can we modify the sorts of
growth regressions to capture the periods of rapid growth followed by slowdowns predicted by
3

Our theory suggests that it may be more fruitful to compare Mexico to economies at a similar level of economic
development. Brazil is a frequently cited example. It is a country that has about 70 percent of the real GDP per
working-age person of Mexico in 2008 but that has experienced higher rates of growth than Mexico since 2000.
Over the period 1995–2008, however, the growth rate of GDP per working age person in Brazil has been 1.1 percent
per year, less than Mexico’s 1.7 percent per year. It has yet to be seen that Brazil is performing significantly better
than Mexico.

the theory? Is openness to trade and foreign investment even necessary for rapid growth when a
country is very far behind the industrial leader? India’s recent experience suggests not. Specific
questions about the experience of Mexico remain to be resolved as well: Why was the period of
rapid growth, 1995–2000, following the enactment of NAFTA so short? Or, put another way,
why was the recovery following the 1982–95 great depression so modest? It may be that
Mexico’s slower growth since 2000 is the product of the contraction of the U.S. manufacturing
sector and of competition with China. Perhaps most importantly, what sorts of reforms does
Mexico need to enact to resume rapid catch-up growth? We hypothesize that these are reforms
that eliminate the barriers to growth of an inefficient financial system, lack of rule of law, and
rigidities in the labor market. In terms of more specific reforms, promoting competition in
nonmanufacturing sectors like petroleum extraction, electricity, telecommunications, and
transportation could spur productivity growth.

References
Alcalá, Francisco, and Antonio Ciccone. 2004. “Trade and Productivity.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 119(2): 613–46.
Alesina, Alberto, Enrico Spolaore, and Romain Wacziarg. 2000. “Economic Integration and
Political Disintegration.” American Economic Review, 90(5): 1276–96.
Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian, and Meijun Qian. 2005. “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth in
China.” Journal of Financial Economics, 77(1): 57–116.
Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2010. “New Models, Same
Old Gains?” NBER Working Paper 15628.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Timothy J. Kehoe. 1992. “In Search of Scale Effects in
Trade and Growth.” Journal of Economic Theory, 58(2): 377–409.
Bajona, Claustre, and Tianshu Chu. 2010. “Reforming State Owned Enterprises in China:
Effects of WTO Accession.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(4): 800–23.
Bajona, Claustre, Mark J. Gibson, Timothy J. Kehoe, and Kim J. Ruhl. 2010. “Trade
Liberalization, Growth, and Productivity.” http://www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe/papers/
BajonaGibsonKehoeRuhl.pdf.
Bergoeing, Raphael, Patrick J. Kehoe, Timothy J. Kehoe, and Raimundo Soto. 2002. “A
Decade Lost and Found: Mexico and Chile in the 1980s.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1):
166–205.
Bergoeing, Raphael, Patrick J. Kehoe, Timothy J. Kehoe, and Raimundo Soto. 2007. “A
Decade Lost and Found: Mexico and Chile in the 1980s.” In Great Depressions of the
Twentieth Century, ed. Timothy J. Kehoe and Edward C. Prescott, 217–56. Minneapolis:
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Bosworth, Barry, and Susan M. Collins. 2008. “Accounting for Growth: Comparing China and
India.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(1): 45–66.
Brandt, Loren, and Xiaodong Zhu. 2009. “Accounting for China’s Growth.” IZA Discussion
Paper 4764.
Broda, Christian, Joshua Greenfield, and David E. Weinstein. 2006. “From Groundnuts to
Globalization: A Structural Estimate of Trade and Growth.” NBER Working Paper 12512.
Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2006. “Globalization and the Gains from Variety.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 541–85.
Conference Board. 2010. “The Conference Board Total Economy Database: Output, Labor and
Labor Productivity Country Details, 1950–2009” (Excel file). Accessed October 28, 2010.
http://www.conference-board.org/subsites/fileretrieve.cfm?filename=1242&id=2196.
Costantini , James A., and Marc J. Melitz. 2008. “The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to
Trade Liberalization.” In The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. Elhanan
Helpman, Dalia Marin, and Thierry Verdier, 107–41. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

De Gregorio, José, and Jong-Wha Lee. 2004. “Growth and Adjustment in East Asia and Latin
America.” Economía, 5(1): 69–134.
DeJong, David, and Marla Ripoll. 2006. “Tariffs and Growth: An Empirical Exploration of
Contingent Relationships.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4): 625–40.
Denison, Edward F. 1962. “The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States and the
Alternatives before Us.” Supplementary Paper No. 13, New York: Committee for Economic
Development.
Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay. 2004. “Trade, Growth, and Poverty.” Economic Journal,
114(493): F22–49.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul A. Samuelson. 1977. “Comparative Advantage,
Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods.” American Economic
Review, 67(5): 823–39.
Dowrick, Steve, and Jane Golley. 2004. “Trade Openness and Growth: Who Benefits?” Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 20(1): 38–56.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel S. Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.”
Econometrica, 70(5): 1741–79.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1989. “Openness, Outward Orientation, Trade Liberalization and
Economic Performance in Developing Countries.” NBER Working Paper 2908.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1998. “Openness, Productivity and Growth: What Do We Really Know?”
Economic Journal, 108(447): 383–98.
Feenstra, Robert C. 1994. “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
Prices.” American Economic Review, 84(1): 157–77.
Feenstra, Robert C., Benjamin R. Mandel, Marshall B. Reinsdorf, and Matthew J. Slaughter.
2009. “Effects of Terms of Trade Gains and Tariff Changes on the Measurement of U.S.
Productivity Growth.” NBER Working Paper 15592.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., and David Romer. 1999. “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American
Economic Review, 89(3): 379–99.
Gibson, Mark J. 2007. “Trade Liberalization, Reallocation, and Productivity.” Ph.D. thesis,
University of Minnesota.
Guariglia, Alessandra, and Sandra Poncet. 2008. “Could Financial Distortions Be No
Impediment to Growth After All? Evidence from China.” Journal of Comparative Economics,
36(4): 633–57.
Harrison, Ann. 1996. “Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, Cross-Country Analysis for
Developing Countries.” Journal of Development Economics, 48(2): 419–44.
Holmes, Thomas J., and James A. Schmitz Jr. 2001. “A gain from Trade: From Unproductive to
Productive Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 47(2): 417–46.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
and India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1403–48.

Hu, Zuliu F., and Mohsin S. Khan. 1997. “Why Is China Growing So Fast?” Staff Papers –
International Monetary Fund, 44(1): 103–31.
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía. 2009. Estadisticas Historicas de Mexico 2009.
Aguacalientes, Mexico: Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía.
International Monetary Fund. International Financial Statistics Database. Accessed October 28,
2010. http://www.imf.org/external/data.htm.
Kambourov, Gueorgui. 2009. “Labour Market Regulations and the Sectoral Reallocation of
Workers: The Case of Trade Reforms.” Review of Economic Studies, 76(4): 1321–58.
Kehoe, Timothy J. 1992. “Modeling the Dynamic Impact of a NAFTA.” In A North American
Free Trade Area, ed. William G. Watson, 24–34, Kingston: John Deutsch Institute.
Kehoe, Timothy J. 1994. “Towards a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of North American
Trade.” In Modeling Trade Policy: Applied General Equilibrium Assessments of North
American Free Trade, ed. Joseph Francois and Clinton R. Shiells, 328–47, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kehoe, Timothy J. 1995. “A Review of Mexico’s Trade Policy from 1982 to 1994.” In The
World Economy: Global Trade Policy 1995, ed. Sven W. Arndt and Chris R. Milner, 135–51.
Oxford and Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell.
Kehoe, Timothy J., and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. “Great Depressions of the 20th Century.”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1): 1–18.
Kehoe, Timothy J., and Edward C. Prescott, eds. 2007. Great Depressions of the Twentieth
Century. Minneapolis, MN: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Kehoe, Timothy J., and Kim J. Ruhl. 2008. “Are Shocks to the Terms of Trade Shocks to
Productivity?” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4): 804–19.
Kehoe, Timothy J., and Kim J. Ruhl. 2009. “How Important Is the New Goods Margin in
International Trade?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 324.
Kohli, Ulrich. 2004. “Real GDP, Real Domestic Income, and Terms of Trade Changes.”
Journal of International Economics, 62(1): 83–106.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Guy Meredith, and Christopher Towe. 2005. “How Has NAFTA Affected the
Mexican Economy? Review and Evidence.” Monetary Policy and Macroeconomic Stabilization
in Latin America, 2005: 35–81.
Krueger, Anne, and Aaron Tornell. 1999. “The Role of Bank Restructuring in Recovering from
Crises: Mexico 1995–1998.” NBER Working Paper 7042.
Krugman, Paul. 1980. “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade.”
American Economic Review, 70(5): 950–59.
Lee, Ha Yan, Luca A. Ricci, and Roberto Rigobon. 2004. “Once Again, Is Openness Good for
Growth?” Journal of Development Economics, 75(2): 451–72.
Lewis, William W. 2004. The Power of Productivity: Wealth, Poverty, and the Threat to
Global Stability. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

López-Córdova, Ernesto. “NAFTA and Manufacturing Productivity in Mexico.” Economía,
4(1): 55–98.
Lustig, Nora. 2001. “Life Is Not Easy: Mexico's Quest for Stability and Growth.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 15(1): 85–106.
Maddison, Angus. 1995. Monitoring the World Economy: 1820–1992. Washington:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Maddison, Angus. 2010. “Historical Statistics of the World Economy: 1–2008 AD” (Excel file).
Accessed October 28, 2010. http://www.ggdc.net/MADDISON/Historical_Statistics/horizontalfile_02-2010.xls.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott. 2009. “Openness, Technology Capital, and
Development.” Journal of Economic Theory, 144(6): 2454–76.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6): 1695–725.
Milner, Chris, and Tony Westaway. 1993. “Country Size and the Medium-Term Growth
Process: Some Cross-Country Evidence.” World Development, 21(2): 203–11.
Moreno-Brid, Juan Carlos, Jesus Santamaria, and Juan Carlos Rivas Valdivia. 2005.
“Industrialization and Economic Growth in Mexico after NAFTA: The Road Travelled.”
Development and Change, 36(6): 1095–119.
Nye, Howard L. M., Sanjay Reddy, and Kevin Watkins. 2002. “Dollar and Kraay on ‘Trade,
Growth and Poverty’: A Critique.” Columbia University.
Parente, Stephen L., and Edward C. Prescott. 1994. “Barriers to Technology Adoption and
Development.” Journal of Political Economy, 102(2): 298–321.
Parente, Stephen L., and Edward C. Prescott. 2002. Barriers to Riches. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2009. “Trade, Multinational Production, and
the Gains from Openness.” http://www.econ.psu.edu/~aur10/Papers/TradeMPforJPE.pdf.
Rawski, Thomas G. 1994. “Chinese Industrial Reform: Accomplishments, Prospects, and
Implications.” American Economic Review, 84(2): 271–75.
Rivera-Batiz, Luis A., and Paul M. Romer. 1991. “Economic Integration and Endogenous
Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2): 531–55.
Rodríguez, Francisco. 2007. “Openness and Growth: What Have We Learned?” Working
Paper 51, United Nations, Department of Economics and Social Affairs.
Rodríguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik. 2000. “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A
Skeptic's Guide to the Cross-National Evidence.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, vol. 15,
ed. Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, 261–338. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi. 2004. “Institutions Rule: The
Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development.” Journal of
Economic Growth, 9(2): 131–65.

Romer, Paul M. 1986. “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth.” Journal of Political
Economy, 94(5): 1002–37.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995(1): 1–118.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 1997. “I Just Ran Two Million Regressions.” American Economic
Review, 87(2): 178–83.
Sato, Kazuo. 1976. “The Ideal Log-change Index Number.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 58(2): 223–28.
Schmitz, James A., Jr. 2005. “What Determines Productivity? Lessons from the Dramatic
Recovery of the U.S. and Canadian Iron Ore Industries Following their Early 1980s Crisis.”
Journal of Political Economy, 113(3): 582–625.
Solow, Robert M. 1957. “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 39(3): 312–20.
Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. Forthcoming. “Growing Like China.”
American Economic Review.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg. 2005. “Borders and Growth.” Journal of Economic
Growth, 10(4): 331–86.
Tornell, Aaron, Frank Westermann, and Lorenza Martinez. 2003. “Liberalization, Growth, and
Financial Crises: Lessons from Mexico and the Developing World.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 2003(2): 1–88.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 2009. “World Investment
Report 2009: Transnational Corporations, Agricultural Production and Development.”
http://www.unctad.org.
U. S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2010. “Current-Dollar and ‘Real’ Gross Domestic
Product” (Excel file). Accessed October 28, 2010. http://www.bea.gov/national/xls/gdplev.xls.
U.S. Census Bureau. “Statistical Abstract of the United States Database.” Accessed October 28,
2010. http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/.
Vartia, Yrjö O. 1976. “Ideal Log-change Index Numbers.” Scandinavian Journal of Statistics,
3(3): 121–26.
Wacziarg, Romain, and Karen Horn Welch. 2008. “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New
Evidence.” World Bank Economic Review, 22(2): 187–231.
Warner, Andrew. 2003. “Once More into the Breach: Economic Reform and Global
Integration.” Center for Global Development Working Paper 34.
World Bank. 1987. World Development Report, 1987. New York: Oxford University Press.
World Bank. 2008. “Global Purchasing Power Parities and Real Expenditures.” In 2005
International Comparison Program. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. “World Development Indicators Database.” Accessed October 28, 2010.
http://data.worldbank.org/.

Yanikkaya, Halit. 2003. “Trade Openness and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical
Investigation.” Journal of Development Economics, 72(1): 57–89.

Table 1
Calculation of Broda-Greenfield-Weinstein (2006) welfare gains from variety
Mexico
1990-2000
6.704
3.070

China
1998-2008
5.634
3.488

5th percentile lambda ratio
Median lambda ratio
95th percentile lambda ratio

0.832
0.956
1.028

0.789
0.954
1.031

Import price bias
Import log-change weight
Equivalent variation (percent)

0.939
0.224
1.417

0.947
0.185
1.013

Mean Elasticity
Median Elasticity

Sources: Broda, Greenfield, and Weinstein (2006) and authors’ calculations.

Table 2
Real GDP growth versus real income growth in Mexico and China
Annual growth rate
(percent)

Real GDP
per capita

Terms of trade
premium

Gain from
variety

Real income
per capita

China 1998-2008

8.989

–0.761

0.101

8.329

Mexico 1990-2000

1.782

–0.169

0.142

2.093

Sources: World Bank World Development Indicators and authors’ calculations.

Figure 1
Trade in Mexico and China
80
70

percent GDP

60

Mexico

50
40

China

30
20
10
0
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Source: IMF International Financial Statistics.

Figure 2
FDI inflows to Mexico and China
6

5

China
percent GDP

4

3

Mexico

2

1

0
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Sources: UNCTAD World Investment Report 2009 and IMF International Financial Statistics.

Figure 3
Real GDP per working-age person in Mexico and China
800
3.00

index (1985 = 100)

400
2.00

China

200
1.00

100
0.00

Mexico
50
-1.00
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Sources: IMF International Financial Statistics and World Bank World Development Indicators.

Figure 4
Terms of trade premium in Mexico and China
4

Mexico (T0 = 1990)

percent real GDP (T0 = 0)

2

0

-2

-4

-6

China (T0 = 1998)
-8
0

2

4

6

8

year since T0

Sources: World Bank World Development Indicators and authors’ calculations.

10

Figure 5
Growth accounting for China
3.000
800

index (1985 = 100)

2.000
400

output
productivity
1.000
200

capital
0.000
100

labor

50
-1.000
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Sources: Conference Board Total Economy Database, IMF International Financial Statistics,
World Bank World Development Indicators, and authors’ calculations.

Figure 6
Growth accounting for Mexico

index (1985 = 100)

0.32
125

capital
labor

0.00
100

output

productivity

-0.32
80
1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Sources: Conference Board Total Economy Database, IMF International Financial Statistics,
World Bank World Development Indicators, and authors’ calculations.

Figure 7
Real GDP per working-age person in the United States
800
3.00

index (1900 = 100)

400
2.00

200
1.00

2 percent growth trend

real GDP
0.00
100

-1.00
50
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Sources: Maddison (2010), U.S. Bureau of the Census Statistical Abstract of the United States,
and U.S.Bureau of Economic Analysis (2010).

Figure 8
Real GDP per working-age person in Mexico
800
3

index (1900 = 100)

400
2

2 percent growth trend
200
1

real GDP

100
0

50
-1
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Sources: Maddison (2010), Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (2009), IMF
International Financial Statistics, and World Bank World Development Indicators.

Figure 9
Purchasing power parity GDP in Mexico and China

2005 U.S. dollars per person

25,000

20,000

Mexico GDP per working-age person

15,000

Mexico GDP per capita
10,000

5,000

China GDP per working-age person
China GDP per capita

0
1985

1990

1995

Source: World Bank World Development Indicators.

2000

2005

