                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           NETWORKS AND WORKOUTS:
TREATMENT SIZE AND STATUS SPECIFIC PEER EFFECTS IN A RANDOMIZED FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                                 Philip S. Babcock
                                                 John L. Hartman

                                              Working Paper 16581
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w16581


                            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          December 2010




     We thank Kelly Bedard, Eric Bettinger, Olivier Deschenes, Peter Kuhn, Heather Royer, Bruce Sacerdote,
     Jon Sonstelie, and Cathy Weinberger for helpful comments. We are grateful for funding by the Hellman
     Family Foundation, and excellent research assistance by Jennifer Carnan, Jennifer Schulte, Allison
     Nuovo, Christy Helvestine, Bonnie Queen, Jessica Evans, Natalie Brechtel, and Randi Golde. We
     are also grateful for assistance from Chris Clontz at the Recreation Center at the University of California,
     Santa Barbara. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
     views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

     NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
     reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
     NBER publications.

     © 2010 by Philip S. Babcock and John L. Hartman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
     to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
     © notice, is given to the source.
Networks and Workouts: Treatment Size and Status Specific Peer Effects in a Randomized
Field Experiment
Philip S. Babcock and John L. Hartman
NBER Working Paper No. 16581
December 2010
JEL No. A13,C21,C93

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper estimates treatment size and status specific peer effects that are not detected by widely-used
approaches to the estimation of spillovers. In a field experiment using university students, we find
that subjects who have been incentivized to exercise increase gym usage more if they have more treated
friends. However, control subjects are not influenced by their peers. Findings demonstrate that fraction
treated has a large influence on outcomes in this environment, and spillovers vary greatly by treatment
status. Results highlight subtle effects of randomization and document a low-cost method for improving
the generalizability of controlled interventions in networked environments.


Philip S. Babcock
Department of Economics
2036 North Hall
University of California, Santa Barbara
Mail Code 9210
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
babcock@econ.ucsb.edu

John L. Hartman
Department of Economics
2028 North Hall
University of California, Santa Barbara
Mail Code 9210
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
hartman@econ.ucsb.edu
1. Introduction

        Widely-used approaches to the estimation of social spillovers will often not detect

certain kinds of peer effects—specifically, effects that vary with treatment size and

treatment status. Commonly used approaches could also underestimate the effects

of implementing policy interventions on a large scale. This paper proposes and

implements an approach that addresses these biases at minimal cost to the experimenter.

As has become apparent in recent research on medical and agricultural interventions in

developing countries, estimating spillovers may be essential to assessing the

generalizability of an intervention.1 In settings where social ties are salient, differences in

spillovers by treatment size and status may be quite large. The goal of this paper is to

measure social effects that would otherwise go undetected, and in this way document a

method for improving the generalizability of controlled interventions in a networked

environment.

        We study spillovers in a pay-for-exercise field experiment using college students

who share a common residence hall. One advantage of this setting is that it allows us to

explore these issues for subjects with dense, localized social ties.2 A second benefit is that

exercise interventions are a subject of interest for researchers and policymakers. For

polcymakers, rising rates of obesity in the U.S. have motivated a search for interventions

that cause people to exercise more.3 Economists have studied exercise interventions not

only for their relevance to pressing issues of public health but for what they may tell us

about behavioral theories. In a seminal paper on the topic, Charness and Gneezy (2009)


1
  Duflo (2006).
2
  Sacerdote (2001) provides evidence of peer effects among college students who share a dormitory, dorm-
room, or fraternity.
3
  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (www.cdc.gov/obesity/childhood/prevalence.html.)


                                                                                                       1
explore these theories and find that short-term incentives can create long-run changes in

behavior.4 There have also been numerous studies of exercise and wellness interventions

in the workplace.5 To date, however, we have found no research on the role of social

effects or spillovers in these interventions.

        As in Charness and Gneezy (2009) and Acland and Levy (2010), we survey

college students and incentivize a random subset to exercise by offering to pay them for

repeated visits to the campus recreation center. A unique feature of our experiment is that

prior to treatment, we elicit a detailed friendship network from the subjects. Random

assignment of treatment creates random variation in the numbers of treated and untreated

peers to which the subject is exposed, and from this we identify treatment-status-specific

and treatment-size-specific peer effects. The methodology we propose can be used in

other interventions, particularly for settings in which subjects have the potential to be

connected to one another by dense social ties.



2. Background

        Our strategy for investigating the well known problems involved in identifying

social effects is based largely on Moffitt’s (2001) description of a partial population

intervention. Partial population designs have recently been used to estimate spillovers

hypothesized to arise from information transfer in schools or departments (Duflo and

Saez, 2003, Miguel and Kremer, 2004), from imitation or social insurance between


4
  Pay-for-exercise programs provide a setting in which to test models of self-control and pre-commitment
(O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999 and 2001, DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2006), habit-formation (Becker,
1992), and theories of intrinsic and extrinsic motivations (Deci, 1971, Benabou and Tirole, 2003 and 2006,
and Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000).
5
  Anderson et al. (2009) and Conn, Hafdahl, and Cooper (2009) are two recent meta-surveys of workplace
wellness interventions. Approximately 40 percent of large employers in the U.S. offer incentive-based
programs designed to improve health (Hewitt Associates, 2002).


                                                                                                         2
households (Angelucci and DiGiorgio, 2009, and Kuhn et al., forthcoming) and from

learning or imitation in schooling decisions (Bobonis and Finan, 2009, Lalive and

Cattaneo, 2009). One could conceptualize an ideal partial population design as one which

begins with a sample of social groups or villages between which there are no spillovers.

Within the groups or villages designated for treatment, a random subset of agents or

households is treated. Differences in group-level means in this setting identify several

quantities of interest: a) The difference between mean outcomes for treated and control

villages captures average group-level treatment effects; b) The difference between mean

outcomes of treated subjects in treated villages and control subjects in untreated villages

estimates the average effect of village treatment on treated subjects; c) The difference in

the mean outcomes of untreated subjects in treatment and control villages captures the

effect of village treatment on untreated subjects.

       In practice, interventions will usually deviate from this idealization in some way.

For example, in Miguel and Kremer’s (2004) well-known study of a program to fight

intestinal worms in Western Kenya, treatment is randomized across villages but not

within village, as the researchers cannot manipulate the decision to receive treatment.

Thus, though the school-level randomization identifies an effect of school-level treatment

that includes within-school spillovers, the researchers are forced to rely on non-

experimental methods to isolate social effects within school.

       Our paper also deviates from the idealized partial population experiment in that

we use experimentally-induced differences in treatment across friendship networks to

quantify differences in exposure to treated peers. Thus, we replace the in-group/out-group

structure of the peer group with a network. One advantage of our design is that we




                                                                                              3
randomize at the individual level and do so in a way that obviates concerns about

differential rates of take-up between treated subjects and controls. Because treatment in

our setting is defined as being eligible for a cash reward for exercise, treatment and take-

up are essentially identical. What our experiment will highlight is that spillovers may be

present even when there is no discernible effect of group treatment on controls, i.e., when

the difference in group means described in c) of an idealized partial population

experiment is zero. This is because exposure to treated subjects may affect treated and

untreated subjects in different ways.

            The simple schematic in Figure 1 fleshes out these ideas by depicting an

experiment in which the fraction s of a target population (or village) is treated and the

fraction (1-s) is not.6 If there are no spillovers and a person’s outcome depends only upon

his own treatment status (Rubin, 1986), the mean outcome for the population,

μ(s)=E[Y|s], is the weighted average of treatment and control means

            μ(s)=sμ1(s)+(1-s) μ0(s),

where treatment and control groups are indexed by subscripts 1 and 0, respectively.

Figure 1A depicts this situation when a fraction s1 of the sample is treated. The horizontal

dotted lines show control and treatment means. The population mean, μ(s), is then the

solid diagonal line that rises with the fraction treated, as weight is shifted from control

mean to treatment mean.

            If spillovers are present, control and treatment means vary with s. Vaccination for

infectious diseases is a canonical example. Health outcomes of both treated and untreated

subjects are expected to improve with an increase in the fraction of the population

vaccinated. Figure 1B illustrates this setting by allowing dμ1/ds=dμ0/ds>0 (with μ0(s) and
6
    Phillipson (2000) and Manski (2009) contain detailed treatments of the issues sketched here.


                                                                                                   4
μ1(s) represented by dashed lines.) The projected mean for the sample, if all individual

were to be treated, is then μ1(1). The difference between μ1(s1) and μ1(1) is the error

associated with a projection that assumes away externalities. Philipson (2000) calls this

difference “program implementation bias.”

         It need not be the case that treatment and control means vary with fraction treated

in the same way. In Figure 1C, the treatment mean rises with s and the control mean does

not. This could occur in the pay-for-exercise setting if peer effects help individuals

overcome self-control problems by pre-committing to exercise with others who have

been similarly incentivized. If there is little or no incentive to exercise for the untreated,

their outcomes may not vary with the fraction treated.7 We note that the comparison of

means described in c) for an idealized partial population design would detect no

“spillover” in this setting.8 There are peer effects, then, that an idealized partial

population experiment cannot isolate and detect.

         Recent literature includes a number of concrete examples. In Kuhn et al.

(forthcoming), the authors estimate consumption spillovers on lottery non-participants

resulting from exposure to lottery winners. But they cannot detect whether lottery

winners in a winning postal code influence each others’ consumption. Angelucci and

DeGiorgi (2009) estimate consumption spillovers from households eligible for transfers

to wealthier, ineligible households, but cannot estimate spillovers between eligible

households. Lalive and Cattaneo (2009), using similar data, summarize concerns about

precisely this kind of spillover between the treated (p. 460): “If children from poor

7
  It is also possible that treatment and control outcomes could respond in opposite directions. This could
occur in the pay-for-exercise setting if, for example, denial of the opportunity to be paid to exercise creates
discouragement that is amplified by contact with treated peers.
8
  To be more precise, measured differences in group means described in a) and b) would include spillovers
and private effects, but the attempt to isolate a spillover effect (in c)) would produce a zero estimate.


                                                                                                              5
households only interact with other children from poor households, there could be

important social spillover effects that can not be detected with the PROGRESA

experiment.” It bears emphasizing that the problem the authors describe is not unique to

the PROGRESA experiment, but is a feature of partial population interventions in

general.

         Figure 1 illustrates the importance of treatment-status-specific estimates of

spillovers. It also highlights the difficulty of extrapolating the effects of program

implementation from an experiment, absent knowledge of how outcomes vary with the

size of the treatment group. One way to address this problem is to run experiments in

many different groups or villages and randomize fraction treated (e.g., Phillipson, 2000).

Our approach of collecting and exploiting data on networks within "groups" (where we

think of groups as the levels at which most previous studies assumed social effects

occurred: classrooms, villages, workplaces, etc.) allows the estimation of social effects

using much less data and at less expense. Moreover, approaches that do not collect

within-group network data run the risk of specifying that the set of people who influence

a subject is larger than the true set—the entire village, for example, rather than the

villager’s immediate social circle.9 If running experiments in enough villages to get

statistical power is logistically challenging and expensive, or if the immediate social

circle is likely to be a more salient reference group than the village, then an approach that

relies on exogenous variation in treatment across friendship networks offers advantages.




9
  While village-based estimates still produce unbiased estimates of the effect on the village as a whole of
treating a certain fraction of the village, such effects might be hard to distinguish statistically from a zero
effect if the fraction treated is small. The advantage of focusing on friendship networks is partly one of
greater statistical power.


                                                                                                                  6
       Two previous studies that we know of use friendship networks to examine

spillovers. Miguel and Kremer (2007) elicit friendship networks from some of the

subjects in the intestinal worms intervention (those who were exposed to the program

later). They examine how these ties predict subjects’ decisions to take up treatment. Our

paper resembles this work in the use of networks, but differs in that our design is based

on randomization at the individual level and that we elicit ties from all participating

subjects. Similarly, Oster and Thornton (2009) elicit friendship ties of at most 3 friends

and estimate spillovers in menstrual cup usage. There, the setting allows for the analysis

to be simplified in a way that is not always practical in other environments: Spillovers for

the controls are not estimated (and may have been implausible, because controls were not

provided with the product.) These important and innovative studies provide strong

evidence that social networks matter. They do not attempt to estimate treatment-status-

specific peer effects for all subjects using individual data. Our work leverages a setting in

which spillovers may be estimated both for treated subjects and controls. We also elicit a

more detailed friendship network than was used in previous studies, and we analyze

individual data for all subjects in order to explore the motivating methodological

concerns more directly and extensively.

       Our main findings are that treated students with more treated friends increased

their usage of the recreation center more, while treated students with more untreated

friends increased their recreation center usage less. Untreated subjects, however, did not

alter their recreation center usage at all, and were not influenced by the treatment status

of their peers. Our analysis implies that if all subjects in the target sample had been




                                                                                              7
treated, the change in recreation center visits would have been 64% larger than what

would have been extrapolated from an estimate that did not take into account spillovers.



3. Experimental Design

        Wave I of the experiment entailed surveying 272 incoming freshman students in

Santa Catalina Residence Hall at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Students

were recruited at our table outside the dormitory dining hall during move-in week,

Sept.19-24, 2009, and were paid $8 for filling out a survey and giving consent to be

contacted later. They were also entered in a lottery for two iPod Nanos, retail value

$149.00.

        In Wave II, which took place Oct.5-12, we administered a friendship survey to the

222 students who responded to our emails or returned to our table at the residence hall,

and so remained in the experiment.10 In the friendship survey, which they filled out

online or at our table on a laptop, students were instructed to click on the checkboxes

next to the names of the people they knew. The list of names from which they chose

included only students in the experiment,11 and they were shown at most 50 names per

screen. Subjects were paid $8 for filling out the friendship survey and were entered in an

iPod lottery. Treatment and control status was assigned at this time. Subjects randomized

into the treatment group were informed they would be paid $80 if they visited the

University Recreation Center 8 times or more between Oct. 12 and Nov. 8. We reiterate

that treatment is defined here as being eligible to be paid for exercising, so the distinction

10
   Among those not returning for the second interview were students who dropped out of the university,
switched email addresses, or left the residence hall to live elsewhere.
11
   To comply with human subjects protocols, we needed a subject’s consent to include her name on the list.
Of the 222 students in Wave II, 209 gave consent to have their names included on the friendship survey.
Thus, there were a few subjects who could choose their friends but could not be chosen.


                                                                                                         8
between take-up and assignment essentially vanishes. By definition, all 222 students who

were paid to fill out friendship surveys “took up” treatment if they were assigned to

treatment, or stayed in the experiment as controls if they had been assigned to the control

group.

         Whenever anyone wishes to enter the Rec Center, the attendant at the front desk

takes his or her student photo ID card and electronically scans it. The student photo is

clearly visible to the attendant who scans the card and only one card can be presented per

student. (Thus, it was extremely difficult, if not impossible, for subjects in our

experiment to cheat by using someone else’s card or by scanning multiple cards for a

single visit.) The time, date, and student card barcode of every gym entry is stored

electronically. This was the source of data on recreation center visits. The treatment

period ended on Nov. 8. Wave III began immediately thereafter. From Nov. 8-19, we

surveyed the subjects again, paid them $12 and entered them in an iPod lottery. At the

end of Wave III, we paid $80 to each subject in the treatment group who had visited the

facility eight times in the allotted period.

         Several unique aspects of the research design in this pay-for-exercise experiment

merit comment, as they relate directly to the identification strategy. The recreation center

was about a 25-30 minute walk from the residence hall. Thus, visits to the recreation

center involved nontrivial commitments of time and effort. Subjects were recruited from

the same dormitory so that they would be likely to know some of the other subjects in the

experiment. Approximately 20% of the students living in the dormitory participated in

the experiment. The research design allowed a period for incoming freshman to form

acquaintanceships with others in the residence hall, and so with other subjects in the




                                                                                             9
experiment. After this period, but prior to treatment, friendship networks were elicited.

Thus, the friendship networks were not influenced by treatment or treatment status.

Random assignment of treatment served two purposes in this experiment. It induced

random variation in exposure to treatment, which allowed identification of individual

effects, and it induced random variation in exposure to treated and untreated peers, which

allowed identification of external effects.

         Figure 2 shows the friendship network elicited from Santa Catalina residents who

were subjects in the experiment. Square nodes represent treated subjects, whereas circular

nodes denote control subjects. An arrow from node A to node B implies that subject A

checked the box indicating she knew subject B. Netdraw, which was used to create this

graph, causes two subjects to appear farther apart on the page when the number of

degrees of separation between them is larger.12 Clustering of nodes in the diagram

indicates clustering in the network. To the extent, then, that the squares are scattered

randomly among the circles, the figure suggests a random distribution of treated subjects

within the friendship network. Figure 3 shows the friendship group for one (circular)

node, a control subject. As is apparent from the figure, the subject indicated that she

knew 6 treated subjects and 11 control subjects. Random variation in numbers of treated

and control subjects known by a subject, induced by random assignment to treatment, is

pivotal in the analysis.13




12
   Borgatti, Everett, and Freeman (2002).
13
   An alternative approach to the one used here would have been to stratify treatment assignment by
friendship group (to insure variation in numbers of treated and untreated friends.) This would have been a
greater departure from standard approaches, which focus on estimation of individual effects. Also, it would
have created logistical problems in a brief 10-week quarter, as friendship data would have to be analyzed
before treatment was assigned. For a discussion of trade-offs involved in estimating individual and external
effects at the same time, see Philipson (2000).


                                                                                                         10
4. Results

A. Individual Effects

       Table 1 shows summary statistics for treatment and control groups in the Santa

Catalina experiment, by age, race, gender, physical characteristics, pre-treatment

recreation center usage, and treatment status of friends. The composition of control and

treatment groups appears very similar in most categories. Age, race, and physical

characteristics, are nearly identical for the two groups. Though treated subjects had

slightly fewer treated friends than control subjects, and more men were randomized into

the treatment group than the control group, the far-right column shows that none of the

differences between the groups is statistically significant.

       Figure 4 shows the rate of recreation center usage for treated and control subjects

before and during the treatment period. Control subjects and treated subjects made 0.58

and .5 recreation center visits per week, respectively, in the pre-treatment period. During

the 4-week treatment period, control subjects continued to visit the recreation center at

about the same rate, while treated subjects increased their visits to an average of 1.77 per

week. This difference is highly significant (with p-value<0.001). We conclude that, as

expected, treatment incentivized subjects to visit the recreation center.

       One could worry that students simply had their cards read at the recreation center

door, then turned around and left. This does not appear to have been the case. Figure 5

displays self-reported levels of exercise by treatment status, before and during the

treatment period. The figure shows the number of times per week subjects exercised

moderately or vigorously for 30 minutes or more. For control subjects, the number of

exercise sessions dropped off during the treatment period (perhaps because the school




                                                                                            11
term progressed and they grew busier), while for treated subjects, the number of sessions

rose. The difference in differences is about .5 sessions per week and is statistically

significant with p-value .07.

         In summary, the evidence indicates that treated subjects visited the recreation

center significantly more often during the treatment period than control subjects, and

further, that treatment induced effort-intensive changes in exercise not limited to card-

swiping visits or substitution between exercise venues.



B. Peer Effects and Recreation Visits

         Most previous approaches assume that social interactions exhibit scale

independence. Specifically, social interactions are scale independent if mean outcomes or

behaviors of the group influence own outcomes in the same way, regardless of group size

(as in the linear-in-means model). If individual behavior is more (or less) affected when 5

out of the individual’s 10 friends engage in an activity than when 1 out of the individual’s

2 friends do so, this assumption does not hold.14 In the regressions summarized in Table

2, we do not impose scale-independence. The dependent variable is the increase in

recreation usage, from pre-treatment to treatment period, and the regressors are the

number of treated friends, the number of untreated friends and a constant. Thus, we allow

for the possibility that having 5 treated friends out of 10 may produce a much different

effect than having 1 friend treated out of 2. We will also address carefully the issue of

whether the size the friendship group drives results in a direct way.


14
   Relatedly, the scale-independent model is highly vulnerable to bias resulting from measurement error in
friendship networks, because miscounting just one person in the numerator or denominator of the share of a
group taking a certain action (or exposed to a certain treatment) can dramatically distort the regressor when
the typical group size is small.


                                                                                                          12
       Columns 1 and 2 summarize results by treatment group. For treated subjects,

having 1 more treated friend is associated with increased recreation center usage that is

.13 visits per week larger, while having 1 more untreated friend is associated with an

increase that is .065 visits per week smaller. This finding is consistent with an

interpretation in which treated friends help a treated subject to go to the recreation center

more frequently during the treatment period (for example, by coordinating plans to create

commitment devices, by reminders and encouragement, or by companionship that

reduces the effort cost of exercising). Untreated subjects, in contrast, may distract,

discourage or otherwise redirect a treated subject toward other activities. Column 2

indicates that unlike treated subjects, control subjects do not respond to whether their

friends are treated or untreated. One possible reason for this difference is that control

subjects may face no commitment problems: Having little or no incentive to visit the

recreation center, they may derive no benefits from pre-commitment. We emphasize that

the interpretations above are simply possibilities, and we do not claim to have established

that they are the driving mechanisms. Table 2 does indicate, however, that the choices of

treated subjects are sensitive to the treatment status of their friends, whereas the choices

of control subjects are not.

       In columns 1 and 2, a subject’s response to the treatment status of her peers may

be in some way confounded with the number of friends she has. An agent will tend to

have more treated friends and more untreated friends if she has more friends overall.

Columns 3 and 4, however, reveal that a subject’s overall number of friends has virtually

no influence on recreation center visits, and that this holds both for treated and control




                                                                                             13
subjects. In short, the treatment composition of the friendship group matters for treated

subjects, but the size of the friendship group does not.

       In Table 3, the dependent variable is number of recreation visits per week in the

treatment period, and we include pre-treatment recreation center usage as a regressor. In

this specification, we let the data tell us how strongly pre-treatment recreation center

usage influences the rate of usage during treatment. (The implicit assumption in the

regressions of Table 2, which feature change in usage as the dependent variable, is that

this coefficient is equal to one.) Results in Table 3 are similar to those in Table 2, and

would indicate that the association between treatment composition of the friendship

group and increased recreation center usage for the treated is not driven by the

assumption above. Interestingly, however, for the control group, an increase of 1 visit

per week in the period before treatment is associated with a change of almost exactly 1

visit per week in the treatment period. Thus pre-treatment behavior strongly predicts

control-group behavior during treatment. For the treatment group, in contrast, an increase

of 1 visit per week in the period before treatment is associated with a change of .57 visits

per week in the treatment period. Pre-treatment behavior, for the treated, is not as strong a

predictor of choices during treatment.

       It may also be informative to examine the outcome that may have mattered most

to the treated subjects: reaching the threshold of 8 visits and earning the $80 payment.

Table 4 shows results from a linear probability model, analogous to the model in Table 3.

The dependent variable is whether or not the subject visited the recreation center 8 times

during the treatment period. Results are very similar in flavor to those in Table 3. Treated

subjects had a .035 greater probability of exercising 8 times in the treatment period (and




                                                                                             14
being paid) if they had 1 more treated friend and were .029 less likely to do so if they had

1 more untreated friend, though we note that the coefficient on treated friends is not

precisely estimated (p-value=.23) Similar to the findings in Table 3, the numbers of

treated and untreated friends had no clear effect on control subjects’ probability of

exercising 8 times.



C. Extrapolating to Implementation

       How large are the effects in Tables 2 and 3, and what do they imply about

extrapolation to a program that would expand treatment to the entire sample? In the

experiment, treated subjects have 2.7 treated friends and 4.8 untreated friends. If

treatment were to be expanded to the entire sample, treated subjects would have 4.8 more

treated friends and 4.8 fewer untreated friends. Given the (strong) assumption of linearity

in the external effect, the extrapolated increase in usage associated with treating the entire

sample would be 4.8(.1)-4.8(-.054) =.74 visits/wk, based on the (conservative) estimates

in Table 3, Column 1. This increase is statistically significant at the 5% level. The

difference between treatment and control means for exercise during the treatment period

was 1.15 visits per week, and was also statistically significant (p-value<0.001). The

estimated external effect, then, is nearly as large as the individual effect, and program

implementation bias is .74/1.15, or about 64%. Figure 5 depicts these effects graphically,

using the schematic of Section 2.

       Figure 5 addresses the hypothetical expansion of the fraction treated from about ⅓

of the sample to the entire sample of particpants in the experiment (the full sample being

about 1/5 of the residence hall). From a policy perspective, though, this may not be the




                                                                                            15
relevant counterfactual. One might want to ask what the effect would be of implementing

treatment for the entire residence hall. In many interventions, it is unrealistic to imagine

one could ever get 100% saturation of treatment, but here “treatment” simply means

being made eligible to receive rewards for exercise. It is not difficult to imagine

extending eligibility to the entire dorm. We emphasize that the field experiment included

about a fifth of the residence hall, and that only individuals in the experiment were in the

elicited friendship network. Thus, there may have been other relevant “untreated”

friends—any friend in the residence hall who was not in the experiment. Implementation

on the entire residence hall would yield more than 4.8 additional treated friends per

subject, on average, and would thus be expected to produce a larger exercise effect than

was extrapolated for implementation on the subpopulation in the experiment. We submit,

then, that the estimate of .74 additional visits per week associated with expanding

treatment to the subpopulation in the experiment, and the corresponding estimate of 64%

program implementation bias, could be interpreted as lower bounds for residence hall (or

broader) implementation.15

         In the previous section, we briefly described possible mechanisms for the effects

observed in the field experiment. It has long been argued, both casually and in formal

models, that exercise regimens require self-control and far-sightedness to carry out. It

may not be surprising, then, to have found evidence of strong peer influence in this

setting. What is less expected, perhaps, is that untreated friends would seem to exert a

negative influence on treated subjects. This highlights three implications we believe to be

important. Firstly, there is evidence in this experiment that the relative size of treatment


15
  We note, however, that untreated friends in the experiment may differ in their influence on treated
subjects from untreated subjects who were never in the experiment.


                                                                                                        16
and control groups may have a large influence on behaviors. Secondly, this influence

appears to differ greatly between treated subjects and controls. Thirdly, many people

trying to increase their exercise levels may have difficulty doing so if they do not have

friends trying to reach the same goals. Randomization, itself, would seem to have many

subtle effects, and these may need to be estimated, as was done here, for experiments to

be interpreted meaningfully.



5. Conclusion

       In a field experiment conducted on college freshmen, all of whom lived in the

same residence hall, we elicited friendship networks and offered monetary incentives for

using the recreation center to a treated subset. We found that treated students with more

treated friends increased their usage of the recreation center more, while treated students

with more untreated friends increased their recreation center usage less. Untreated

subjects, however, did not alter their recreation center usage at all, and were not

influenced by the treatment status of their peers.

       We highlight three main contributions of this research: Firstly, the experiment

provided evidence of large peer effects in a self-control setting that is of interest to

researchers and policy-makers. Secondly, the findings offered empirical evidence of large

variations in the magnitude of spillovers by treatment status and treatment size,

highlighting potential effects of randomization in a controlled setting that are sometimes

ignored. Thirdly, this research design offered a simple methodology that could be applied

at low cost to a wide range of controlled interventions in which social networks are likely

to influence behaviors.




                                                                                            17
References

Acland, D. and Levy, M. (2010), “Habit Formation and Naivete in Gym Attendance:
Evidence from a Field Experiment,” mimeo, UC Berkeley.

Anderson, L., Quinn, T., Glanz, K. et al. (2009), “The Effectiveness of Worksite
Nutrition and Physical Activity Interventions for Controlling Employee Overweight and
Obesity: A Systematic Review” American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 37(4): 340-
357.

Angelucci, M., and De Giorgi, G. (2009), ”Indirect Effects of an Aid Program: How Do
Cash Transfers Affect Ineligibles’ Consumption?” American Economic Review, 99(1):
486-508.

Becker, G. (1992), “Habits, Addictions and Traditions,” Kyklos, 45(3): 327-345.

Benabou, R., and Tirole, J., (2003), “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation” Review of
Economic Studies, 70(3): 489-520.

Benabou, R., and Tirole, J., (2006), “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior” American
Economic Review, 96(5): 1652-1678.

Bobonis, G. J., and Finan, F. (2009), "Neighborhood Peer Effects in Secondary School
Enrollment Decisions", Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4): 695–716.

Borgatti, Steve, Everett, M. and Freeman, L., Ucinet 6.87 for Windows: Software for
Social Network Analysis (Harvard, MA: Analytic Technologies, 2002).

Charness, G., and Gneezy, U. (2009), “Incentives to Exercise” Econometrica, 77(3):
909–931.

Conn, V., Hafdahl A., and Cooper, P. (2009), “Meta-Analysis of Workplace Physical
Activity Interventions” American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 37(4): 330-339.

Deci, E. (1971), “Effects of Externally Mediated Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 18(1): 105-115.

DellaVigna, S., and Malmendier, U. (2006), “Paying Not To Go To the Gym” American
Economic Review, 96(3): 694-719.

Duflo, E. (2006), “Field Experiments in Development Economics,” Discussion paper.

Duflo, E., and Saez, E. (2003), “The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(3), 815–842.




                                                                                       18
Gneezy, U., and Rustichini, A. (2000), “Pay Enough or Don’t Pay at All”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115(3): 791-810.

Hewitt Associates LLC. (2002), “Health Promotion/Managed Health Provided by Major
U.S. Employers in 2001.”

Kuhn, P., Kooreman, P., Soetevent, A.R., and Kapteyn, A. (forthcoming), “The Effects of
Lottery Prizes on Winners and their Neighbors: Evidence from the Dutch Postcode
Lottery,” American Economic Review.

Lalive, R. and Cattaneo, A. (2009), “Social Interactions and Schooling Decisions,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(3): 457-477.

Manski, C.F. (2009), “Identification Of Treatment Response With Social Interactions,"
Mimeo, Northwestern University.

Miguel, E. and Kremer, M. (2004), “Worms: identifying impacts on education and health
in the presence of treatment externalities.” Econometrica 72(1): 159-217.

Miguel, E. and Kremer, M. (2007), “The Illusion of Sustainability,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122(3): 1007-1065

Moffitt, R. A. (2001), “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria, and Social
Interactions,” in Social Dynamics, ed. by S. N. Durlauf, and H. P. Young, pp. 45–82.
MIT Press.

O’Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (1999), “Doing it Now or Later,” American Economic
Review, 89(1): 103-124.

O’Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (2001), “Choice and Procrastination,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 116(1): 121-160.

Oster, E. and Thornton, R. (2009), “Determinants of Technology Adoption: Private Value
and Peer Effects in Menstrual Cup Take-Up,” NBER Working Paper No.14828.

Philipson, T. (2000), “External Treatment Effects and Program Implementation Bias,"
NBER Technical Working Paper No. 250.

Rubin, D. (1986), “Statistics and Causal Inference: Which Ifs Have Causal Answers,"
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81(396): 961-2.

Sacerdote, B. (2001), “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 681–704.




                                                                                        19
Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics

                              Treatment              Control
                          Mean      St. Dev.   Mean       St. Dev. P-Value (Diff=0)
Age                       18.01       0.29      18.01       0.33        0.92
Black                      0.03       0.18       0.04       0.21        0.73
Hispanic                   0.24       0.43       0.25       0.43        0.92
Male                       0.62       0.49       0.53       0.50        0.15
Height                    67.54       3.42      66.93       3.94        0.23
Weight                    146.08     21.28     143.85      26.76        0.49
Visits/wk (pre)            0.50       0.76       0.58       0.82        0.45
Treated Friends            2.66       2.29       2.87       2.05        0.50
Untreated Friends          4.77       4.21       5.67       3.90        0.11

Obs                          86                 136




                                                                                      20
Table 2 - Regressions of Exercise Change on Number of Treated and
Untreated Peers - by Treatment Group
                             1              2              3           4
                        Treatment        Control      Treatment    Control
                        Δvisits/wk     Δvisits/wk     Δvisits/wk  Δvisits/wk
#Treated friends           .13**         -.0027
                          (.051)         (.039)
#Untreated friends        -.065*          .0096
                          (.033)         (.018)
#Friends                                                -.0016      .0057
                                                        (.017)       (.01)
Constant                   1.2***        -.0064         1.3***     -.0083
                           (.16)         (.093)          (.16)       (.09)
Observations                 86            136            86          136
R-squared                   0.05           0.00          0.00        0.00
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                               21
Table 3 - Regressions of Exercise Visits on Number of Treated and
Untreated Peers - by Treatment Group
                              1              2             3           4
                        Treatment        Control      Treatment    Control
                         Visits/wk      Visits/wk      Visits/wk  Visits/wk
#Treated friends            .10**        -.0044
                          (.046)         (.039)
#Untreated friends        -.054*           .013
                          (.032)         (.018)
#Friends                                                -.0035       .007
                                                        (.016)     (.0091)
Visits/wk(Pre)             .57***        .96***         .54***      .97***
                            (.16)        (.098)          (.13)      (.061)
Constant                   1.5***         .0032         1.5***    -.00039
                            (.15)        (.096)          (.17)       (.09)
Observations                 86            136            86          136
R-squared                   0.21           0.68          0.18        0.68
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                              22
Table 4- Regressions of Reaching 8-Visit Threshold on Number of
Treated and Untreated Peers - by Treatment Group
                              1              2              3          4
                        Treatment        Control      Treatment    Control
                         Visits/wk      Visits/wk      Visits/wk  Visits/wk
#Treated friends            .035           -.016
                          (.029)          (.014)
#Untreated friends        -.027*            .01
                          (.016)         (.0078)
#Friends                                                -.0065      .0016
                                                        (.0084)    (.0041)
Visits/wk(Pre)             .17***         .26***          .16**     .26***
                          (.058)          (.028)         (.067)     (.027)
Constant                    .6***          -.036         .62***     -.041
                            (.09)         (.041)         (.088)     (.041)
Observations                 86             136            86        136
R-squared                   0.09           0.44           0.07       0.43
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                              23
                                             Figure 1

A.                                               B.

Outcome                                                 Outcome
mean                                                    mean



                                                                                                          Bias

     μ1(s1)                                              μ1(s1)
                                                                      μ1(s)




     μ0(s1)                                              μ0(s1)

                                                                      μ0(s)




              0                s1            1                    0                s1                 1
                          Program size (s)                                    Program size (s)




C.

Outcome
mean


                                                 Bias

     μ1(s1)
                  μ1(s)




     μ0(s1)       μ0(s)




              0                s1            1
                          Program size (s)




                                                                                                 24
          Figure 2

Santa Catalina Residence Hall
     Friendship Network




                                Squares - Treated
                                Circles - Control




                                           25
          Figure 3

Friendship Links – Subject 137




                                 Squares - Treated
                                 Circles - Control




                                                 26
                      Figure 4


                Rec Center Visits
                    (per wk)

 2

1.5
                                          Control
 1
                                          Treatment
0.5

 0
      Pre-treatment    Treatment Period




                                                      27
                      Figure 5


        30-Minute Exercise Sessions
                  (per wk)

3.8
3.6
3.4                                       Control
3.2                                       Treatment
 3
2.8
      Pre-treatment    Treatment Period




                                                      28
                                 Figure 6

                             Santa Catalina
                      Program Implementation Bias

Outcome
mean


                                                        Bias
                                                        .74
 μ1(s1)
              μ1(s)
                                 1.15


 μ0(s1)       μ0(s)




          0                 s1                      1
                       Program size (s)




                                                               29
