                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WHAT DOES STOCK OWNERSHIP BREADTH MEASURE?

                                             James J. Choi
                                                Li Jin
                                             Hongjun Yan

                                         Working Paper 16591
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16591


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




Choi and Yan received support from a Whitebox Advisors research grant administered through the
Yale International Center for Finance, Jin received support from the Harvard Business School Division
of Research, and Choi received support from the National Institute on Aging (grant P01-AG005842).
We thank Yakov Amihud, Warren Bailey, Long Chen, Cam Harvey, David Hirshleifer, Harrison Hong,
Christine Jiang, Ron Kaniel, Owen Lamont, Akiko Watanabe, and audience members at Berkeley,
CICF Conference, Frontiers in Finance Conference, NYU Five Star Conference, Emory, Fudan, Goldman
Sachs Asset Management, Harvard, INSEAD, Michigan, National University of Singapore, Oxford,
SUNY Binghamton, University of Rochester, and Washington University in St. Louis for their comments.
We are indebted to Ben Hebert and Jung Sakong for their research assistance, and to Fenghua Wang
and Dora Liu for their help in calculating all the breadth measures used in the paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by James J. Choi, Li Jin, and Hongjun Yan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What Does Stock Ownership Breadth Measure?
James J. Choi, Li Jin, and Hongjun Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 16591
December 2010, Revised July 2012
JEL No. G12

                                                ABSTRACT

Using holdings data on a representative sample of all Shanghai Stock Exchange investors, we show
that increases in ownership breadth (the fraction of market participants who own a stock) predict low
returns: highest change quintile stocks underperform lowest quintile stocks by 23% per year. Small
retail investors drive this result. Retail ownership breadth increases appear to be correlated with overpricing.
Among institutional investors, however, the opposite holds: Stocks in the top decile of wealth-weighted
institutional breadth change outperform the bottom decile by 8% per year, consistent with prior work
that interprets breadth as a measure of short-sales constraints.


James J. Choi                                          Hongjun Yan
Yale School of Management                              Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street                                    135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200                                        Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                               New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER                                               hongjun.yan@yale.edu
james.choi@yale.edu

Li Jin
Harvard Business School
Finance Unit
Boston, MA 02163
ljin@hbs.edu
        What should we infer about future returns when we see a large number of investors
buying a stock they had previously not owned, or a large number of investors completely
liquidating their holdings of a stock? In this paper, we test how changes in ownership breadth—
the fraction of market participants with a long position in a given stock—predict the cross-
section of stock returns.
        Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002) (hereafter CHS) argue that in a market with short sales
constraints, when an investor holds no long position in a stock, he is likely to have negative
information about the stock’s fundamental value. Due to short sales constraints, this negative
information is only partially incorporated into the stock’s price. Thus, when ownership breadth is
low, there is a large amount of negative news missing from the stock’s price, and the stock’s
future returns will be low.1
        Empirically testing this theory is challenging because it requires a representative sample
of all investors who face short sales constraints, which is usually not available at high frequency.
Previous empirical tests of ownership breadth have measured ownership breadth among U.S.
mutual funds, which are not representative of all U.S. investors who face short-sales constraints.
The mismatch between available data and theory may explain why the evidence on ownership
breadth has been mixed to date. Because ownership breadth level is close to a permanent
characteristic for a stock, CHS argue that focus should be placed on ownership breadth
changes—essentially controlling for a stock fixed effect. CHS find that cross-sectionally, stocks
that are held by fewer mutual funds this quarter than last quarter subsequently underperform
stocks with mutual fund ownership breadth increases from 1979 to 1998. But Nagel (2005)
expands the CHS sample by five years and finds that there is no relationship on average between
mutual fund ownership breadth changes and future returns over the longer sample.2



1
  Most theoretical models find that short-sales constraints lead to overvaluation (e.g., Miller (1977), Harrison and
Kreps (1978), Allen, Morris, and Postlewaite (1993), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003)), but there are exceptions. For
example, Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) argue that short-sales constraints do not bias stock prices on average
when investors correctly anticipate that pessimistic investors are sitting on the sidelines. Bai, Chang, and Wang
(2006) show that, depending on the relative importance of informed versus uninformed trading motives, short-sales
constraints can increase, decrease, or have no impact on stock prices.
2
  Cen, Lu, and Yang (2011) find that mutual fund breadth changes tend to negatively predict returns when the Baker
and Wurgler (2006, 2007) sentiment index experiences large absolute movements. Lehavy and Sloan (2008) find
that U.S. mutual fund ownership breadth change is positively autocorrelated, and that controlling for future breadth
changes, current breadth change negatively predicts future returns.


                                                         2
        We use a new holdings dataset from the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) that is uniquely
suited to testing the CHS theory. The investors in the data are a random, survivorship-bias-free
sample of all investors in the SSE. During our 1996 to 2007 sample period, short sales were
strictly prohibited in China, and there was minimal equity derivatives activity.3 Therefore, our
sample is also representative of all investors in the market who face short-sales constraints.
        We find, in sharp contrast to the CHS prediction, that high breadth change stocks
subsequently underperform low breadth change stocks when we define ownership breadth as
CHS do—the percent of all market participants who have a long position in a stock, giving equal
weight to each investor. The annualized difference in the four-factor alpha between the highest
and lowest quintiles of equal-weighted total breadth change (which is not public information) in
the first month after portfolio formation is –23%, with a t-statistic of 9.7. Abnormal returns are
present on both the long and short sides of the hypothetical zero-investment portfolio and persist
for five months after portfolio formation. (Data on each stock’s monthly breadth portfolio
assignments are available on the second author’s website.)
        This finding may be consistent with the lay theory recounted by Lewis (1989): “The first
thing you learn on the trading floor is that when large numbers of people are after the same
commodity, be it a stock, a bond, or a job, the commodity quickly becomes overvalued.” In other
words, ownership breadth measures popularity among noise traders who are able to move prices.
Indeed, the breadth measure we adopt from CHS is essentially a measure of breadth among retail
investors in China, since retail investors vastly outnumber institutions in the market. Portfolios
formed on equal-weighted breadth change among only retail investors have returns that are
nearly identical to portfolios formed on equal-weighted total breadth change. Lewis is silent on
when a commodity becomes popular and therefore overvalued. We find that equal-weighted
retail breadth change’s contemporaneous correlation with a stock’s return is negative. Therefore,
retail investors may be causing misvaluation by leaning against price movements and delaying
full price adjustment to fundamental news.
        As we put more weight on sophisticated investors in our breadth measure, the results
change. When we redefine total breadth so that investors are weighted by their lagged stock

3
  There were no equity derivatives prior to the end of 2005. From 2005 to 2007, eleven Shanghai Stock Exchange
companies (out of over 800 total listed companies) were allowed to issue put warrants. See Xiong and Yu
(forthcoming) for more details on these warrants.


                                                      3
market wealth, the annualized four-factor alpha difference between the highest and lowest total
breadth change portfolios attenuates to –5% (still statistically significant). Further restricting the
population over which we calculation wealth-weighted breadth change to institutions only, we
reproduce the original CHS result in a completely new sample: highest-decile wealth-weighted
institutional breadth change stocks outperform lowest-decile wealth-weighted institutional
breadth change stocks. The annualized difference in the four-factor alphas is 8%, with a t-
statistic of 2.6.
        This last result suggests that when ownership breadth is measured within the population
of all sophisticated investors that observe unbiased signals of the stock’s fundamental value but
cannot short, it functions more in accordance with the CHS theory, primarily reflecting how
much negative information is not in the stock price due to short-sales constraints. The CHS
model does not have unsophisticated traders who observe no fundamental signals, which could
be why it no longer applies once ownership breadth is measured over a population of
predominantly unsophisticated retail investors.
        On average, institutional trades against retail investors are profitable before transactions
costs; if a stock’s month-over-month change in the log fraction of shares owned by institutions is
one standard deviation higher, its abnormal return in the subsequent month is 3.5% higher on an
annualized basis. But the significance of institutional ownership percentage changes disappears
once we control for equal-weighted retail breadth changes and wealth-weighted institutional
breadth changes, while both breadth change measures remain significant return predictors. In
other words, an institution buying shares from an individual positively predicts future returns
only if the individual is completely liquidating his position or the institution previously had no
position in the stock. This result indicates that how many shares in aggregate change hands
between institutions and individuals does not matter as much as how many of each investor type
start and end with holdings of the stock, thus demonstrating the value of disaggregated investor-
level data for forecasting future returns.
        Because we only have ownership data from China, we have no direct evidence on the
extent to which our results generalize to other countries, just as any empirical study using only
U.S. data cannot draw any conclusions about whether its results extend to non-U.S. markets. We
believe that even if our results were to apply only to China, they are of general interest given the
significance of the Chinese stock market, which had 139 million investment accounts at year-end

                                                  4
2007 (China Securities Regulatory Commission (2009)) and the second-largest market
capitalization among all national stock markets at year-end 2010. Although much of our data
come from a time when the Chinese stock market was quite young, all of our main results hold in
the second half of our sample period, suggesting that they continue to apply to China’s market
today.
         Nevertheless, similarities between China and other markets in retail investor behavior and
stock return patterns give us some reason to think that ownership breadth operates in the same
way outside of China. Chinese retail investors exhibit the disposition effect, excessive trading,
home bias, and under-diversification, just as U.S. investors do (Chen et al. (2007), Feng and
Seasholes (2008)). Chen et al. (2010) test 18 variables that have been shown to predict cross-
sectional stock returns in the U.S. market and find that in the 1995 to 2007 period, all 18
variables’ point estimates in univariate Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions have signs consistent
with the U.S. evidence, and five are statistically significant, compared to eight significant
coefficients for the U.S. markets during this same period.
         In addition to the literature on ownership breadth, our paper is related to research that
attempts to empirically detect the price impact of short-sales constraints,4 research on investor
sentiment measures,5 and research on the portfolio performance of institutional versus individual
investors.6
         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes our data, and
Section II defines the variables we use in the analysis. Section III presents the main tests of
ownership breadth’s ability to predict the cross-section of stock returns. Section IV shows how
returns, breadth, and institutional ownership behave around the formation date of portfolios
sorted on breadth change, which gives us insight into the decisions that result in breadth changes
4
  These studies have adopted a number of proxies to measure short-sales constraints, such as analyst forecast
dispersion (Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002), Yu (2009)), short interest (Asquith, Pathak, and Ritter (2005),
Boehme, Danielsen and Sorescu (2006)), the introduction of traded options (Figlewski and Webb (1993), Danielsen
and Sorescu (2001), Mayhew and Mihov (2005)), and lending fees (Jones and Lamont (2002), D’Avolio (2002),
Reed (2002), Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2002), Mitchell, Pulvino, and Stafford (2002), Ofek and Richardson (2003),
Ofek, Richardson, and Whitelaw (2004), Cohen, Diether, and Malloy (2007)).
5
  Examples include Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991), Baker and Wurgler (2006, 2007), Cornelli, Goldreich, and
Ljunqvist (2006), Kumar and Lee (2006), Qiu and Welch (2006), Tetlock (2007), Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2011),
Hwang (2011), Baker, Wurgler, and Yuan (2012), and Ben-Rephael, Kandel, and Wohl (2012).
6
  See, for example, Gruber (1996), Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), Zheng (1999), Chen, Jegadeesh,
and Wermers (2000), Seasholes and Wu (2007), Frazzini and Lamont (2008), Kaniel, Saar, and Titman (2008),
Barber, Lee, Liu, and Odean (2008), Campbell, Ramadorai, and Schwartz (2009), Kelley and Tetlock (2010), and
Barber, Odean, and Zhu (forthcoming).


                                                        5
and why breadth changes might be related to future returns. Section V explores the relationship
between breadth changes and changes in institutional ownership percentages. Section VI
compares the return-predicting ability of retail breadth changes in months with and without
earnings announcements to assess whether breadth changes reflect anything more than trading by
investors with private information. Section VII investigates the extent to which breadth changes
predict future returns via a Merton (1987) investor recognition channel, and Section VIII
discusses the different implications that ownership initiations versus discontinuations have for
future returns. Section IX concludes.


I. Data description
         Our ownership breadth data come from the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE). At the end
of 2007—the last year of our sample period—the 860 stocks traded on the SSE had a total
market capitalization of $3.7 trillion, making it the world’s sixth-largest stock exchange behind
NYSE, Tokyo, Euronext, Nasdaq, and London. Mainland China’s other stock exchange, the
Shenzhen Stock Exchange, had a $785 billion market capitalization at year-end 2007. By year-
end 2010, China’s stock market had the second-largest market capitalization among all countries
of the world, behind only the U.S.
         Almost all SSE shares are A shares, which only domestic investors could hold until 2003.
At year-end 2007, A shares constituted over 99% of SSE market capitalization. B shares are
quoted in U.S. dollars and can be held by foreign and (since 2001) domestic investors. Shares are
further classified into tradable and non-tradable shares. Non-tradable shares have the same
voting and cashflow rights as tradable shares and are typically owned directly by the Chinese
government (“state-owned shares”) or by government-controlled domestic financial institutions
and corporations (“legal person shares”).7 We use the term “tradable market capitalization” to
refer to the value of tradable A shares, and “total market capitalization” to refer to the combined

7
  Beginning in April 2005, non-tradable shares began to be converted to tradable status, although the conversion
process was slow enough that as of year-end 2007, 72% of total Chinese market capitalization remained non-
tradable. Converted tradable shares were subject to a one-year lockup, and investors holding more than a 5% stake
were subject to selling restrictions for an additional two years. Dropping returns starting in May 2006 (the month
after the first formerly non-tradable shares became liquid and thus begin to appear in our holdings data) does not
qualitatively affect our breadth portfolio alpha estimates in Table 5, except that in the shorter sample, the long-short
wealth-weighted total breadth change portfolio’s three-factor alpha is significant at the 1% level, and the long-short
wealth-weighted institutional breadth change portfolio’s one-factor alpha is significant at the 10% level and the four-
factor alpha is significant at the 5% level.


                                                           6
value of tradable and non-tradable A shares. During our sample period, about 27% of SSE
market capitalization was tradable.
           To trade on the SSE, both retail and institutional investors are required to open an
account with the Exchange, at which point they must identify themselves to the Exchange as an
individual or an institution. Each account uniquely and permanently identifies an investor, even
if the account later becomes empty. Investors cannot have multiple accounts. The data assembled
by the Exchange for this paper consists of the entire history of SSE tradable A-share holdings
from January 1996 to May 2007 for a representative random sample of all accounts that existed
at the end of May 2007. Since there are far fewer institutional accounts than retail accounts, the
Exchange over-sampled institutional investors in order to ensure that a meaningful number of
institutional accounts were extracted.8 The market-wide statistics computed from these account
data are reweighted to adjust for the over-sampling of institutional investors. The sample
contains both currently active and inactive accounts, so there is no survivorship bias, and in
expectation, a constant fraction of the accounts extant at any date are represented. The number of
accounts in the sample grows from 36,349 retail accounts and 360 institutional accounts to
384,709 retail accounts and 20,727 institutional accounts from January 1996 to May 2007.
Holdings data are aggregated at the Exchange into stock-level measures. The aggregation is
carried out under arrangements that maintain strict confidentiality requirements to ensure that no
individual account data are disclosed.
           Table 1 shows the mean and median value in RMB of an investor’s holdings in a single
company, conditional on investing in the company, as well as the mean and median value of an
investor’s total stock portfolio. For most of the sample period, the exchange rate was about 8.3
RMB per U.S. dollar, but it then fell to 7.7 RMB per U.S. dollar from July 2005 to May 2007.
Retail investors start with a mean (median) stock position value of 8,069 (3,900) RMB and a
mean (median) total portfolio value of 22,179 (8,680) RMB in 1996. By 2007, the last year of
our sample, these values have increased to 21,992 (6,670) RMB and 54,759 (13,620) RMB,
respectively. Even adjusting for the 16% rise in the Chinese consumer price index over this
period, this represents a sizable increase in the position and portfolio values of retail investors.
Institutions start with a mean (median) stock position value of 738,976 (54,375) RMB, and a


8
    Further details of the sampling process can be obtained from the authors.


                                                            7
mean (median) total portfolio value of 3,572,650 (198,102) RMB in 1996. Their mean (median)
stock position value increased to 8,153,493 (185,187) RMB and their total portfolio value
increased to 32,808,349 (330,980) RMB by 2007. Institutional investors’ portfolio values grew
much more quickly than retail investors’, particularly for the means. The median institutional
investor portfolio is strikingly small throughout the sample period—far less than 100,000 USD—
and the large difference between the mean and the median values indicates that the portfolio
value distribution is extremely right-skewed.
         We obtain stock return, market capitalization, earnings announcement date, and
accounting data from the China Stock Market & Accounting Research Database (CSMAR).


II. Variable definitions
         Following CHS, we define the equal-weighted total ownership breadth change of stock i
in month t as follows. We first restrict the sample to investors who have a long position in at
least one SSE stock at the end of both t – 1 and t. This restriction ensures that the breadth change
measure captures only the trading activity of existing market participants, rather than changes in
the investor universe due to new market participants entering and institutions dissolving.9 Equal-
weighted total ownership breadth change is the difference between the end of
t – 1 and the end of t in the fraction of these subsample investors who own stock i. We obtain
equal-weighted retail breadth change and equal-weighted institutional breadth change by further
restricting the investor subsample to retail investors or institutional investors. Stocks almost
never have an empty set of retail owners in our sample, but zero ownership is more frequent
within our institutional sample, particularly among small-cap stocks. At each time period, we do
not calculate breadth change for stocks that have zero owners in the relevant subsample at either
t – 1 or t, since the breadth change measure we obtain would be censored.
         A stock’s equal-weighted total ownership breadth increases when one investor partially
liquidates her position in the stock to sell to one or more investors who previously did not own
the stock, or one investor completely liquidates her position by selling her shares to two or more



9
 Portfolio returns are quite similar if we instead require that investors have a long position at either t – 1 or t. When
we construct wealth-weighted breadth change, described later in this section, using this alternative sample definition,
we weight investors that are not in the market at t – 1 by their stock market wealth at the end of t.


                                                           8
investors who previously did not own the stock. Note that market clearing does not constrain a
stock’s equal-weighted total ownership breadth change to be zero.
        To assess the extent to which unsophisticated investors drive the negative correlation
between total ownership breadth change and future returns, we use an alternative measure of
ownership breadth not found in CHS that de-emphasizes small investors by weighting investors
by the value of their SSE portfolio at the beginning of the month.10 To calculate wealth-weighted
total ownership breadth change at t, we again restrict the sample to investors who have a long
position in at least one SSE stock at the end of both t – 1 and t. Wealth-weighted ownership
breadth change is

                                              ∑W       v,t
                                                             −    ∑W         v,t
                                             v∈Vi ,t             v∈Vi ,t−1
                                                                                   ,                         (1)
                                                       ∑W         v,t
                                                       v∈At


where Wv,t is the SSE stock portfolio value of investor v at month t’s market open, Vi,t is the set
of subsample investors who held stock i at the end of month t, and At is the entire subsample of
investors who owned at least one SSE stock at the end of both t – 1 and t. Wealth-weighted retail
breadth change and wealth-weighted institutional breadth change are defined analogously over
their respective investor populations.
        Breadth change can be decomposed into the variables IN and OUT. Equal-weighted IN is
the percent of subsample investors who had a zero position in stock i at the end of t – 1 and a
positive position at the end of t. Equal-weighted OUT is the percent of subsample investors who
moved from a positive position to a zero position in stock i between the ends of t – 1 and t. By
construction, equal-weighted breadth change is equal-weighted IN minus equal-weighted OUT.
Wealth-weighted IN and OUT are defined analogously. For example, wealth-weighted IN is the
month t opening SSE stock portfolio value of subsample investors who moved from a zero
position to a positive position in stock i between t – 1 and t divided by the month t opening SSE
stock portfolio value of all subsample investors.




10
  Small investors have fewer resources with which to gather information. Natural selection arguments such as that
of Friedman (1953) may also lead to rational individuals becoming over-represented among wealthy investors.
However, Yan (2008) shows that the natural selection mechanism does not robustly reduce irrational investors’
wealth share.


                                                              9
        Our main cross-sectional analysis involves evaluating the return performance of
portfolios formed on breadth changes. We estimate one, three, and four-factor alphas, where the
factor portfolio returns capture CAPM beta, size, value, and momentum effects. The market
portfolio return is the composite Shanghai and Shenzhen market return, weighted by tradable
market capitalization. The riskfree return is the demand deposit rate. We construct size and value
factor returns (SMB and HML, respectively) for the Chinese stock market according to the
methodology of Fama and French (1993), but using the entire Shanghai/Shenzhen stock universe
to calculate percentile breakpoints. We form SMB based on total (i.e., tradable plus non-tradable)
market capitalization and HML based on the ratio of book equity to total market capitalization,
weighting stocks within component sub-portfolios by their tradable market capitalization.11 We
construct the momentum factor portfolio MOM following the methodology described on
Kenneth French’s website. We calculate the 50th percentile total market capitalization at month-
end t – 1 and the 30th and 70th percentile cumulative stock returns over months t – 12 to t – 2,
again using the entire Shanghai/Shenzhen stock universe to calculate percentile breakpoints. The
intersections of these breakpoints delineate six tradable-market-capitalization-weighted sub-
portfolios for which we compute month t returns. MOM is the equally weighted average of the
two recent-winner sub-portfolio returns minus the equally weighted average of the two recent-
loser sub-portfolio returns.
        We control for other possible predictors of returns using Fama-MacBeth (1973)
regressions, where the predictor variables are the stock’s breadth change (defined in various
ways), log of total market capitalization, book-to-market ratio (the value at year-end τ – 1 is used
as the predictor from July of year τ through June of year τ + 1), return during the last year
excluding the prior month, return during the prior month, sum of monthly turnover during the
prior quarter, change in the log percent of tradable A shares owned by institutions during the
prior month (as measured in our ownership data), Amivest liquidity ratio (described further
below) during the prior month, shadow cost of incomplete information, and two dummies for
whether the stock’s share trading volume during the prior week was in the top tenth or bottom
tenth of the ten most recent weeks (Gervais, Kaniel, and Mingelgrin (2001)). We operationalize
the Amivest liquidity ratio as the sum of the stock’s yuan trading volume over one month divided

11
 Whenever possible, we use the book equity value that was originally released to investors. If this is unavailable,
we use book equity that has been restated to conform to revised Chinese accounting standards.


                                                        10
by the sum of the stock’s absolute daily returns over that month. Higher values of the liquidity
ratio correspond to lower price impacts of trading, and hence higher liquidity. The shadow cost
of incomplete information, λ, captures abnormal returns due to Merton’s (1987) “investor
recognition hypothesis” that investors neglect to hold stocks they are unaware of, causing the
investors who do hold these neglected stocks to sacrifice diversification and hence demand a
higher expected return. Investor recognition is closely related to ownership breadth changes, so it
is important to explore the extent to which breadth changes predict returns through the investor
recognition channel. We adopt the operationalization of λ used by Bodnaruk and Ostberg (2009):
                                                              1− M it
                                         λit = 2.5σ it2 xit           ,                           (2)
                                                               M it

where 2.5 is an arbitrary constant representing aggregate investor risk aversion, σ it2 is the

variance of the residuals from regressing stock i’s excess monthly returns on Chinese market
excess returns from month t – 35 to month t; xit is stock i’s tradable A-share market capitalization
as a fraction of total Chinese tradable A-share market capitalization at month-end t; and Mit is the
number of investors holding stock i at month-end t divided by the total number of investors at
month-end t. In calculating Mit, we define “total number of investors” as all investors with at
least one long SSE position at t (and do not condition on t – 1 holdings).
          Table 2 displays summary statistics for the variables used in the cross-sectional analysis.
Because the number of stocks listed on the SSE expanded rapidly during our sample period, we
adopt the following procedure in order to keep later time periods from dominating the summary
statistics. We calculate separately for each month the mean and standard deviation of each
variable. The table reports the time-series average of these monthly mean and standard deviation
series.
          The summary statistics for equal-weighted retail breadth change are nearly identical to
those for equal-weighted total breadth change, since retail investors vastly outnumber institutions.
Because institutions have disproportionately large stock holdings, wealth-weighted total breadth
changes do not follow wealth-weighted retail breadth changes nearly as closely.
          Table 3 shows the mean and standard deviation of breadth changes separately for each
year of our sample. The mean equal-weighted breadth changes are close to zero in every year;
the largest magnitude occurs in 1996, when the mean equal-weighted institutional breadth
change takes on a value of only –0.069%. The average wealth-weighted breadth changes

                                                      11
experience considerably more variation, particularly among institutions. The average wealth-
weighted institutional breadth change experiences two valleys of –0.446% and –0.525% in 1996
and 2003, respectively. The cross-sectional standard deviation of breadth changes generally falls
as the sample period progresses, with the exception of institutional wealth-weighted breadth
changes, which exhibits its greatest dispersion from 1998 to 2000, and total wealth-weighted
breadth changes, whose dispersion follows a U-shaped path with respect to time.
        Table 4 contains the correlations among the various breadth measures. Equal-weighted
total and retail breadth changes are almost perfectly positively correlated with each other. Equal-
weighted institutional breadth changes are mildly positively correlated (0.054) with equal-
weighted retail breadth changes. Wealth-weighted retail breadth changes are strongly positively
correlated with equal-weighted retail breadth changes, but the correlation coefficient of 0.643
indicates that there is still considerable divergence between these two retail breadth change
measures. Wealth-weighted institutional breadth change is negatively correlated with retail
breadth change, and this negative correlation is stronger with equal-weighted retail breadth
change (–0.117) than with wealth-weighted retail breadth change (–0.030). Wealth-weighted
institutional breadth change exhibits only some positive correlation (0.305) with equal-weighted
institutional breadth change, showing that large institutions behave differently from small
institutions.


III. Main return prediction tests
A. Forecasting one-month-ahead returns
        We test the ability of breadth changes to predict the cross-section of returns by using
breadth changes to form portfolios. Following CHS, at the end of each month t, we sort stocks
into five groups based on tradable market capitalization (0th to 20th size percentile, 20th
percentile to 40th size percentile, …, 80th percentile to 100th size percentile). Within each size
quintile, we form five sub-portfolios based on breadth change during t, creating a total of 25 sub-
portfolios. The breadth change breakpoints that determine the sub-portfolio boundaries differ by
size quintile, so that all 25 sub-portfolios contain the same number of stocks. We weight stocks
by tradable market capitalization within each sub-portfolio. To form the “Quintile n” breadth
change portfolio, we equally weight across size quintiles the five nth quintile breadth change
sub-portfolios, and hold the stocks for one month before re-forming the portfolios at the end of

                                                12
month t + 1. We adopt this sequential sorting methodology because the volatility of breadth
change increases with firm size. If we sorted stocks by breadth change without considering size,
very few small firms would be in the extreme quintiles of breadth change.
         Table 5 shows the breadth change portfolios’ raw excess returns and alphas generated by
time-series regressions. The left half of Panel A shows that returns decrease monotonically with
equal-weighted total breadth change. On a raw-return basis, the lowest quintile outperforms the
highest quintile by 204 basis points per month, or 24.5% per year, with a t-statistic of 10.2. The
lowest quintile has an annualized Sharpe ratio of 1.11, and a (non-investable) zero-investment
portfolio that holds the lowest quintile long and the highest quintile short has a Sharpe ratio of
2.97. In comparison, during this 137-month period, the Sharpe ratio of all Shanghai Stock
Exchange A shares weighted by tradable market capitalization was 0.77, and the Sharpe ratio of
the U.S. CRSP value-weighted index was 0.49.
        The return differential between the lowest and highest breadth change quintiles barely
falls when we adjust the return using the CAPM, three-factor, and four-factor models: It is 202
basis points per month (24.2% per year) with a t-statistic of 9.6 when we adjust for CAPM beta
risk, 197 basis points per month (23.6% per year) with a t-statistic of 9.4 when we additionally
adjust for size and value effects, and 194 basis points per month (23.3% per year) with a t-
statistic of 9.7 when we additionally adjust for size, value, and momentum effects.12 Abnormal
returns come not only from underperformance in the highest total breadth change portfolio
(which cannot be shorted), but also from outperformance in the lowest total breadth change
portfolio, which has a significant positive four-factor alpha of 112 basis points per month (13.4%
per year).
        These results are contrary to the CHS model, which predicts that future returns are
increasing in ownership breadth, since high breadth means fewer investors with bad news are
sitting on the sidelines.13 The remainder of this subsection shows that ownership breadth among
small, unsophisticated investors is responsible for the rejection of the CHS prediction.

12
   The average of the long-only test portfolio alphas are not approximately zero mainly because the test portfolios
contain only Shanghai Stock Exchange stocks, whereas our factor portfolios contain both Shanghai and Shenzhen
Stock Exchange stocks.
13
   Although the model of Bai, Chang, and Wang (2006) has only one risky asset and cannot be used to analyze
cross-sectional returns directly, their intuition could potentially lead to the implication that ownership breadth
increases should predict lower future returns through a short-sales constraint channel: A breadth increase implies
that informed investors’ short-sales constraints are less binding, causing the stock price to be more informative, so


                                                         13
         In the right half of Table 5’s Panel A, we see that when we use wealth-weighted total
breadth changes to form portfolios, the raw return difference between the lowest and highest
breadth change quintiles falls 82% to 36 basis points per month (4.3% per year), although this
difference remains significant at the 5% level. Adjusting the difference by the one-factor, three-
factor, or four-factor model yields slightly larger and still-significant alphas: 45 basis points, 41
basis points, and 42 basis points per month (5.4%, 4.9%, and 5.0% per year), respectively.
         Further evidence on the role of unsophisticated investors comes from Panels B and C of
Table 5, which show returns and alphas of portfolios formed from sorts on retail or institutional
breadth changes. In Panel B, paralleling the sorts on total breadth changes, we sort stocks into
quintiles based on retail breadth changes. For the portfolios based on institutional breadth
changes in Panel C, however, our breadth change breakpoints are the 10th and 90th percentiles
instead of the 20th, 40th, 60th, and 80th percentiles. This is because a large number of stocks
every month have an equal-weighted institutional breadth change equal to zero.14
         We see in the left half of Panel C that stocks experiencing large equal-weighted
institutional breadth increases do not significantly underperform stocks experiencing large equal-
weighted institutional breadth decreases. The negative relationship between equal-weighted total
breadth changes and future returns in Panel A is entirely driven by retail investors; the returns of
portfolios formed on equal-weighted retail breadth changes in the left half of Panel B are very
close to those of portfolios formed on equal-weighted total breadth changes.15 As we have



uninformed investors become more certain about the stock’s future payoffs and require lower returns. However, if
institutions are the informed investors in the market, then our finding that institutional breadth increases lead to
higher future returns is the opposite of what the above story predicts.
14
   Out of 137 × 3 × 5 = 2,055 potential subportfolio-months, there is an empty equal-weighted institutional breadth
change subportfolio 11 times and an empty wealth-weighted institutional breadth change subportfolio three times.
When a subportfolio is empty, we exclude its return and average over the non-empty subportfolios.
15
   It is believed that Chinese mutual fund managers sometimes front-run their own fund’s trades by trading in retail
accounts (Ren (2011)). This practice is known by the colorful name of “rat trading” and could raise the concern that
employees of institutional investors are responsible for much of the retail trading we observe. However, we find that
retail breadth increases lead to lower subsequent returns, which suggests that front-running is not a major
determinant of retail breadth changes in our data. It is also believed that some institutions used individual IDs to
open a large number of accounts, which are dubbed “gunny sack accounts,” mostly in order to increase the
institution’s allocation of underpriced IPO shares, since there is a quota for the maximum allocation to each account.
This practice is thought to have gradually disappeared since 2002, when the Chinese Securities Regulatory
Commission tightened its oversight. There were also anecdotal cases of institutions using these accounts to
manipulate stock prices (e.g., Zhou (2005)). Our retail breadth findings are not driven by IPO-related trading, since
we obtain similar results after excluding newly issued stocks. Our findings are also not likely to be due to price
manipulation with gunny sack accounts. If retail breadth changes were primarily driven by institutions using


                                                         14
previously noted, equal-weighted total breadth change and equal-weighted retail breadth change
are almost identical due to the large number of retail investors.
        Moving to wealth-weighted breadth changes among investor subsamples, we find that the
increased emphasis on institutions in the wealth-weighted total breadth change measure is not the
only reason why wealth-weighting attenuates the negative relationship between total breadth
changes and future returns. Even when forming portfolios based on breadth changes among retail
investors alone, wealth-weighting decreases the spread between the high and low breadth change
portfolio returns. The alphas of the difference between the lowest and highest wealth-weighted
retail breadth change portfolios in Panel B are between 142 and 143 basis points per month
(17.0% to 17.1% per year), which is smaller than the 193 to 202 basis point per month difference
between the lowest and highest equal-weighted retail breadth change portfolios (albeit not
significantly so).
        When we form portfolios on wealth-weighted breadth changes among institutions only—
the measure that places the most emphasis on the large institutions that are probably the most
sophisticated investors in the market—the sign of the relationship between breadth changes and
future returns flips, reproducing the CHS empirical result: The high wealth-weighted institutional
breadth change portfolio significantly outperforms the low wealth-weighted institutional breadth
change portfolio by 58, 60, 71, and 67 basis points per month (7.0%, 7.2%, 8.5%, and 8.0% per
year) on a raw, one-factor-adjusted, three-factor-adjusted, and four-factor-adjusted basis,
respectively. Unlike CHS’s empirical results, however, the abnormal returns are present only in
the high breadth change portfolio (which has a Sharpe ratio of 0.98) and are absent from the low
breadth change portfolio. We speculate that the absence of abnormal negative returns in the low
breadth change portfolio is due to institutional breadth decreases reflecting not only negative
information but also the need to service customer redemptions.
        The large difference between wealth-weighted and equal-weighted institutional breadth
changes is not necessarily surprising in light of the fact that there are many institutions with
extremely small stock portfolios. Recall that the median institution in our sample holds a stock
portfolio worth less than 100,000 U.S. dollars. The median number of stocks held by an
institution in May 2007 is one. Although we do not know the identities of the institutions in our

individual accounts in pump-and-dump schemes, retail breadth changes should be positively correlated with
contemporaneous returns—the opposite of what we find.


                                                   15
data, we suspect that these small institutional portfolios are held by non-financial companies that
do not employ professional portfolio managers and thus trade like unsophisticated investors.


B. Persistence of abnormal returns after portfolio formation
       Both retail and institutional breadth changes predict returns, but we document in this
subsection that only retail breadth changes significantly predict returns beyond one month into
the future. This difference in persistence is evidence that retail breadth changes do not predict
returns merely because they are negatively correlated with institutional breadth changes. (We
will formally test the independent ability of retail versus institutional breadth changes to predict
returns in the Fama-MacBeth analysis in Section V.)
       To assess breadth change’s predictive power for returns k months ahead, we sort stocks
into quintiles based on their month-end t tradable market capitalization. Within each size quintile,
we form month t breadth change quintile breakpoints (for total and retail breadth change) or 10th
and 90th percentile month t breadth change breakpoints (for institutional breadth change). We
calculate each size × breadth change sub-portfolio’s t + k return, weighting stocks by
t + k – 1 tradable market capitalization. We finally compute the equal-weighted average of the
t + k returns of all the highest breadth change sub-portfolios across size quintiles minus the
equal-weighted average of the t + k returns of all the lowest breadth change sub-portfolios across
size quintiles. Repeating this procedure each calendar month produces a “t + k” return spread
time series.
       Table 6 shows the one, three, and four-factor alphas of return spreads for k = 2, 3, …, 12.
For brevity, we will discuss only the four-factor alphas, although the other alpha results are quite
similar. Equal-weighted retail breadth change significantly predicts returns in every month up to
five months into the future. At month t + 5, the difference between the highest and lowest
breadth change portfolio four-factor alphas is still –42 basis points (–5.0% annualized). Even
though the four-factor alpha differences are no longer significant from months t + 6 to t + 12,
their point estimates are all negative with the exception of month t + 9. Wealth-weighted retail
breadth change shows a similar amount of predictive persistence; the four-factor alpha difference
between the highest and lowest wealth-weighted retail breadth change quintiles stops being
significant after month t + 5, with the exception of a significant negative spread at t + 10.
Comparing the equal-weighted to the wealth-weighted retail four-factor alpha differences at each

                                                16
horizon, we see that from t to t + 5, equal-weighted retail breadth change always predicts a larger
spread than wealth-weighted retail breadth change, consistent with our t + 1 results in Table 5.
       In contrast, institutional breadth change does not significantly predict returns beyond one
month, whether breadth changes are equal- or wealth-weighted. None of the four-factor alpha
differences in Table 6 under the institutional columns is significant. However, it is notable that
for wealth-weighted institutional breadth change, the four-factor alpha difference point estimates
are positive in nine out of the eleven time horizons.
       As in Table 5, the predictive power of total breadth change beyond the first month is
driven by retail investors. The four-factor alpha spreads between the highest and lowest equal-
weighted total breadth change quintiles are almost the same as those between the highest and
lowest equal-weighted retail breadth change quintiles. For portfolios formed on wealth-weighted
total breadth change, where institutions have more influence, the alpha spread significance
disappears beyond the first month.


C. Subsample tests
       In this subsection, we perform our return prediction tests on five subsamples. The first
two subsamples are the first half of the sample period (1996-2001) and the second half of the
sample period (2002-2007). The third and fourth subsamples restrict portfolios to the smallest
and largest size quintiles of stocks. The fifth subsample excludes companies that have issued or
repurchased shares in the past twelve months. The motivation for this last exclusion is that stocks
may systematically experience breadth increases around share issuances and breadth decreases
around share repurchases. In the U.S. market, IPOs and seasoned issues generally have low
returns after the issuance date (Ritter (1991), Loughran and Ritter (1995)), and stocks whose
companies have repurchased shares have high subsequent returns (Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and
Vermaelen (1995)). Therefore, including these stocks in our sample may cause us to confound
issuance and repurchase effects with a breadth change effect.
       Table 7 shows, for each subsample, the one, three, and four-factor alpha spreads between
the highest breadth change and lowest breadth change quantiles in the first month after stocks are
sorted by breadth change. The retail breadth change results, whether equal-weighted or wealth-
weighted, are robustly present in all subsamples. Unlike many return anomalies documented in
the literature, the predictive power of retail breadth change is (insignificantly) stronger among

                                                 17
large stocks than small stocks. Excluding recent issuers and repurchasers has no effect on the
results. Interestingly, the magnitudes of the retail four-factor alpha spreads in the first half of the
sample are significantly larger16 than those in the second half. This could be consistent with
increasing sophistication of retail investors over time and/or increasing aggressiveness of
institutional investors over time in betting against retail breadth changes, thus attenuating future
abnormal returns.
         In contrast, the alpha spreads for portfolios formed on institutional breadth change are not
significant in some subsamples. Equal-weighted institutional breadth change portfolios continue
not to significantly predict returns in every subsample except when restricting to the 1996 to
2001 period, when its one and three-factor alphas are negative and significant. Wealth-weighted
institutional breadth change generates a significant alpha spread only in the second half of the
sample; in the first half, the four-factor spread is 45 basis points per month (5.4% per year) but
insignificant, whereas in the second half, it is 106 basis points per month (12.7% per year) and
highly significant. Wealth-weighted institutional breadth change also significantly predicts
returns only among large stocks (four-factor alpha spread of 161 basis points per month, or 19.2%
per year), not small stocks (insignificant four-factor alpha spread of 33 basis points per month, or
4.0% per year). The wealth-weighted institutional breadth change results are not affected,
however, by excluding recent issuers and repurchasers. These differences in alphas across
subsamples could be due to an increase in sophistication among domestic financial institutions
over time, the entry of sophisticated foreign institutions into the SSE in 2003, and the fact that
financial institutions tend to focus their attention on large stocks.


IV. Behavior of returns, breadth, and institutional ownership around portfolio formation
         In order to better understand the decisions that result in breadth changes and why breadth
changes might affect prices, we examine in this section the behavior of returns, breadth changes,
and institutional ownership percentage in a 48-month window around the breadth change
portfolio formation month.




16
 The differences are significant at the 5% level or greater, except for the three-factor equal-weighted retail alphas,
which are significantly different at the 10% level.


                                                         18
A. Behavior around equal-weighted retail breadth change portfolio formation
         The top graph in Figure 1 shows the average excess returns of the lowest, middle, and
highest equal-weighted retail breadth change portfolios as a function of months since portfolio
formation. Returns on and during the 24 months after the portfolio formation month t are
constructed exactly as described in Tables 5 and 6. Returns prior to t are constructed analogously
to returns after t. We sort stocks into quintiles based on their month-end t tradable market
capitalization. Within each size quintile, we form month t breadth change quintile breakpoints.
We calculate each size × breadth change sub-portfolio’s t – j return, weighting stocks by t – j – 1
tradable market capitalization. Finally, we calculate the t – j return of the “Quintile n portfolio”
as the equal-weighted average of the five nth quintile breadth change sub-portfolio returns, for
j = 1, 2, …, 24.17
         We see in the graph that retail investors tend to start investing in stocks that have had a
winning streak during the prior 24 months broken by a low return this month, and they tend to
exit stocks with the opposite return pattern.18 This behavior could be consistent with individuals
using a representativeness heuristic (Tversky and Kahneman (1974), Barberis, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998)) to judge that a stock that has had consistently high returns in the past is likely to
continue this performance in the future, so an anomalous price dip today represents an attractive
buying opportunity because the stock’s price will soon bounce back to its previously established
trend line. But when many retail investors act upon this belief by buying new positions in a stock,
it on average continues to underperform next month and does not outperform subsequently,
contrary to the representativeness heuristic prediction. Conversely, a stock that has had
consistently low returns in the past is thought to be likely to continue underperforming in the
future, so an unusual price increase today creates an attractive temporary exit opportunity for



17
   Returns in months prior to t are biased downwards because stocks are sorted into portfolios using future
information, month t market capitalization. Stocks with low realized returns from t – k to t tend to be sorted into the
small stock quintile and so have high weights at t – k when we value-weight the stocks in this quintile. Similarly,
stocks with high realized returns tend to be sorted into the large stock quintile and have low weights. Returns after t
do not suffer from this look-ahead bias, so we cannot directly compare returns prior to t to returns afterwards.
However, comparisons across different size quintile within a given pre-formation month are informative.
18
   This pattern is also consistent with previous empirical findings in other countries on retail investor reactions to
returns at different horizons (Choe, Kho, and Stulz (1999), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000, 2001), Benartzi (2001),
Goetzmann and Massa (2002), Griffin, Harris, and Topaloglu (2003), Jackson (2003), Richards (2005), Kaniel, Saar,
and Titman (2008), Barber, Odean, and Zhu (2009)).


                                                         19
owners of the stock.19 But when many retail investors respond by completely liquidating their
positions, the stock continues to outperform after the portfolio formation month and does not
underperform subsequently.
        The negative correlation between returns and retail investor breadth change during the
portfolio formation month suggests that retail breadth does not predict future returns due to
pump-and-dump schemes where institutions artificially push up prices in order to attract trend-
chasing retail investors before selling at a profit. The negative correlation also suggests that if
retail investors cause return continuation, they do so by trading against fundamental news and
inhibiting full price reaction during the formation month. The lack of subsequent return reversals
is inconsistent with the abnormal portfolio returns after month t being caused by retail-trading-
induced price-overshooting. The middle graph of Figure 1 shows that high retail breadth change
stocks continue to have significantly elevated retail breadth change in the month following
portfolio formation, and a similar pattern holds for low retail breadth change stocks. The positive
autocorrelation of retail breadth changes may contribute to the persistence of abnormal returns
following the portfolio formation month.
        If high retail breadth change stocks typically have large return run-ups prior to the
portfolio formation month that are reversed afterwards, could retail investors play a role in the
prior run-up? If they do, we might guess that high retail breadth change stocks were overvalued
prior to the portfolio formation month, and the formation month is when the bubble begins to
burst. Although average returns of high retail breadth change stocks consistently exceed those of
low retail breadth change stocks from the second to the 24th month prior to portfolio formation,
the former group’s retail breadth change consistently lies above the latter’s only for the five
months immediately prior to the formation month, and the difference is large only for the last
two months. In addition, as shown in the bottom graph of Figure 1, average institutional
ownership of high retail breadth change stocks is always higher than that of low retail breadth
change stocks prior to the formation month, and this ordering reverses during and after the
formation month. In sum, there is no strong evidence that retail investors are responsible for the
majority of high retail breadth change stocks’ run-up prior to portfolio formation.


19
  Alternatively, the price rise today might cause some owners’ paper losses to become paper gains, causing them to
be more eager to liquidate their position at a gain (Shefrin and Statman (1985), Odean (1998)).


                                                       20
B. Behavior around wealth-weighted institutional breadth change portfolio formation
        Figure 2 contains graphs that are analogous to those in Figure 1, but the series correspond
to portfolios formed on wealth-weighted institutional breadth changes, and the middle graph
shows wealth-weighted institutional breadth changes instead of equal-weighted retail breadth
changes.
        In contrast to what we found in Figure 1 with equal-weighted retail breadth changes, the
top graph in Figure 2 shows that stocks with high wealth-weighted institutional breadth changes
have higher returns than stocks with low wealth-weighted institutional breadth changes in both
the portfolio formation month and the first month prior to portfolio formation, but similar returns
in the 23 previous months (–24 to –2). Wealth-weighted institutional breadth changes in the
formation month represent sharp reversals of the prior ownership trends. Stocks with low wealth-
weighted institutional breadth change in month t were experiencing relatively high wealth-
weighted institutional breadth changes in the prior seven months (middle graph) and have a
higher institutional ownership during the entire 24 months prior to portfolio formation than
stocks with high wealth-weighted institutional breadth change in month t (bottom graph).
        The bottom graph also reveals that stocks in the 10th to 90th percentiles of wealth-
weighted institutional breadth change have a substantially lower institutional ownership
percentage than stocks in the two extreme deciles. In other words, stocks that do not experience
much institutional ownership entry and exit tend to be stocks that are not owned much by
institutions at all.20


V. Are the breadth change effects just proxies for profitable institutional trades against
individuals?
        Our results thus far show that when more retail investors hold a stock, its future returns
are low, whereas when more institutions hold it, its future returns are high. A natural question
then arises: does breadth change capture anything more than the tendency of institutions to profit
at the expense of retail investors? We explore this issue using Fama-MacBeth regressions, which
allow us to control for more variables than the portfolio-sort approach we used in Section III.

20
  Recall, however, that the sample of stocks used to construct the wealth-weighted institutional breadth change
portfolios excludes stocks that have zero institutional ownership in and immediately before the portfolio formation
month.


                                                        21
        Recall that breadth changes are more volatile among large stocks than small stocks.
Therefore, simply pooling all observations in a single Fama-MacBeth regression would cause the
breadth coefficients to be identified mostly by the largest stocks. In order to avoid this, we run all
the Fama-MacBeth regressions in this paper in the following manner. In each month t, we
estimate five separate cross-sectional regressions, one for each tradable market capitalization
quintile. The equal-weighted average of that variable’s five month t coefficients is that variable’s
month t coefficient for the overall stock universe. We then apply the usual Fama-MacBeth
methodology to the overall coefficient series: the time-series average is the final point estimate
of the coefficient, and the time-series standard deviation divided by the square root of the
number of months in the sample is the standard error of the coefficient.
        The first column of Table 8 shows that when institutions in aggregate increase their
holdings of a stock (implying that retail investors have decreased their holdings), the stock
performs well in the subsequent month. The coefficients are from a Fama-MacBeth regression
where next month’s return is predicted by this month’s change in the stock’s log of institutional
ownership percentage, log total market capitalization, book-to-market ratio, and prior-year return
excluding the current month. A one standard deviation increase in the log institutional ownership
percentage change of a stock predicts a strongly significant increase in its next month’s return of
0.333 × 0.806 = 0.27%, or 3.2% on an annualized basis. The second column of Table 8
additionally controls for the current month’s stock return, the sum of turnover during the current
month and prior two months, the Amivest liquidity ratio during the current month, and dummies
for the most recent week of trading volume being in the top decile or bottom decile of the last ten
weeks. The point estimate on log institutional ownership percentage change barely moves to
0.329, and it remains highly significant.
        The third column of Table 8 adds a control for equal-weighted retail breadth change.
Equal-weighted retail breadth change is a strong negative predictor of future returns, but
institutional ownership change is now significant at only the 10% level and has a point estimate
of 0.179, which is 55% that in the second column. One interpretation of this attenuation is that
trading against equal-weighted retail breadth changes accounts for 45% of the profitability of
institutional trades against retail investors.
        The fourth column of Table 8 adds as an explanatory variable a dummy for a stock being
in the top 10 percentiles of wealth-weighted institutional breadth change within its size quintile.

                                                 22
We use a dummy instead of a linear control because of the nonlinear effect found in Table 5
(stocks in the highest 10 percentiles of wealth-weighted institutional breadth change earned
abnormal returns, whereas those in the lowest 10 percentiles did not). Log institutional
ownership percentage change’s point estimate attenuates another 51% relative to its value in the
third column and is not significant even at the 10% level, but being in the top 10 percentiles of
wealth-weighted institutional breadth change is a significantly positive predictor of future returns,
and equal-weighted retail breadth change continues to be a significantly negative predictor.
       Collectively, these results indicate that changes in institutional ownership percentage
predict future returns only to the extent that they are correlated with equal-weighted retail
breadth changes or wealth-weighted institutional breadth changes. Put another way, breadth
changes do not predict returns because they are merely proxies for institutional ownership
percentage changes. Rather, institutional ownership percentage changes predict returns because
they are proxies for breadth changes. An institution buying shares from an individual positively
predicts future returns only if the individual is completely liquidating his position (perhaps
signaling something about the depth of the retail population’s pessimism) or the institution does
not already have shares of this company (indicating that its information is no longer censored by
the short-sales constraint).


VI. Does retail breadth change predict returns only because it is correlated with informed
trading?
       It is possible that retail breadth changes predict future returns not because retail investors
push prices away from fundamentals, but because small retail investors are disproportionately
likely to be counterparties to informed traders. Abnormal returns could then occur when these
informed traders’ private information becomes public after the portfolio formation month. In this
section, we provide some evidence that this channel is unlikely to account for all the predictive
power of retail breadth changes.
       If abnormal returns of portfolios formed on retail breadth changes are solely the result of
private information becoming public after the portfolio formation date, then a retail breadth
change in a month where the firm has made an earnings announcement should be less predictive
of the next month’s returns. This is because the earnings announcement made public much of the
private information that informed investors were trading on during the announcement month,

                                                23
leaving less of this private information to be revealed in the following month.21 We therefore test
whether retail breadth changes are less predictive of returns that occur in the month after an
earnings announcement.
       From 1996 to 2001, Chinese companies released earnings twice a year. Starting in 2002,
earnings were released quarterly. Six calendar months—February, March, April, July, August,
and October—collectively contain 99.75% of the earnings announcements between 1996 and
2007. Using equal-weighted retail breadth changes in these six months to construct portfolios,
we find that the average four-factor alpha difference between the highest and lowest breadth
change portfolios in the following month, when relatively less private information should be
revealed, is –1.98% (s.e. = 0.29, t = 6.83). In the other six months, the average four-factor alpha
spread is –1.72% (s.e. = 0.31, t = 5.55). These two alpha spreads are not statistically
distinguishable from each other, and the larger magnitude of the alpha spread point estimate in
the months following an earnings release is the opposite of what the informed-trading-only story
would predict.
       Because not all firms announce earnings in the same month, we can also use within-
month variation to identify whether equal-weighted retail breadth changes are less predictive of
returns when the breadth changes occur in an earnings announcement month. The fifth column of
Table 8 shows coefficients from a Fama-MacBeth return prediction regression where we control
for all the variables we used in Section V, a dummy for whether the company announced
earnings in that month, and interactions of that dummy with equal-weighted retail breadth
change and a dummy for wealth-weighted institutional breadth change being in the top 10
percentiles within the stock’s size quintile. In order to avoid identifying these additional
coefficients from only a tiny number of announcing companies, we restrict the sample to months
when at least 100 firms in the Fama-MacBeth sample announced earnings and some firms did
not announce earnings, which reduces the number of months in the regression from 137 to 34.
The interaction between equal-weighted retail breadth change and the earnings announcement
dummy is not significant, and its point estimate is negative, indicating that if anything, equal-
weighted retail breadth change is more predictive of future negative returns when breadth change
is measured in an earnings-announcement month.

21
   See Tetlock (2010) for evidence that public financial announcements reduce the amount of asymmetric
information about a company.


                                                 24
        In sum, both across-month and within-month comparisons indicate that equal-weighted
retail breadth change is not less predictive of returns that occur when relatively little private
information is revealed. If anything, the relationship is the opposite. This suggests that the
abnormal returns of portfolios formed using retail breadth change are not entirely due to retail
breadth changes being negatively correlated with the trading flow of informed investors whose
private information is subsequently revealed.


VII. Is breadth change’s predictive power due to investor recognition?
        Merton (1987) hypothesizes that when a stock is not widely held because investors are
unaware of it, the investors who do hold the stock demand a return premium because they are
overweighting it in their portfolios, sacrificing diversification. This return premium is captured
by the variable λ, the shadow cost of incomplete information. To test whether the Merton
“investor recognition” mechanism is responsible for our breadth change results, we repeat our
Fama-MacBeth analysis while directly controlling for λ as operationalized by Bodnaruk and
Ostberg (2009) to predict returns in the Swedish stock market.22
        The penultimate column of Table 8 shows coefficients from a Fama-MacBeth regression
where the dependent variable is next month’s return and the explanatory variables are λ and the
full set of other controls from Section V. The coefficient on λ is insignificant and does not have
the predicted positive sign, whereas the coefficient on equal-weighted retail breadth change
remains negative and strongly significant. The coefficient on the dummy for being in the top 10
percentiles of wealth-weighted institutional breadth change attenuates and is no longer
significant, but its standard error is large and the point estimate is not significantly different from
its value in the fourth column of Table 8, where we did not control for λ.23
        We conclude that there is no evidence that λ predicts future returns or is responsible for
the ability of equal-weighted retail breadth changes to predict future returns. Wealth-weighted
institutional breadth changes are no longer significant once we control for λ, but the fact that λ
itself does not predict returns makes this finding difficult to interpret.

22
   Our tables show results where λ is formed using equal-weighted breadth levels. Using wealth-weighted breadth
levels instead gives nearly identical results.
23
   Note, however, that in addition to the difference in explanatory variables, the sample in the fourth column of
Table 8 is not the same as the sample in the penultimate column. In order to compute λ, we need a stock to have
three years of prior return history, which reduces the sample relative to that in specifications without λ.


                                                       25
VIII. Ownership initiations versus discontinuations
       In this section, we explore whether ownership initiations have different information
content than ownership discontinuations. Recall that by construction, breadth change equals IN
(the fraction of investors who initiate ownership) minus OUT (the fraction of investors who
discontinue ownership).
       The last column of Table 8 shows coefficients from a Fama-MacBeth regression where
the dependent variable is next month’s return and the explanatory variables are equal-weighted
retail IN, equal-weighted retail OUT, wealth-weighted institutional IN, wealth-weighted
institutional OUT, and the full set of non-breadth control variables from Section V. The
estimates show that the coefficient magnitude on retail IN is more than twice the coefficient
magnitude on retail OUT, but both components of retail breadth change significantly predict
returns. The fact that retail OUT predicts returns is additional evidence against the investor
recognition hypothesis being responsible for the ability of retail ownership breadth to predict
returns, since investors who have just liquidated their holdings of a stock are presumably aware
of its existence. Neither institutional IN or OUT are significant return predictors, which may be
unsurprising given the non-linearity of the institutional breadth change effect in Table 5.


IX. Conclusion
       We have tested the ability of ownership breadth changes to forecast the cross-section of
stock returns. The prior theory on the relationship between breadth and future returns makes
predictions about breadth measured over a very specific population: all investors in a stock
market who face short-sales constraints. Our key innovation relative to past empirical studies is
that we are able to measure breadth over this theoretically relevant population by using a
representative sample of all investors in the Shanghai Stock Exchange, where short-selling is
prohibited. We find that the relationship between ownership breadth and future returns depends
crucially on the sub-population over which ownership breadth is measured.
       Contrary to the Chen, Hong, and Stein (2001) hypothesis that breadth changes measure
how much bad news is being withheld from prices due to short-sales constraints, when
ownership breadth measured over all investors increases (suggesting a relaxation of short-sales
constraints), future returns are low. This negative relationship is driven by the ownership

                                                26
decisions of small retail investors. The negative relationship between total ownership breadth
changes and future returns is consistent with contrarian retail trades inhibiting immediate full
price adjustment to fundamental news. Breadth behaves more in accordance with the Chen,
Hong, and Stein (2001) theory if it is measured only over a population of sophisticated investors.
We find that a large increase in the wealth-weighted number of institutions that hold a stock in a
given month predicts a high stock return the following month. However, we do not see
corresponding underperformance following a large wealth-weighted decrease in the number of
institutional owners.
       Institutional trades against individuals are on average profitable before transactions costs.
However, this profitability is almost entirely explained by these trades’ correlation with equal-
weighted retail breadth changes and wealth-weighted institutional breadth changes. This result
indicates that how many shares in aggregate change hands between institutions and individuals
does not matter as much as how many of each investor type start and end with holdings of the
stock, thus demonstrating the value of disaggregated investor-level data for forecasting future
returns.




                                                27
References
Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1993, Finite bubbles with short sales
       constraints and asymmetric information, Journal of Economic Theory 61, 206-229.

Asquith, Paul, Parag Pathak, and Jay Ritter, 2005, Short interest, institutional ownership, and
       stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 78, 243-276.

Bai, Yang, Eric Chang, and Jiang Wang, 2006, Asset prices under short-sale constraints,
      Working paper, MIT Sloan.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock
       returns, Journal of Finance 61, 1645-1680.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2007, Investor sentiment in the stock market. Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 21, 129-151.

Baker, Malcolm, Jeffrey Wurgler, and Yu Yuan, 2012, Global, local, and contagious investor
       sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 272-287.Barber, Brad, Yi-Tsung Lee,
       Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean, 2009, Just how much do individual investors lose by
       trading? Review of Financial Studies 22, 609-632.

Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean, and Ning Zhu, 2009, Systematic noise, Journal of Financial
       Markets 12, 547-569.

Barber, Brad, Terrance Odean, and Ning Zhu, forthcoming, Do noise traders move markets?,
       Review of Financial Studies.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor sentiment,
       Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-343.

Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to
       company stock, Journal of Finance 56, 1747-1764.

Ben-Rephael, Azi, Shmuel Kandel, and Avi Wohl, 2012, Measuring investor sentiment with
      mutual fund flows, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 363-382.

Bodnaruk, Andriy and Per Ostberg, 2009, Does investor recognition predict returns?, Journal of
      Financial Economics 91, 208-226

Boehme, Rodney D., Bartley R. Danielsen, and Sorin M. Sorescu, 2006, Short sale constraints,
     differences of opinion, and overvaluation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Studies
     41, 455-487.

Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Allie Schwartz, 2009, Caught on tape: Institutional
     trading, stock returns, and earnings announcements, Journal of Financial Economics 92,
     66-91.

                                              28
Cen, Ling, Hai Lu, and Liyan Yang, 2011, Investor sentiment, disagreement and return
      predictability of ownership breadth, Working paper, University of Toronto.

Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2002, Breadth of ownership and stock
      returns, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 171-205.

Chen, Hsiu-Lang, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Russ Wermers, 2000, The value of active mutual
      fund management: an examination of stockholdings and trades of fund managers, Journal
      of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 343-368.

Chen, Gongmeng, Kenneth A. Kim, John R. Nofsinger, and Oliver M. Rui, 2007, Trading
      performance, disposition effect, overconfidence, representativeness bias, and experience
      of emerging market investors, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 20, 425-451.

Chen, Xuanjuan, Kenneth A. Kim, Tong Yao, and Tong Yu, 2010, On the predictability of
      Chinese stock returns, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 18, 403-425.

China Securities Regulatory Commission, 2009, China capital markets development report 2008,
       http://www.csrc.gov.cn/pub/csrc_en/Informations/publication/200911/P02009110352022
       2505841.pdf. Accessed August 12, 2011.

Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and René M. Stulz, 1999, Do foreign investors destabilize stock
      markets? The Korean experience in 1997, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 227-264.

Cohen, Lauren, Karl Diether, and Christopher Malloy, 2007, Supply and demand shifts in the
      shorting market, Journal of Finance 62, 2061-2096.

Cornelli, Francesa, David Goldreich, and Alexander Ljunqvist, 2006, Investor sentiment and pre-
       IPO markets, Journal of Finance 61, 1187-1216.

Da, Zhi, Joseph Engelberg, and Pengjie Gao, 2011, In search of attention, Journal of Finance 66,
       1461-1499.

D’Avolio, Gene, 2002, The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Economics 66,
      271-306.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
       fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035-
       1058.

Danielsen, Bartley R. and Sorin M. Sorescu, 2001, Why do option introductions depress stock
       prices? A study of diminishing short sale constraints, Journal of Financial and
       Quantitative Analysis 36, 451-484.




                                              29
Diamond, Douglas W., and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1987, Constraints on short-selling and asset
      price adjustment to private information, Journal of Financial Economics 18, 277-311.

Diether, Karl, Christopher Malloy, and Anna Scherbina (2002), Differences of opinion and the
       cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-141.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
      and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Feng, Lei, and Mark S. Seasholes, 2008, Individual investors and gender similarities in an
      emerging stock market, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 16, 44-60.

Figlewski, Stephen, and Gwendolyn Webb, 1993, Options, short sales, and market completeness,
       Journal of Finance 48, 761-777.

Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen A. Lamont, 2008, Dumb money: Mutual fund flows and the cross-
       section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 299-322.

Friedman, Milton, 1953, Essays in Positive Economics, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Geczy, Chris, David Musto, and Adam Reed, 2002, Stocks are special too: An analysis of the
       equity lending market, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 241-269.

Gervais, Simon, Ron Kaniel, and Dan H. Mingelgrin, 2001, The high-volume return premium,
       Journal of Finance 56, 877-919.

Griffin, John M., Jeffrey H. Harris, and Selim Topaloglu, 2003, The dynamics of institutional
        and individual trading, Journal of Finance 58, 2285-2320.

Goetzmann, William N., and Massimo Massa, 2002, Daily momentum and contrarian behavior
      of index fund investors, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 375-390.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of
       various investor types: A study of Finland’s unique data set, Journal of Financial
       Economics 55, 43-67.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Matti Keloharju, 2001, What makes investors trade? Journal of Finance 56,
       589-616.

Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds, Journal
   of Finance 51, 783-810.

Harrison, J. Michael, and David Kreps, 1978, Speculative investor behavior in a stock market
       with heterogeneous expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323-336.

Hwang, Byoung-Hyoun, 2011, Country-specific sentiment and security prices, Journal of
     Financial Economics 100, 382-401.
                                             30
Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction to open
       market share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181-208.

Jackson, Andrew, 2003, The aggregate behavior of individual investors, Working paper, London
       Business School.

Jones, Charles M., and Owen A. Lamont, 2002, Short sale constraints and stock returns, Journal
       of Financial Economics 66, 207-239.

Kaniel, Ron, Gideon Saar, and Sheridan Titman, 2008, Individual investor trading and stock
       returns, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 273-310.

Kelley, Eric K., and Paul C. Tetlock, 2010, How wise are crowds? Insights from retail orders and
       stock returns, Working paper, Columbia University.

Kumar, Alok, and Charles M. C. Lee, 2006, Retail investor sentiment and return comovements,
      Journal of Finance 61, 2451-2486.

Lee, Charles M. C., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard H. Thaler, 1991, Investor sentiment and the
      closed-end fund puzzle, Journal of Finance 46, 75-109.

Lehavy, Reuven, and Richard G. Sloan, 2008, Investor recognition and stock returns, Review of
      Accounting Studies 13, 327-361.

Lewis, Michael, 1989. Liar’s Poker: Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street. New York:
       Norton.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23-51.

Mayhew, Stewart, and Vassil Mihov, 2005, Short sale constraints, overvaluation, and the
     introduction of options, Working paper, Texas Christian University.

Merton, Robert C., 1987. A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
      information. Journal of Finance 42, 483-510.

Miller, Edward M., 1977, Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion, Journal of Finance 32,
        1151-1168.

Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, and Eric Stafford, 2002, Limited arbitrage in equity markets,
       Journal of Finance 57, 551-584.

Nagel, Stefan, 2005, Short sales, institutional investors, and the cross-section of stock returns,
       Journal of Financial Economics 78, 277-309.




                                               31
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, Journal of Finance 53,
      1775-1798.

Ofek, Eli, and Matthew Richardson, 2003, Dot com mania: The rise and fall of Internet stock
       prices, Journal of Finance 58, 1113-1137.

Ofek, Eli, Matthew Richardson, and Robert Whitelaw, 2004, Limited arbitrage and short sales
       restrictions: Evidence from the options markets, Journal of Financial Economics 74, 305-
       342.

Qiu, Lily, and Ivo Welch, 2006, Investor sentiment measures, Working paper, University of
       California, Los Angeles.

Reed, Adam, 2002, Costly short-selling and stock price adjustment to earnings announcements,
       Working paper, University of North Carolina.

Ren, Daniel, 2011, Watchdog finally gets tough on ‘rat traders,’ South China Morning Post
      (December 5). http://topics.scmp.com/news/china-business-watch/article/Watchdog-
      finally-gets-tough-on-rat-traders. Accessed May 19, 2012.

Richards, Anthony, 2005, Big fish in small ponds: The trading behavior of foreign investors in
       Asian emerging equity markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40, 1–27.

Ritter, Jay, 1991, The long-run performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Finance 46, 3-
         27.

Scheinkman, Jose, and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal of
       Political Economy 111, 1183-1219.

Seasholes, Mark, and Guojun Wu, 2007, Predictable behavior, profits, and attention, Journal of
       Empirical Finance 14, 590–610.

Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers
       too long: Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance 40, 777-790.

Tetlock, Paul C., 2007, Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock
       market, Journal of Finance 62, 1139-1168.

Tetlock, Paul C., 2010, Does public financial news resolve asymmetric information? Review of
       Financial Studies 23, 3520-3557.

Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman, 1974, Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases,
      Science 185, 1124-1131.

Xiong, Wei, and Jialin Yu, forthcoming, The Chinese warrants puzzle, American Economic
       Review.

                                               32
Yan, Hongjun, 2008, Natural selection in financial markets: Does it work? Management Science
      54, 1935-1950.

Yu, Jialin, 2009, Commonality in disagreement and asset pricing, Working paper, Columbia
       University.

Zheng, Lu, 1999. Is money smart? A study of mutual fund investors’ fund selection ability,
   Journal of Finance 54, 901-933.

Zhou, Lunjun 周伦军, 2005, “麻袋帐户”相关纠纷案件的审判思路浅析,[Cases Related
       to “Gunny Sack Accounts”], http://www.njfy.gov.cn/site/boot/jlfy-
       mb_a2005112142657.htm (Accessed June 1, 2012).




                                            33
                                         Table 1. Portfolio and position summary statistics
This table reports (in RMB), separately for retail and institutional investors at the beginning of each year in our sample, the mean and
median of investors’ individual stock position values and the mean and median of investors’ total stock portfolio value.

                                      Retail investors                                          Institutional investors
                 Individual position value         Total portfolio value       Individual position value         Total portfolio value
                   Mean           Median           Mean           Median         Mean           Median           Mean           Median
1996               8,069           3,900          22,179           8,680        738,976         54,375         3,572,650       198,102
1997              11,091           5,680          28,735          12,375        802,767         47,880         2,921,252       119,175
1998              11,241           5,696          30,802          13,313       1,090,328        42,205         3,788,510        86,440
1999              12,536           6,100          33,955          14,177       2,400,134        40,358         8,294,886       102,264
2000              16,879           7,920          43,468          17,908       3,114,389        36,960         9,977,062       118,080
2001              17,528           8,477          46,671          19,895       2,389,368        34,700         8,211,759       133,313
2002              15,047           7,220          40,557          17,159       2,026,537        45,570         8,309,475       184,118
2003              13,768           6,349          37,537          15,025       2,320,780        37,400         9,515,146       216,850
2004              14,040           6,040          38,423          14,360       3,242,438        55,680        13,177,925       286,178
2005              11,261           4,308          30,463          10,390       4,107,368        54,810        16,793,688       203,138
2006              17,915           5,627          46,182          13,172       7,195,547       134,456        26,866,712       288,191
2007              21,992           6,670          54,759          13,620       8,153,493       185,187        32,808,349       330,908
        Table 2. Summary statistics of variables used in cross-sectional analysis
The cross-sectional means and standard deviations are calculated separately within each month.
The table reports the time-series average of these means and standard deviations. Equal-weighted
total breadth change is the change between month-ends t – 1 and t in the number of investors
holding stock i divided by the total number of investors. Wealth-weighted total breadth change is
like equal-weighted total breadth change, but weights investors by the value of their SSE stock
portfolio at the open of month t. Institutional and retail breadth changes are defined analogously
on the retail or institutional subsample. Equal-weighted retail IN is the percent of retail investors
who held no position in the stock at t – 1 but held a positive position in it at t. Equal-weighted
retail OUT is the percent of retail investors who held a positive position in the stock at t – 1 but
held no position in it at t. Wealth-weighted institutional IN and OUT are defined analogously
over institutions, weighting them by their SSE stock portfolio value at the open of month t.
Breadth changes, IN, and OUT are expressed as percentages, so that a 1 percent value is coded as
1, rather than 0.01. The variable λi,t is the Merton shadow cost of incomplete information defined
in equation (2), and ∆log(Institutional ownershipi,t) is the change between month-ends t – 1 and t
in the log of the fraction of the stock’s tradable A shares held by institutions. Returni,t –11→t – 1 is
the stock’s cumulative return from month t – 11 to t – 1. Liquidity ratio is the sum of the stock’s
yuan trading volume divided by the sum of the stock’s absolute daily returns during month t.
High relative volume and low relative volume are dummies for whether the stock’s share trading
volume during the prior week was in the top tenth or bottom tenth of the ten most recent weeks,
respectively. The sample is stock-months where there are a positive number of individual
investors and a positive number of institutional investors at both t and t – 1.

                                                           Mean                 Standard deviation
Returni, t+1                                               1.944                        9.422
ΔEqual-weighted total breadthi,t                          -0.002                       0.051
ΔEqual-weighted retail breadthi,t                         -0.002                       0.051
   Equal-weighted retail INi,t                             0.067                        0.074
   Equal-weighted retail OUTi,t                            0.069                        0.075
ΔEqual-weighted institutional breadthi,t                  -0.009                       0.194
ΔWealth-weighted total breadthi,t                         -0.031                       0.265
ΔWealth-weighted retail breadthi,t                        -0.025                       0.115
ΔWealth-weighted institutional breadthi,t                 -0.114                       2.123
   Wealth-weighted institutional INi,t                     0.542                        1.558
   Wealth-weighted institutional OUTi,t                    0.656                        1.684
λi,t                                                       0.011                        0.039
∆log(Institutional ownershipi,t)                           0.009                        0.806
log(Total market capi,t)                                  14.562                       0.786
Book-to-marketi,t                                          0.409                        0.193
Returni,t –11→t – 1                                       17.413                       37.316
Prior quarter turnoveri,t                                  1.105                        0.603
Liquidity ratioi,t                                         0.936                        1.387
High relative volumei,t                                    0.124                        0.275
Low relative volumei,t                                     0.145                        0.271
        Table 3. Mean and standard deviation of breadth change in each year
This table shows the cross-sectional mean and standard deviation (in parentheses below
the mean) of the six kinds of breadth change within each year. The means and standard
deviations are calculated separately within each month, and we report the time-series
average of these means and standard deviations within each year.

               Equal-weighted breadth change            Wealth-weighted breadth change
              Total        Retail        Inst.          Total       Retail         Inst.
1996         -0.009        -0.009       -0.069         -0.126      -0.111         -0.446
             (0.177)      (0.177)       (0.486)       (0.455)      (0.461)       (2.505)
1997          0.014        0.014        -0.020         -0.034      -0.033        -0.005
             (0.113)      (0.113)       (0.296)       (0.221)      (0.224)       (1.508)
1998          0.000        0.000        -0.016         -0.027      -0.025        -0.147
             (0.069)      (0.069)       (0.200)       (0.198)      (0.133)       (4.509)
1999         -0.002        -0.002       -0.013         -0.033      -0.025         -0.167
             (0.054)      (0.054)       (0.159)       (0.295)      (0.097)       (5.160)
2000          0.001        0.001        -0.015         -0.035      -0.023        -0.175
             (0.069)      (0.069)       (0.188)       (0.295)      (0.106)       (3.884)
2001          0.002        0.002        -0.012         -0.024      -0.010        -0.211
             (0.025)      (0.025)       (0.130)       (0.168)      (0.044)       (2.503)
2002         -0.001        -0.001       -0.003         -0.026      -0.008         -0.158
             (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.129)       (0.214)      (0.035)       (2.536)
2003         -0.001        -0.001       -0.013         -0.070      -0.010         -0.525
             (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.207)       (0.286)      (0.061)       (2.246)
2004          0.000        0.000        -0.005         -0.020      -0.009        -0.067
             (0.020)      (0.020)       (0.222)       (0.286)      (0.051)       (1.607)
2005         -0.001       -0.001        -0.003         0.000        -0.005        0.009
             (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.192)       (0.329)      (0.054)       (1.291)
2006         -0.002        -0.002       -0.005         -0.017      -0.016         -0.014
             (0.034)      (0.034)       (0.220)       (0.450)      (0.104)       (1.452)
2007          0.004        0.004         0.003         -0.017       -0.024        0.000
             (0.068)      (0.068)       (0.148)       (0.569)      (0.112)       (1.474)
           Table 4. Correlation of breadth change measures with each other
Each month, we calculate the cross-sectional correlation of each breadth measure with
the other breadth measures. The table reports the time-series mean of these correlations,
with the standard error (computed as the time-series standard deviation of the correlation
divided by the square root of the number of months) in parentheses below.

                             Equal-weighted breadth change       Wealth-weighted breadth change
                              Total     Retail       Inst.       Total      Retail        Inst.
Equal-         Total        1.000** 1.000** 0.058** 0.128**                 0.643**    -0.117**
weighted                   (0.000)  (0.000)  (0.016)  (0.028)              (0.015)     (0.015)
breadth        Retail                1.000** 0.054** 0.127**                0.643**    -0.117**
change                              (0.000)  (0.016)  (0.028)              (0.015)     (0.015)
               Inst.                          1.000** 0.294**               0.141**     0.305**
                                             (0.000)  (0.014)              (0.016)     (0.013)
Wealth-        Total                                   1.000**              0.347**     0.811**
weighted                                              (0.000)              (0.032)     (0.026)
breadth        Retail                                                       1.000**    -0.030*
change                                                                     (0.000)     (0.012)
               Inst.                                                                    1.000**
                                                                                       (0.000)
* Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.
                                        Table 5. Monthly returns on breadth change portfolios
This table shows the raw return in excess of the riskfree rate and one, three, and four-factor alphas from portfolios that are formed
based on the prior month’s equal- or wealth-weighted breadth change among the total, retail, or institutional investor sample. At the
end of each month t, we first sort stocks into tradable market capitalization quintiles, and then calculate month t breadth change
breakpoints within each size quintile. We value-weight stocks within each market cap × breadth change sub-portfolio. For the total
and retail investor samples, to form the “Quintile n” portfolio, we equally weight across the market cap quintiles the five nth quintile
breadth change sub-portfolios, and hold the stocks for one month before re-forming the portfolios. The “5 – 1” return is the difference
between the Quintile 5 and Quintile 1 portfolio returns. For institutions, to form the “< 10th percentile” portfolio, we equally weight
across the size quintiles the five sub-portfolios whose breadth change is less than the 10th percentile and hold the stocks for one month
before re-forming the portfolio. The other portfolios are formed in an analogous fashion. The “≥ 90th – < 10th” return is the difference
between the “≥ 90th percentile” return and the “< 10th percentile” return. Returns are expressed in percentages, so that a 1 percent
return is coded as 1, rather than 0.01. Standard errors are in parentheses.

                                                       Panel A: Total breadth change portfolios
                                        Equal-weighted breadth change                                  Wealth-weighted breadth change
                           Raw return     CAPM alpha    3-factor alpha   4-factor alpha   Raw return     CAPM alpha    3-factor alpha   4-factor alpha
Quintile 1                   2.87**         1.01**         1.10**           1.12**          2.18**          0.37          0.49*            0.52**
(lowest breadth change)     (0.77)         (0.27)         (0.21)           (0.21)          (0.74)          (0.25)        (0.20)           (0.19)
Quintile 2                   2.41**         0.49           0.54**           0.58**          2.16**          0.28          0.32             0.35*
                            (0.79)         (0.27)         (0.19)           (0.17)          (0.77)          (0.27)        (0.19)           (0.17)
Quintile 3                   1.93*          0.13           0.26             0.28            1.91*           0.03          0.11             0.15
                            (0.74)         (0.26)         (0.18)           (0.18)          (0.79)          (0.31)        (0.21)           (0.19)
Quintile 4                   1.80*         -0.09           0.00             0.04            1.70*          -0.15         -0.06            -0.03
                            (0.78)         (0.27)         (0.21)           (0.19)          (0.77)          (0.28)        (0.20)           (0.19)
Quintile 5                   0.84          -1.01**        -0.87**          -0.83**          1.82*          -0.08          0.08             0.10
(highest breadth change)    (0.76)         (0.28)         (0.22)           (0.20)          (0.77)          (0.23)        (0.18)           (0.17)
5–1                         -2.04**        -2.02**        -1.97**          -1.94**         -0.36*          -0.45*        -0.41*           -0.42*
                            (0.20)         (0.21)         (0.21)           (0.20)          (0.18)          (0.18)        (0.18)           (0.18)
                                                       Panel B: Retail breadth change portfolios
                                        Equal-weighted breadth change                                       Wealth-weighted breadth change
                           Raw return      CAPM alpha        3-factor alpha   4-factor alpha   Raw return     CAPM alpha    3-factor alpha   4-factor alpha
Quintile 1                   2.88**           1.02**       1.11**          1.13**         2.59**         0.73**        0.86**                   0.88**
(lowest breadth change)     (0.77)           (0.27)       (0.21)          (0.21)         (0.76)        (0.26)         (0.21)                   (0.20)
Quintile 2                   2.46**           0.52         0.57**          0.61**         2.18**         0.31          0.36                     0.40*
                            (0.79)           (0.27)       (0.19)          (0.17)         (0.77)        (0.28)         (0.19)                   (0.17)
Quintile 3                   1.91*            0.13         0.25            0.27           1.93*          0.11          0.20                     0.23
                            (0.74)           (0.26)       (0.18)          (0.17)         (0.75)        (0.28)         (0.19)                   (0.18)
Quintile 4                   1.79*           -0.08        -0.00            0.04           1.86*        -0.03           0.06                     0.09
                            (0.77)           (0.27)       (0.21)          (0.19)         (0.78)        (0.27)         (0.19)                   (0.18)
Quintile 5                   0.86            -1.00**      -0.85**         -0.81**         1.19         -0.70**        -0.57**                  -0.53**
(highest breadth change)    (0.77)           (0.27)       (0.22)          (0.19)         (0.77)        (0.25)         (0.19)                   (0.17)
5–1                         -2.03**          -2.02**      -1.96**         -1.93**        -1.39**       -1.43**        -1.43**                  -1.42**
                            (0.21)           (0.21)       (0.21)          (0.21)         (0.16)        (0.17)         (0.17)                   (0.17)
                                                    Panel C: Institutional breadth change portfolios
                                        Equal-weighted breadth change                               Wealth-weighted breadth change
                           Raw return      CAPM alpha        3-factor alpha   4-factor alpha   Raw return     CAPM alpha    3-factor alpha   4-factor alpha
< 10th                       2.35**           0.56                0.63*          0.67*           1.92*           0.06          0.12             0.15
percentile                  (0.76)           (0.32)              (0.29)         (0.28)          (0.75)          (0.22)        (0.18)           (0.17)
10th to 90th                 1.92*            0.04                0.13           0.17            1.87*           0.00          0.09             0.13
percentiles                 (0.77)           (0.26)              (0.18)         (0.16)          (0.77)          (0.26)        (0.18)           (0.17)
≥ 90th                       1.92*            0.04                0.18           0.19            2.51**          0.66*         0.83**           0.81**
percentile                  (0.77)           (0.25)              (0.20)         (0.20)          (0.76)          (0.26)        (0.23)           (0.23)
≥ 90th – < 10th             -0.44            -0.52               -0.45          -0.48            0.58*           0.60*         0.71*            0.67**
                            (0.31)           (0.32)              (0.32)         (0.32)          (0.27)          (0.28)        (0.27)           (0.26)
* Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.
            Table 6. Persistence of long-short breadth change portfolio alphas
This table shows the one, three, and four-factor alphas from zero-investment portfolios
that are formed based on breadth change that is either equal- or wealth-weighted among
all, retail, or institutional investors. To form the “Month t + k” portfolio, we sort stocks
into quintiles based on their month t tradable market capitalization. Then within each size
quintile, we calculate month t breadth change quintile breakpoints (for total and retail
breadth change) or 10th and 90th percentile month t breadth change breakpoints (for
institutional breadth change). We weight stocks by t + k – 1 tradable market capitalization
within each size × breadth change sub-portfolio. We then hold long an equal-weighted
portfolio of all the highest breadth change sub-portfolios across the size quintiles and
short an equal-weighted portfolio of all the lowest breadth change sub-portfolios across
size quintiles during month t + k before stocks are re-sorted into (possibly) new
portfolios. The number of months used to construct the estimates decreases as k increases
due to the boundaries of our sample period. Standard errors are in parentheses.

                                 Panel A: One-factor alphas
                        Equal-weighted breadth change      Wealth-weighted breadth change
                        Total       Retail       Inst.      Total      Retail       Inst.
Month t + 2            -0.95**     -0.93**      0.13       -0.12      -0.58**       0.20
                       (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.23)      (0.18)     (0.17)       (0.25)
Month t + 3            -0.93**     -0.94**      0.02       -0.21      -0.61**       0.15
                       (0.22)      (0.22)      (0.24)      (0.16)     (0.19)       (0.26)
Month t + 4            -0.63**     -0.63**     -0.45       -0.02      -0.35         0.14
                       (0.20)      (0.20)      (0.31)      (0.19)     (0.18)       (0.22)
Month t + 5            -0.42*      -0.41*       0.14       -0.33*     -0.38*       -0.11
                       (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.27)      (0.16)     (0.17)       (0.23)
Month t + 6            -0.27       -0.26        0.25        0.09      -0.13         0.22
                       (0.20)      (0.20)      (0.23)      (0.16)     (0.16)       (0.24)
Month t + 7            -0.19       -0.19       -0.35        0.12      -0.13         0.09
                       (0.20)      (0.21)      (0.27)      (0.16)     (0.20)       (0.23)
Month t + 8            -0.21       -0.20        0.25       -0.06      -0.13         0.43
                       (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.24)      (0.16)     (0.13)       (0.24)
Month t + 9            -0.01       -0.05       -0.00       -0.18      -0.25         0.04
                       (0.22)      (0.22)      (0.23)      (0.17)     (0.17)       (0.19)
Month t + 10           -0.19       -0.18       -0.39       -0.16      -0.29*       -0.20
                       (0.19)      (0.18)      (0.26)      (0.16)     (0.14)       (0.22)
Month t + 11           -0.09       -0.11       -0.10        0.18      -0.01         0.17
                       (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.23)      (0.17)     (0.15)       (0.20)
Month t + 12           -0.33*      -0.35*      -0.15        0.03       0.03         0.17
                       (0.16)      (0.16)      (0.23)      (0.14)     (0.17)       (0.23)
                        Panel B: Three-factor alphas
                Equal-weighted breadth change      Wealth-weighted breadth change
                Total       Retail       Inst.       Total     Retail       Inst.
Month t + 2    -1.03**     -1.01**      0.09       -0.20      -0.65**       0.22
               (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.23)      (0.18)     (0.17)       (0.25)
Month t + 3    -0.93**     -0.94**     -0.04       -0.17      -0.63**       0.30
               (0.22)      (0.22)      (0.25)      (0.16)     (0.19)       (0.25)
Month t + 4    -0.69**     -0.70**     -0.33       -0.12      -0.40*        0.13
               (0.19)      (0.19)      (0.31)      (0.19)     (0.17)       (0.23)
Month t + 5    -0.47*      -0.46*       0.25       -0.31      -0.38*       -0.08
               (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.26)      (0.17)     (0.17)       (0.23)
Month t + 6    -0.26       -0.24        0.23         0.11     -0.14         0.26
               (0.20)      (0.20)      (0.23)      (0.16)     (0.16)       (0.24)
Month t + 7    -0.20       -0.18       -0.25         0.20     -0.06         0.21
               (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.27)      (0.16)     (0.20)       (0.22)
Month t + 8    -0.18       -0.15        0.19       -0.08      -0.14         0.35
               (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.24)      (0.16)     (0.13)       (0.24)
Month t + 9     0.06        0.01        0.11       -0.10      -0.24         0.11
               (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.16)     (0.16)       (0.19)
Month t + 10   -0.20       -0.17       -0.34       -0.12      -0.28*       -0.15
               (0.19)      (0.18)      (0.26)      (0.16)     (0.14)       (0.22)
Month t + 11   -0.11       -0.14       -0.06         0.22     -0.00         0.26
               (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.23)      (0.17)     (0.16)       (0.19)
Month t + 12   -0.30       -0.32*      -0.15         0.07      0.02         0.17
               (0.16)      (0.16)      (0.24)      (0.14)     (0.17)       (0.23)
                                      Panel C: Four-factor alphas
                             Equal-weighted breadth change       Wealth-weighted breadth change
                             Total       Retail       Inst.       Total      Retail       Inst.
Month t + 2                 -1.02**     -1.00**      0.07        -0.20      -0.65**       0.22
                            (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.23)       (0.18)     (0.17)       (0.25)
Month t + 3                 -0.90**     -0.92**     -0.03        -0.17      -0.64**       0.31
                            (0.22)      (0.22)      (0.25)       (0.16)     (0.19)       (0.25)
Month t + 4                 -0.70**     -0.71**     -0.32        -0.14      -0.40*        0.11
                            (0.19)      (0.19)      (0.31)       (0.18)     (0.17)       (0.23)
Month t + 5                 -0.43*      -0.42*       0.25        -0.30      -0.34*       -0.08
                            (0.17)      (0.17)      (0.26)       (0.17)     (0.16)       (0.23)
Month t + 6                 -0.22       -0.21        0.22         0.08      -0.12         0.22
                            (0.20)      (0.20)      (0.23)       (0.16)     (0.15)       (0.23)
Month t + 7                 -0.14       -0.11       -0.22         0.20      -0.01         0.20
                            (0.19)      (0.19)      (0.27)       (0.16)     (0.19)       (0.22)
Month t + 8                 -0.15       -0.12        0.15        -0.10      -0.15         0.31
                            (0.17)      (0.18)      (0.24)       (0.16)     (0.13)       (0.23)
Month t + 9                  0.09        0.05        0.13        -0.07      -0.21         0.13
                            (0.20)      (0.21)      (0.21)       (0.15)     (0.16)       (0.19)
Month t + 10                -0.21       -0.18       -0.34        -0.15      -0.30*       -0.19
                            (0.19)      (0.18)      (0.27)       (0.15)     (0.14)       (0.22)
Month t + 11                -0.08       -0.10       -0.01         0.22       0.01         0.26
                            (0.17)      (0.17)      (0.23)       (0.17)     (0.16)       (0.20)
Month t + 12                -0.28       -0.30       -0.20         0.11       0.05         0.20
                            (0.16)      (0.16)      (0.24)       (0.15)     (0.17)       (0.24)
* Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.
           Table 7. Long-short breadth change portfolio alphas among subsamples
   This table shows the one, three, and four-factor alphas from zero-investment portfolios
   that are formed based on breadth change within subsets of our sample: between 1996 and
   2001; between 2002 and 2007; within only the smallest tradable market capitalization
   quintile; within only the largest tradable market capitalization quintile; or excluding
   stocks for which less than one year has elapsed since a share issuance or repurchase
   event. Breadth change is either equal- or wealth-weighted among all, retail, or
   institutional investors. We sort stocks into size quintiles based on their month t tradable
   market capitalization, and calculate month t breadth change quintile breakpoints (for all
   and retail investors) or 10th and 90th percentile month t breadth change breakpoints (for
   institutional investors) within each size quintile. We weight stocks within each size ×
   breadth change sub-portfolio by tradable market capitalization. With the exception of the
   analyses that include only the smallest or largest size quintile, the portfolios whose alphas
   we report are long an equal-weighted portfolio of all the highest breadth change sub-
   portfolios across size quintiles and short an equal-weighted portfolio of all the lowest
   breadth change sub-portfolios across size quintiles. Stocks are held for one month during
   t + 1 before they are re-sorted into (possibly) new sub-portfolios. Because of months
   where some size × breadth change subportfolios are empty, the smallest size quintile
   equal-weighted institutional breadth change returns are calculated using only 133 months,
   and the largest size quintile equal-weighted institutional breadth change returns are
   calculated using only 136 months. Standard errors are in parentheses.

                                    Panel A: One-factor alphas
                            Equal-weighted breadth change         Wealth-weighted breadth change
                             Total      Retail       Inst.         Total      Retail       Inst.
1996-2001                   -2.44**    -2.46**      -1.29*        -1.24**    -1.95**      0.09
                            (0.30)     (0.30)       (0.57)        (0.27)     (0.25)      (0.47)
2002-2007                   -1.58**    -1.55**       0.30          0.39*     -0.88**      1.13**
                            (0.29)     (0.29)       (0.21)        (0.17)     (0.19)      (0.25)
Smallest size quintile      -1.73**    -1.75**       0.09         -0.60      -0.99**      0.31
                            (0.32)     (0.33)       (0.51)        (0.34)     (0.32)      (0.41)
Largest size quintile       -2.21**    -2.20**      -0.11          0.22      -1.42**      1.51*
                            (0.44)     (0.44)       (0.55)        (0.39)     (0.35)      (0.62)
No issuances or             -1.95**    -1.93**      -0.35         -0.44*     -1.27**      0.69*
repurchases in last year    (0.24)     (0.24)       (0.30)        (0.20)     (0.20)      (0.31)
                                        Panel B: Three-factor alphas
                                 Equal-weighted breadth change         Wealth-weighted breadth change
                                  Total       Retail       Inst.        Total      Retail       Inst.
1996-2001                        -2.26**     -2.28**     -1.18*        -1.20**    -1.97**      0.29
                                 (0.30)      (0.31)      (0.59)        (0.28)     (0.27)      (0.48)
2002-2007                        -1.57**     -1.54**      0.31          0.38*     -0.81**      1.07**
                                 (0.30)      (0.30)      (0.22)        (0.18)     (0.20)      (0.26)
Smallest size quintile           -1.66**     -1.69**      0.31         -0.44      -0.81*       0.33
                                 (0.33)      (0.34)      (0.51)        (0.33)     (0.31)      (0.41)
Largest size quintile            -2.07**     -2.06**     -0.20          0.28      -1.43**      1.68**
                                 (0.44)      (0.44)      (0.56)        (0.40)     (0.35)      (0.60)
No issuances or                  -1.88**     -1.91**     -0.40         -0.43*     -1.27**      0.77*
repurchases in last year         (0.24)      (0.24)      (0.30)        (0.21)     (0.20)      (0.31)
                                         Panel C: Four-factor alphas
                                 Equal-weighted breadth change         Wealth-weighted breadth change
                                  Total       Retail       Inst.        Total      Retail       Inst.
1996-2001                        -2.34**     -2.37**     -1.08         -1.17**    -2.02**      0.45
                                 (0.28)      (0.29)      (0.58)        (0.28)     (0.26)      (0.43)
2002-2007                        -1.54**     -1.52**      0.31          0.38*     -0.80**      1.06**
                                 (0.30)      (0.30)      (0.22)        (0.18)     (0.20)      (0.26)
Smallest size quintile           -1.66**     -1.68**      0.32         -0.41      -0.78*       0.33
                                 (0.33)      (0.34)      (0.51)        (0.33)     (0.31)      (0.42)
Largest size quintile            -2.04**     -2.03**     -0.26          0.22      -1.45**      1.61**
                                 (0.44)      (0.43)      (0.54)        (0.38)     (0.35)      (0.58)
No issuances or                  -1.86**     -1.89**     -0.45         -0.44*     -1.26**      0.71*
repurchases in last year         (0.24)      (0.24)      (0.29)        (0.20)     (0.20)      (0.29)
   * Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.
                                        Table 8. Future returns: Fama-MacBeth regressions
This table shows coefficients from monthly Fama-MacBeth regressions where the dependent variable is the stock’s month t + 1 return.
Each month, we run cross-sectional regressions separately within each tradable market capitalization quintile and average the
coefficients from these five regressions. The coefficients reported in the table are time-series averages of these averaged coefficients,
and the standard errors in parentheses are based on the time-series standard deviations of these averaged coefficients. Most of the
explanatory variables are as defined in Table 2. “Top 10% of Δwealth-weighted inst. breadth” is a dummy variable for a stock being in
the top ten percentiles of month t’s wealth-weighted institutional breadth change distribution within its tradable market capitalization
quintile. “Earnings announced” is a dummy variable for the company announcing earnings in month t. Average R2 is the average of
the cross-sectional regressions’ R2 values. Stock-months are excluded from the sample if there are not a positive number of retail
investors and a positive number of institutional investors in the stock at both t and t – 1.

∆log(Institutional               0.333**         0.329**          0.179          0.087           0.202         0.238           0.095
 ownershipi,t)                  (0.088)         (0.098)          (0.096)        (0.092)         (0.141)       (0.263)         (0.115)
ΔEqual-weighted retail                                          -39.540**      -37.554**       -28.319*      -35.886**
 breadthi,t                                                      (4.539)        (4.685)        (12.866)       (5.962)
Top 10% of Δwealth-                                                              0.606*         -0.362         0.003
 weighted inst. breadthi,t                                                      (0.267)         (0.989)       (0.434)
log(Total market capi,t)        -0.396          -0.266           -0.283         -0.300           0.349        -0.348          -0.350
                                (0.203)         (0.210)          (0.208)        (0.205)         (0.423)       (0.257)         (0.209)
Book-to-marketi,t                1.343*          1.566**          1.319*         1.382*          2.189        -0.508           1.756**
                                (0.575)         (0.555)          (0.548)        (0.548)         (1.122)       (0.999)         (0.536)
Returni,t –11→t – 1 ÷ 100        0.763           1.051*           1.291*         1.267*          1.642         2.680*          1.021*
                                (0.523)         (0.529)          (0.523)        (0.523)         (0.918)       (1.064)         (0.491)
Returni,t ÷ 100                                 -1.731           -5.855**       -6.158**         0.901        -4.849*         -5.694**
                                                (1.530)          (1.570)        (1.581)         (2.850)       (2.169)         (1.582)
Prior quarter turnoveri,t                       -0.622**         -0.560*        -0.547*         -0.718        -0.329          -0.294
                                                (0.232)          (0.234)        (0.239)         (0.374)       (0.334)         (0.238)
Liquidity ratioi,t                              -1.934**         -1.898**       -1.910**        -3.317**      -2.921          -1.510*
                                                (0.635)          (0.631)        (0.673)         (1.015)       (1.701)         (0.748)
High relative volumei,t                                   -0.643**   -0.529*   -0.518*     0.953     -0.131     -0.492*
                                                          (0.246)    (0.246)   (0.248)    (1.780)    (0.305)    (0.240)
Low relative volumei,t                                     0.231      0.178     0.189     -0.746      0.351      0.244
                                                          (0.227)    (0.229)   (0.233)    (0.440)    (0.304)    (0.234)
Earnings announcedi,t                                                                     -0.409
                                                                                          (0.408)
Earnings announcedi,t ×                                                                   -3.644
 ΔEW retail breadthi,t                                                                   (15.576)
Earnings announcedi,t ×                                                                    0.913
 Top 10% of ΔWW                                                                           (0.971)
 inst. breadthi,t
λi,t                                                                                                -14.384
                                                                                                    (23.070)
Equal-weighted                                                                                                 -52.075**
retail INi,t                                                                                                    (6.884)
Equal-weighted                                                                                                  20.728**
retail OUTi,t                                                                                                   (6.265)
Wealth-weighted                                                                                                 -0.456
inst. INi,t                                                                                                     (1.832)
Wealth-weighted                                                                                                  0.426
inst. OUTi,t                                                                                                    (1.514)
Constant                                7.254*             6.911*     7.082*    7.271*    -1.435      8.635*     8.000*
                                       (3.227)            (3.262)    (3.260)   (3.218)    (6.090)    (3.828)    (3.295)
# months                                137                137        137       137         34        137        137
Average R2                             0.104              0.211      0.233     0.247      0.270      0.363      0.281
* Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.
                                          Excess returns
 8%
 6%
 4%
 2%
 0%
 -2%
       -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
                                     Month relative to portfolio formation


                           Equal-weighted retail breadth change
  0.08
  0.06
  0.04
  0.02
  0.00
 -0.02
 -0.04
 -0.06
 -0.08
         -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
                                       Month relative to portfolio formation


                             Institutional ownership percentage
 20%

 15%

 10%

  5%

  0%
       -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
                                     Month relative to portfolio formation

                    Quintile 1 (lowest)        Quintile 3    Quintile 5 (highest)


Figure 1. Returns, equal-weighted retail breadth change, and institutional
ownership in 48-month window around portfolio formation date. The series shown
represent statistics on portfolios formed on equal-weighted retail breadth change, as
described in Tables 5 and 6.
                                      Excess returns
 8%

 6%

 4%

 2%

 0%
      -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
                                    Month relative to portfolio formation


                      Wealth-weighted institutional breadth change
  4
  2
  0
 -2
 -4
 -6
      -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
                                    Month relative to portfolio formation


                             Institutional ownership percentage
 20%

 15%

 10%

  5%

  0%
       -24 -22 -20 -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
                                     Month relative to portfolio formation

                 < 10th percentile       10th-90th percentile     ≥ 90th percentile


Figure 2. Returns, wealth-weighted institutional breadth change, and institutional
ownership in 48-month window around portfolio formation date. The series shown
represent portfolios formed on wealth-weighted institutional breadth change, as described
in Tables 5 and 6.
