NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECIAL EXCHANGE RATES FOR
CAPITAL ACCOUNT TRANSACTIONS

Rudiger Dornbusch

Working Paper No. 1659

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity and
Industrial Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1659
July 1985

Special Exchange Rates for
Capital Account Transactions

ABSTRACT

The exchange rate consistent with high employment and a balanced current
account are rarely the same as the rates consistent with asset market

equilibrium at interest rates policy makers wish to prevail. Whenever rates
are freely determined the assets markets prevail and the results may be hard
to live with, or at least harder than would appear to be the case of special
exchange rates and capital controls which are used to isolate home assets

markets from the world capital market. This paper investigates the motive
for choosing capital controls and special exchange rates, the principal forms

and some of the experience. We look in particular at three institutional
arrangements:

• dual exchange rates separating current and capital account
transactions,

• black or parallel markets for foreign exchange,
O exchange rate guarantees, dollar deposits and dollar—linked
domestic debt.

Rudiger Dornbusch
Department of Economics
E52—357
M.I.T.

Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 253—3648

May 1985

SPECIAL EXCHANGE RATES FOR CAPITAL ACCOUNT TRANSACTIONS*
Rudiger Dornbusch
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

The exchange rate consistent with high employment and a balanced
current account are rarely the same as the rates consistent with asset market
C

1 4t,..$

cm +r

...4- 4r#nw.nn#
nel 4 en, n,clrn,.e
,.v4
AUCaC a. .7 n a. .aaa
A. C U C C
C C U ..n#ne.

U.SJ. LU .1. .1.. LAW 0 U .42 U C a.

.h. a..

IS

nnn'crc4
1
C V C a. .

W1rorntror
w—o+ao
U
£1'...aa S.. V •A.

a.

IS S. 17

are freely determined the assets markets prevail and the results may be hard
to live with, or at least harder than would appear to be the case of special
exchange rates and capital controls which are used to isolate home assets

markets from the world capital market. This paper investigates the motive
for choosing capital controls and special exchange rates, the principal forms

and the some of the experience. We look in particular at three institutional
arrangements:

• dual exchange rates separating current and capital account
transactions,

• black or parallel markets for foreign exchange.
• exchange rate guarantees, dollar deposits and dollar—linked domestic
debt,

tThis paper is part of a research project on exotic exchange rate
arrangements conducted for the World Bank. I am indebted to members of the
division on Trade and Adjustment Policy for helpful discussions and
suggestions.

These are the main forms of coping with the problem of asset market
-

integration

and spill—over effects from asset markets to the rest of the

economy. They amount to either restricting the traffic or to applying
special rates that attempt to isolate assets markets from too close a link
with the rest of the world or too close a link with the home economy,
whichever appears easier to break.

1. The Motive for Isolating Assets Markets.
The starting point for any discussion of special arrangements for

assets markets is the high mobility of capital. Assets markets are linked
internationally, they are linked in terms of risk and expectations-adjusted

returns and that linkage is tight and rapid. That implies severe
restrictions on the scope for policies; policies must be such as to give

asset holders the world rate of return or else they will seek to leave with
one of three results: under a fixed rate the stock of reserves (if the rate

were fixed) will be depleted, under a flexible rate the exchange rate will be
depressed to a level where home returns are again in line with those abroad
means, or because of these alternatives policies will be aligned with the
requirements of assets markets rather than with policy priorities.

The problem can be easily understood by looking at three key linkages

between an economy and the rest of the world. These are respectively the
linkages between interest rates, the linkages of prices, and the impact on
employment of real exchange rates:
(1)

i=i*+/e+R( )

(2)

P

f(eP*)

3

N

(3)

=

N(eP*/P)

where i and i are home and foreign interest rates, e/e is the rate of

depreciation and R is the risk premium. P and P are home and foreign prices
and N is employment. Equation (i) states that home interest rates are equal
to those abroad, adjusted for anticipated depreciation and the risk premium

that emerges from political and exchange rate risk. This equation can be
viewed as the constraint on financial policies: In integrated asset markets
the home interest rate must be set high enough or else the currency will come

under attack. Equation (2) points out that domestic prices will be affected
by the exchange rate: a collapse of the exchange rate would surely cause a

steep increase in home inflation. Equation (3) emphasises that a change in
the (real) exchange rate will influence employment. In the longrun no doubt
real depreciation will raise employment, in the shortrun predominant
distribution effects may make the effects run the other way.

These three linkages then mean that asset markets are internationally
integrated and that this integration places restraints on policy or that lack
of attention to these constraints as implications for inflation and for

employment. Moreover, because the reactions are strong and rapid the issues
are of foremost importance. They cannot be disregarded because reserves are
often in short supply and deep depreciation of the exchange rate can be
politically catastrophic, but running the world to the tune of assets markets

is at best questionable. Hence the interest in institutional arrangements
that delink assets markets and free policies for what are perceived to be the
"true" priorities.

There is any number of examples of countries where massive exchange
rate movements or capital flows became an inconvenience or more for policy
makers.

For example, in the U.S. in 1980—85 the steep dollar appreciation,

4

for safe haven reasons or because of interest rates, led to overvaluation and

an unprecedented shock to manufacturing. Very soon there was talk of
renewing the import surcharge, that had already been tried to cope with the
overvaluation of the early 1970s, and even a renewal of interest equalisation
taxes came into discussion.

But, of course, the shock can also run the other way when capital
flight leads to a collapse of the exchange rate and, as a result, an

inflation explosion. The best example would be the onset of the German
hyperinflation in the 1920s. The "balance of' payments school" at that time

saw in the confidence—induced collapse of the exchange rate the source of
domestic inflation which in turn led to budget deficits that validated the

escalating rates of price increase. Figure 1 shows the exchange rate of the
dollar in Berlin in early 1923. During February-March the government manages
to stabilize the rate and while this is going on prices are stable. Then a
loss in confidence, related to the reparations problem, ensues and in a few
weeks the exchange rate increases sevenfold (!) thus leading into
hyperinflation as the exchange rate depreciation via prices, wages and the
widening budget deficit opens all mechanisms for uncontrolled price rises.

There is any number of examples, though perhaps less extreme, about the
macroeconomic problems emerging from a collapse of' confidence in assets

markets. There are even more episodes of cases where asset market
integration simply foreclosed policy options because it was felt that the
consequences for reserve losses or the exchange rate were inacceptable.

The importance of the capital market integration issue has been

highlighted in the aftermath of the debt problem. Much of the accumulation
of Latin Anierican external debt reflects, in fact, the financing of capital

flight. This is strikingly the case for Argentina, Mexico and Venezuela

Figure 1

The Exchange Rate Collapse in
HyperinflatiOn Germany

5

where the amounts are extraordinarily large. The consequence is this: real
wages are being cut to gain competitiveness and hence trade surplusses to
finance the debt service that is the counterpart of capital flight.
If wage earners and external asset holders are not one and the same the

social implications are shocking. Table 1 shows the liabilities of U.S.
banks (not counting banks in other countries, currency and other forms of
wealth) to Latin America:

Table 1

Liabilities of U.S. Banks to Latin American Residents
(Billion $ U.S., Eid of Period)
Latin America

Mexico

Venezuela

1980

24.1

4.5

3.1

1982

43.0

8.0

8.4

1984

55.9

12.7

10.5

Source: Federal Reserve Bulletin, various issues.

2. Delinking Assets Markets.
There are various ways in which assets markets can be delinked. The
first is to decide on the scope for capital controls. One possibility is to
maintain the international integration of capital markets given by equation
(i) above, but to delink domestic assets markets, at least partially, from

the home economy. The means would be a special, separate exchange rate for
asset market transactions. Free capital mobility at a fixed or flexible
special rate, separate from commercial transactions, would be a way of

separating equation (i) from (2) and (3). Having more than one exchange
rate makes it easier to live with the exchange rate consequences of capital
market integration.

6

An alternative is to opt against international integration of assets

markets by instituting formal capital control. This may take the form of a
prohibition of holding of foreign assets by residents except for special

authorisation. The difficulty is to make that prohibition stick: black
markets will emerge or capital flows will take place implicitly in current

account transactions. In response the government may be tempted to quasilegalize (this is a peculiarly Latin notion) parallel markets for foreign
exchange or create domestic equivalents in the form of a dollar denominated

internal debt or dollar deposits. The effectiveness of capital controls
determines here how successfully a government can split markets and isolate
the home economy.

Figure 2 helps classify some of the modalities: a two way
classification distinguishes whether the rate for asset market transactions
is managed (fixed as a special case) or freely determined and whether access
to the exchange market for capital account transactions is restricted or

completely open. Institutional arrangements fall somewhere in the box. For
example, Mexico has a heavily managed rate with unrestricted access, while
Venezuela also has unrestricted access but considerably less intervention.
Brazil restricts the access completely for the official market where the rate

is managed. Even the black market has a somewhat managed rate and an
implicit restriction of access for corporations. In the remainder of the
paper we study some of these systems to see what particular problems they
solve and what problems they create.

3.

Dual Exchange Rates.
In this section we discuss dual exchange rates: a situation where a

significant part of commercial transactions is conducted at a uniform fixed

Figure 2

Alternative Exchange Market
Arrangements

ce

-

—

9?

Black Markets

Mexico

N

7
N

Venezuela

Brazil

—

7

rate while capital account and selected commercial transactions go at another

rate, a free or managed rate. The interesting features in this regime,
setting it aside from the discussion of multiple rates in the previous

section, arise from the capital account. The fact that the foreign exchange
market is opened to capital account transactions establishes an immediate

linkage between financial markets, and specifically expectations prevailing

in financial markets, and the exchange rate or the level of intervention. By
separating financial transactions from commercial transactions the

authorities attempt to maintain the advantages of a managed, stable exchange
rate for commercial transactions that is not upset by the vagaries of the
capital account.

Dual rates are typically established by countries that feel they cannot

or do not wish to prohibit capital account transactions. In circumstances
where the macroeconomy is highly unstable capital flows will be very volatile

and potentially massive. If foreign exchange reserves are limited a country
has essentially two choices: set a uniform rate that is so undervalued that
there can only be an expectation of appreciation and hence no threat of

capital flight. Alternatively the rates must be split so that the capital
account rate can depreciate to whatever level required to make the public

willing to hold the existing stock of domestic assets. Each alternative has
serious drawbacks: the over-depreciation of a uniform rate represents a

dramatic shock to real wages and inflation. It poses the question why real
wages should be cut merely to stabilize the expectations of wealth holders.
But the free rate on capital account also raises questions: will it distort
allocation as some transactions slip into the free market, will it be stable
in the absence of intervention and will there ultimately be exchange rate
unification?

8

Figure 3 makes some of these issues more concrete by showing the Mexican

example. The Figure shows three different rates: the Mexican "controlled"
rate that applies to essential imports, most exports and debt service. The
"free rate" applies to all other transactions, in particular capital account

transactions and tourism. The third rate is the New York quotation for cable
transfers corresponding to the external free market. Figure 4 shows the
premium of the N.Y. rate over the "controlled" rate in Mexico. The huge
differential up to January 1983 corresponds to the early experimentation with

exchange control of various kinds. Since then the levels and differentials
have been established in a manner that the Central Bank increasingly has come
into a position of managing the two rates.
Mexico has moved to a dual, managed rates with a moderate differential.

Venezuela's case shown in Figure 5 by contrast does not show a settling down

yet. Following a long tradition of fixed exchange rates the government
abandoned pegging the rate except for essential imports in March 1983.
Specifically capital movements were to be conducted in a free foreign

exchange market. The premium shown in Figure 6 reached a level, using
monthly averages, of more than 260 percent. The volatility of the free rates
and the extent of discrepancies between free and controlled rates pose
important issues for resource allocation and macroeconomics.

A Model of the Dual Market: We now present a sequence of models of dual
markets, building up progressively the key linkages between asset markets and
the inacroeconomy. We start with a model of full employment, a constant

commercial exchange rate, purchasing power parity, rational expectations and
only two assets: domestic money and foreign nominal interest earning
assets.1

1For detailed discussion and derivations see Appendix I.

Figure 3
Mexican Exchange Rates
(Pesos per $

U.S.)

Pesos 1$

200

N.Y. Rate

"Controlled Rate"

100

rket Rate"

1982

1983

1984

Figure 4

The Mexican Free Market Premium
(N.Y. Rate as Percent of Official)

%

161

100-

30

18

I
0

1982

1983

1984

1985

Figure 5

Exchange Rates in Venezuela
(Bolivars per $ U.S.)

A

151

7.5
I

4.3

-

.>(—<-..<- "Z-

1983

Official

Rate

'I

1984

1985

Figure 6
Venezuela: Free Market Premium
(As Percent of Official Rate)

261
9-

0

200

100

-

-

75

1983

1984

1985

9

In the asset market the desired ratio of money to foreign assets, M/eK

depends on the rate of return on foreign assets which equals the rate i plus

the expected rate of depreciation, /e. The term K denotes the stock of
foreign assets and eK their value in home currency:
(4)

M/eK =

L(i*+/e)

L'

,

i

< 0

or, inverting the equation,
(4a)

/e h(M/eK) -

,

=

ho

L1,

h' < 0

Here e represents the capital account exchange rate which is assumed flexible

and is used to value foreign assets. Alternative models have been presented
by de Macedo (1983), Lizondo (1984), and Flood (1978) where external asset
accumulation plays a significant part.

We focus here on domestic events

rather than on the effects on the home economy of foreign interest earnings.
But the simplification is one of convenience, it does not fundamentally alter

the analysis. Since we are not focussing on foreign asset accumulation we
assume that i*=O. Hence the value of K remains constant over time except for
government intervention.

The trade balance equals the excess of income over spending. We assume
away investment and take taxes to be zero. Private saving is assumed
proportional to the excess of planned real asset holdings, w, compared to
actual holdings, (N+eK)/x, with an adjustment for anticipated capital gains
on real balances and on foreign assets. Here x denotes the exchange rate for

commerical transactions and hence with PPP also the price level. Letting X
be the rate of depreciation of the commercial rate, X =
following expression for the real trade balance:
(5)

B = S — g
m =

Mix,

=

v(w-m—k

)

k = Ke/x

+ ?m

+

(X—/e)k

/x,

we have the

10

where g denotes real government spending which is financed by domestic credit
creation.

The rate of increase in real balances, n/x, is determined by real

government spending plus the real trade surplus. Thus the change in the real
money stock can then be written as:
=

(6)

v(w-m-k)

+

(X-h(m/k)k

The other dynamic equation of the model describes the evolution of the
real capital account rate, q

e/x, or equivalently the premium of the

capital account rate over the commercial rate:

/q h(m/k) -

(7)

X

Figure 7 shows the schedules along which respectively real balances are

constant and the real capital account rate are constant. The arrows indicate
the dynamics and, as is conventional in perfect foresight models of this

structure, there is a unique stable trajectory JJ. From any initial stock of
real balances, say m, the economy converges to the longrun equilibrium at E
along the path JJ.

The model is closed by a specification of the rate of depreciation of

the commercial rate. It is assumed that the commercial rate depreciated at a
rate ?.

that

is sufficient, in the steady state, to generate the inflation tax

revenue with which to finance the given level of real government spending.
Given any intial real money stock such as m0 there is a unique

equilibrium on JJ and hence a value of foreign assets k0. With a given value
K/x that means we have a unique capital account rate at which the assets

markets clear. Over time the system evolves to the steady state equilibrium
at E. If real balances initially are low the path is characterized by rising
real balances and a rising real value of foreign assets or an increasing

Figure 7

J
q=Q

M/x

r
L

m0

k

0

Adjustment With A Dual Rate

q= e/x

11

premium of the capital account rate relative to the commercial rate, e/x.

Thus if assets are intially low there will be trade surplusses that cause the
real money stock to be rising as the central bank intervenes to sustain the

commercial rate. At the same time the real value of foreign assets is rising
due to capital gains.

In the steady state saving is zero, trade is balanced and the real money

stock is constant. The premium of the capital account rate is constant, as
the rate depreciates at the same pace as the commercial rate. The seignorage
supported by depreciation finances real government spending. The equilibrium
dynamics in Figure 7

is

shown for a given rate of depreciation X of the

commercial rate. It is interesting now to ask how an increase in the rate of
depreciation will affect the premium.

It is shown in Appendix I that an increase in government spending
requires an increase in the rate of depreciation, given inelastic real

money demand. Increased depreciation of the commercial rate will immediately
depreciate the capital account rate or increase the premium. Even in the
steady state the premium will increase. The result is intuitively obvious
once we recognize that in the steady state the capital and commercial rate

depreciate at the same rate. An increase in the rate of depreciation of the
capital account rate shifts asset holders from money to foreign assets.
Given the fixed supply only an increase in the premium can bring about that

rebalancing of portfolios. The increase in the premium due to an increased
rate of crawl of the commercial rate was demonstrated by Lizondo (1984).
Expectations: Having sketched the effect of a current increase in the rate of
government spending we look next at the impact of a shift in expectations.

Starting in the steady state the public anticipates that the government will
increase real spending, deficit finance and depreciation at some known future

12

date. What is the path of adjustment to this disturbance? This is an
interesting question if we want to explain the large fluctuations in the data
for the dual market premium.

In Figure 8 we show the initial equilibrium at point E. As shown in
Appendix I an increased steady state rate of depreciation shifts the
schedules. The q=O rotates clockwise and the iii=o

schedule

shifts out and to

the right. The new steady state is at point E' with an increased steady

state premium '.
Now consider the adjustment process. At the moment the expectation of

higher future government spending develops there is an immediate portfolio
shift from money to foreign assets leading to a jump in the premium from

point E to a point like A. The extent of this instantaneous depreciation
depends among other things on how proximate the shift in monetary policy is.

If it were almost immediate the jump is virtually all the distance to JJJ
Now at point A the dynamics are still governed by the initial monetary policy

and accordingly with the high level of the premium the value of foreign

assets is high relative to real balances. This can only be an equilibrium if
the rate of depreciation of the capital account rate has risen and hence is

now higher than the that of the commercial rate. Accordingly the system
moves in the direction of point B. The economy arrives at B precisely at the
time when the more rapid rate of depreciation of the commercial rate is

introduced. From there on the movement is along J'J with some decline in
the premium.

Note that we can determine the rate of depreciation of the capital
account rate from the conditions of monetary equilibrium as shown in (4a).
With a declining ratio of real balances to external assets along the path
ABE'

the

rate of depreciation of the capital account rate must be rising

Figure 8

m

1E

m

JI
A

q'=O

m' =0

0

q

An Anticipated Increase in
Government Spending

13

throughout. Figure 9 shows the path of the rate of depreciation of the
capital account rate over the path. The.times T0 and T' correspond to the

initial shift in expectations and the implementation of the new policy. Up
to time T0 we have equal rates of depreciation: e/e

X. Then at the time

expectations shift there is a jump in the premium and in the rate of

depreciation of the capital account rate. Since the rate of depreciation of
the commercial rate is still unchanged the premium is further appreciating

until time T'. Now the commercial rate depreciates at the higher rate X' in
excess of the capital account rate, implying some real appreciation.
Over time the two rates converge to depreciate at the same pace.
It is interesting to comment also on the trade balance in the adjustment

process. As long as monetary policy is unchanged, following the shift in
expectations, there is a trade deficit. The deficit arises because the
increase in the premium raises wealth relative to target and the real capital

gains lead to dissaving. Furthermore, with declining real balances
seignorage starts falling short of the initial level of spending thus further

deteriorating the trade deficit. The expectation of a shift in policy will
therefore lead to trade deficits and potentially difficulties in sustaining
the path of depreciation.

We have considered increased real government spending and deficits

financed by money creation. The increase in spending can be viewed as either
spending on goods and services or transfers abroad by the government,

including government debt service. In this broader interpretation the
exercise is of interest because it suggests that any disturbance that leads
to increased deficit finance will provoke an increase in the premium.

Moreover, since we were looking at real government spending in excess of real
tax collection we can also think of the exercise in terms of a loss of real

Figure 9

T

0

T'

An Increased Rate of Crawl

time

14

government revenues due to reduced taxes or a loss of external resources. In
this perspective the expectation of a decline in real oil prices, for
example, would increase the state enterprise and government budget deficit,

imply deficit finance and hence forces a depreciation of the capital account
rate.

Consider now the effect of intervention. Assume the central bank sells
foreign assets or foreign exchange in exchange for domestic money. We can
decompose the impact of such an intervention into two separate effects. The
private sector now holds increased foreign assets at each level of the
premium. With unchanged real balances the premium would immediately- decline

to move the economy back to portfolio balance at point E. But real balances
in private hands have declined as part of the open market operation, just as

they would have in the case of a devaluation. The decline in real balances
takes

the economy to the south—west of

Accordingly

the

point E, on JJ, in Figure 7.

premium declines proportionately more than the increase in

foreign assets. Intervention in the capital account market thus clearly is
effective in depressing the premium. Interestingly it also gives rise to a
trade surplus via the wealth effects of the decline in the premium.

Extensions: The basic model has served to show the linkage between financial
policies and the premium in the dual market. But the analysis needs
extension if we are to see some macroeconomic complications coming from dual

markets. So far the dual rate exerts effects only on the value of wealth and
hence on income and spending. But in fact the more important channels
operate presumably via relative prices and domestic interest rates.

These, too, are linked to the free rate and the important point to recognize
is that financial disturbances such as we saw above have macroeconomic

15

effects via the free exchange rate. Furthermore these effects occur simply
on the basis of expectations.

We now consider the case where some goods——non—essential imports and
non—traditional exports—-are transacted along with capital account
transactions in the free market. Essential imports, say food arid materials,

and traditional exports are conducted at a fixed rate. Since part of the
goods now are traded at the free rate, the aggregate price level is

influenced by both the commercial and the free rate. Moreover the premium of
the free rate now sets the relative price of those goods entering via the

free market. Instability of asset demands, policies, and expectations now
introduces instability of the price level and of relative prices.
Moreover, if the dual rate regime is chosen to defend the foreign
exchange reserves this purpose may in fact not come to be satisfied.
Financial disturbances that lead to an increase in the premium draw resources
into the premium market on the supply side while leading consumers to

substitute toward the controlled market. A rise in the premium associated
with a "flight from domestic money" still will lead to reserve depletion,
except that it now is channelled via the enlarged trade deficit at the
regulated rate.

We maintain a maximum of the previous structure. The specification of
asset markets remains unchanged. But now we need to separate the markets for
the two clases of goods, maintaining for each the PPP assumption since some

points can still be made in that setting. Let foreign prices be unity so
that e and x denote the prices of goods that trade at the official and free

rate respectively. The aggregate price level, P, now is an expenditure

weighted function of these two prices. The premium and the relative price of
goods trading in the free market continues to be denoted by q.

16

P =

(8)

P(e,x)

,

q =e/x

In the previous equations P now replaces x as the deflator for assets.
To simplify matters we dispense with depreciation of the regulated rate,
i.e. X =

0.

Let B and J now denote the trade balances at international

prices of the regulated and free market.

It is important to recognize that now the free market no longer
involves finding the price at which an existing stock of foreign assets, K,

is held. The market now can, via the current flows, generate an accumulation
or decumulation of foreign assets. The same effect would arise
(uninterestingly) from interest on foreign assets, but the effect considered

here is more central. Specifically we look at the possibility of trade being
diverted from the official market to the free market: the central bank faces
larger trade deficits and loses reserves, while in the free market a trade

surplus leads to accumulation of foreign assets. We can think of the
implications of shifting transactions to the free market as legalizing the
capital flight involved in underinvoicing of exports or the import smuggling

financed by underinvoiced exports. Because the free market now involves not
only stocks but also flows we need to specify the trade balances for the

official and the free market separately. We denote these real trade balances
by B and J respectively:
(9)

B =

B(q,a,u,g),

J

J(q,a,u)

An increase in the free market rate relative to the fixed official rate
will deteriorate the official trade balance, B, and improve the trade balance

in the free market. The reason is that consumers will substitute toward the
now relatively cheaper goods traded at the official rate while producers will
move resources out of production for the official market and into activities

that benefit from the free rate. This substitution is one of the most

17

important features of a dual rate regime once commercial transactions get
into the free market.

Formally, the model is now more difficult because the real money stock,
the stock of foreign assets and the premium each must be tracked and hence a

simple phase diagram can no longer help. But we can still get a lot of
answers by just looking at comparative steady states where accumulation and

depreciation are zero. The steady state system, as shown in the appendix, is
defined by the following equations:
(10)

J(q, m +

(n)

w=m+k

(12)

m/qK =

k,

0)

0

L(0)

Equations (ii) and (12) combine to give us a relation between the

premium and the stock of forei assets in Figure 10. The relation is:
(13)

w = qK(1 +

L(0))

and hence for given target wealth, w is simply a rectangular hyperbola which

captures both portfolio preferences and saving behavior. We show equation
(io) as the upward sloping schedule JJ.

In drawing the schedule as

positively sloped, we assume that a rise in the premium improves the trade
balance via substitution effects more than enough to offset the deterioration
that stems from the rise in wealth and spending brought about by a higher

free market rate. The steady state equilibrium is at point E.
Consider now the following policy measure. The government moves some
export activity that previously was conducted at the official rate into the

free market. We show in Figure 11 the effect as a rightward shift of the JJ
curve. Since the increased export surplus of the free market has to be
compensated by higher wealth or a reduction in the premium JJ shifts to the

position indicated by the dashed schedule. Across steady states the premium

q

J

/JI

J

/
/

qK(1+L(0) )=w

K

0

Figure 10
Commercial transactions Enter the

Free Market

Figure .11

A Portfolio Shift Toward
Foreign Assets

WI

q

\

w

3

/31
q

3'

—

K

/
Ti1

1<

18

declines and

the

stock of foreign assets, K, rises. From (ii) and (12) it

can be shown that across steady states real balances are constant:
m = sw

(14)

,

s =

L(O)/(1

+

L(O))

where s is the steady state ratio of money to wealth in the absence of
inflation.

But note, now, that the decline in the premium, at a fixed official
rate, means an appreciation of the free rate and hence a decline in the price
level P(x,e).

With a fall in the price level constant real balances imply a

fall in nominal balances and thus a cumulative deficit at the official rate.

The policy shift of exports to the free market is only in part compensated by
a reduction in the premium which shifts production toward the official market
and demand toward the free rate.

Trade disturbances, as can be seen from the above argument always leave

longrun real balances unchanged. The cumulative official deficit depends on
the impact the disturbance has on the premium. But the direction of change
of the premium will depend on the relative importance of wealth and

substitution effects in the free market trade balance. If the wealth effect
dominates JJ is negatively sloped. Then a shift of some exports toward the
free market can actually raise the longrun premium and lead to a loss of
external assets in

the

free market. In that case moving exports from the

official to the free market (assuming stability) would generate cumulative
reserve gains.

Consider next a portfolio disturbance. This is, of course, the kind of
event against which countries seek to protect themselves with a dual rate.

From

(14) it is apparent that longrun real balances will decline.

Accordingly

if the premium remains unchanged or even falls then there must be

a cumulative trade deficit at the official rate. The mechanism is the

19

following: the portfolio shift drives up immediately the premium in the free

market. As a result there are two effects on the official trade balance.
The higher premium directly diverts resources to the production of those
goods that enter the free market and shifts demand toward the goods traded at

the official rate. Second, the rise in the premium raises wealth and
therefore raises spending thereby also increasing the official deficit.
In Figure 11, we show the adjustment starting from an initial

equilibrium at E. The portfolio shift leads to a rightward shift of JJ and

%

4• 4,
n,,,,m,+
t" ,,
T4 +'
SO USA A-rU fl U 'iA S S S UI. S Lii•
UJ.sc oaMsc amJ
lAin U aLil.L irUal.,

w w iJj csa I., U

LI

S .1.

USA U

adjustment process is asymptotic then there will be a path TT along which the
economy travels, starting with an immediate sharp rise of the premium from E

to E". Subsequently, as foreign assets are being accumulated and money is
being decumulated portfolio proportions of M and K come more nearly in line
with preferences.. The process continues until the full adjustment in
portfolios has been achieved by changes in nominal money and external assets.

The unambigous effect is that a portfolio shift is fully absorbed by a loss
in reserves even though this occurs via the regulated market rather than as

capital flight. This conclusion is really important because it shows that
the dual rates can break the speed of capital flight but may not be able to

stop an equivalent reserve loss occurring via the impact of the premium on
the trade deficit.

Triple and Nultiple Rates: We saw earlier the Venezuelan case where the free
market premium reached more than 260 percent of the commercial rate. Such a
discrepancy is of course a very large distortion. It maintains the real wage
in termm of some essentials at the cost of a large tax thrown on the sectors

forced to sell at the commercial rate. The resulting tendency toward a
deficit in the regulated market brings about reserve depletion and thus

20

expectations of devaluation. The expectation then further raises the premium
and reinforces the reserve losses.

A typical response to the dilemma is to maintain the regulated rate for
essential imports but to shift some exports toward a third market where the

rate is also fixed but at a higher level. In Venezuela such a multiple
system involves presently the following structure:

Table 2 The Venezuelan System
Date

Bolivars/$U.S.

2/1983

4.3
6.0

free
2/84

4.3
6.0
7.50
free market

Category

petroleum

exports, debt service,and
basic food
most imports
all other transactions

basic

food

petroleum exports
services, most imports, debt service,

non-traditional exports, non—essential
imports, capital account transactions

The change in the exchange rate structure involves a real depreciation

in respect to debt service, services and imports. Their relative price
increases as they are shifted from the lowest rate to an intermediate level

involving a 25 percent depreciation. What would we expect to be the impact
on the free market premium over the basic rate, e/x? We can still use our
model except that now we have another parameter

x1/x the ratio of the

intermediate rate to the basic rate. The ww schedule would remain unchanged.

But there will be an effect on the trade balance of the free market. The
question is whether splitting the basic rate will increase or reduce the

trade surplus of the free market. If the resources entering the sector that
now has an increased official rate come primarily from the free market, and

21

if the increased price diverts demand primarily toward the free market then
we get a deficit there or j(

) declines

at each level of q or JJ shifts

leftward in Figure 10 above. With unchanged real balances across steady
states the splitting would involve a cumulative trade surplus at the official

rate. Conversely if the shift primarily worsens the official trade balance
while improving the free market surplus the premium would decline. The price
level P(e, x, x) now could fall (depending on the relative weights) and
there might be a cumulative loss of reserves, as can be observed from the
equation for real balances written here in terms of nominal money arid
prices:
(14a)

M =

P(e,

x, x1 )sw

The ambiguity of the effect of the policy move on reserves is, of

course, critical. It suggests that an obvious move to increase efficiency——
removing some items from a severely undervalued exchange rate--may in fact

produce exactly the wrong results for reserves. Moreover there is no
presumption that shifting an activity from one rate to another will in fact
improve welfare as is obvious from the second-best nature of the exercise.

This point is important because it means that increasing the number of rates
by shifting activities from the lowest or basic rate toward the more
'trealistic" free rate does not necessarily reduce distortions in the economy.

It may well increase the misallocation.

The Unification Problem: Figure 12 shows the premium of the free rate over
the official exchange rate for the Dominican Republic. The official rate is
constitutionally fixed at 1 peso/$ U.S. As is apparent the free rate at
which an increasing number of transactions are conducted has progressively

moved away from the official rate. The Dominican Republic now faces a very
classical problem common in Europe after World War I: Should the official

Figure 12

Premium of the Dominican Republic
(Percent over Official Rate)

%

200

100

20

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

22

exchange rate be restored as a uniform rate, requiring deflation such as the
U.K., for example, undertook in moving back in 1925 to the pre-war par, or
should a new uniform rate be set, taking into account the level of the free
rate as Poincare did in 1926 in France.

It is clear that the present system is not viable because it involves

huge distortions. In response to the distortions an increasing number of
transactions are shifted to the parallel rate so that the average exchange
rate in fact is depreciating over time as a consequence of the progressive

reallocation. Table 3 shows the effects of this reallocation on the
effective exchange rate (weighting the trade categories by the exchange rate
treatment they receive).

Table 3 Average Exchange Rates for the Dominican Republic
(Pesos per $Ti.s.)
1 982

1983

1984*

Effective: Imports

1

.19

1

.31

2.18

Effective: Exports

1

.0

1

.15

1.77

Official

1

.0

1

.0

1.0

Parallel

1

.46

1

.61

2.75

*Estjmate

Source: Warid Bank
Much the same problem, though in perhaps less clear—cut terms, arises
for a country where the free rate and the basic rate are so far apart that
the resource allocation costs outweigh any macroeconomic benefits——i.e.,

Venezuela though probably not Mexico. When the dual rate has gone far out of
line the unification of rates becomes an important macroeconomic issue. The
expectations about the manner in which unification will be achieved will
affect both the premium (and hence the trade deficit) and also interest rates

23

and activity. If the expectation, as must ordinarily be the case, is one of
devaluation of the official rate then the free market premium will already
reflect that expectation and be correspondingly higher, thereby worsening the

trade deficit. Interest rates will reflect the expectation of depreciation
of the free rate and thus will rise in the period ahead of the expected

depreciation. Therefore if the devaluation is delayed real interest rates
for activities tied to the official rate are increasing and that, of course,

leads to a decline in activity. Bankruptcy problems arise as debt service
comes to absorb declining real earnings of the sector that is atrophied by
the overvalued official rate.

It is obvious then that a dual rate far way from the official rate must

be a very transitory policy. Attempts at unification cannot be avoided and
the real wage problem ultimately cannot be solved by implicit trade taxes and
subsidies that infect all markets and, especially, forward looking financial

markets. A more sensible model is the Mexican solution where the dual market
is used as a strictly transitory shock absorber. Figure 4 above showed the
premium in the free Mexican market relative to the controlled rate. The
divergence is kept small, although when financial disturbances occur they are

allowed to affect the premium. But fundamentals are reflected in the rate in
the sense that the premium stays on average well below 20 percent.

4. Black Markets.
Our analysis has focussed on cases where the government sanctions an

official free market for all non—preferential transactions. In some cases
the reaction to the high premium is to exclude certain transactions, in
particular capital account transactions, altogether from access to foreign

exchange. As a consequence a black market will immediately spring up and

24

function in a manner completely identical to the dual market we have already
studied.

Figures 13 and 14 show the premium in the Brazilian black or "parallel"

market in the past ten years. It shows the same erratic pattern as the
Venezuelan dual rate, reflecting expectations about major shifts in financial
policy, politics and official exchange rate policy.

The market brings together all unauthorized foreign exchange

transactions: import smuggling and coffee export smuggling undertaken to
avoid quotas and/or export taxes, unofficial military export revenue,

tourism, and capital account transactions. In Dornbusch et.al. (1983) it is
shown that the market is well—behaved in that seasonal factors, interest
rates, the official real exchange rate and anticipations of maxis explain the

behavior of the premium. In fact even the bid—ask spreads in the black
market can be well explained in terms of the theory of dealership. (See
Dornbusch and Pechman (1985)). Interest rates and the variability of the
premium that proxies the extent of news explain the size of the spread.
Figure 15 shows the Premium in Argentina in the period since Martinez de

Hoz. &cept for brief periods of unified exchange markets there is always a
premium. Politics and real interest rates are the main determinants. The
Argentinian example shows how politics can take a free exchange rate far way

from PPP. n example is the 1983 Alfonsin pre—election period in late 1983:
the premium rises to more than 100 percent (in daily data) and falls by 40

percentage points immediately on the day after the election. Of course, the
path of the premium has effects on resource allocation and on inflation and
thus is an important macroeconomic issue.

The traditional view of black markets is to view them as an offshoot

of the restriction of commercial transactions. But there is all the evidence

Figure 13
The Black Market Premium: Brazil 1974—81

07

/0

40.0

ju.u
20.0
10.0

0.0
3

'974

3
1975

3

3

3

1976

1977

1978

3
1979

3
1980

3
1981

25

5o

75

0
0

0

1980

1981

1982

88

Figure 14
The Parallel Market Premium in Brazil
Percent of the Official Rate)

1983

1984

Figure 15
Parallel Market Premium in Argentina
(Percent of Official Rate)

%

125

1oq

75

50

1982

1983

1984

1985

25

to support the view that they are closely tied to financial markets. At any
point in time there is a given stock of foreign assets in the hands of

domestic residents. Given expected returns on domestic assets there will be
a level of the premium that establishes stock equilibrium. The level of the
premium in turn influences the flows into and out of the pool of foreign

assets in the hands of the public. These considerations are particularly
obvious in the case of Argentina. In July 1982, for example, the government
chose to solve problems of domestic overindebtedness of firms and the

government oy Ireezing nominaL inieres raLes oeiow Lne raie 01 nia-ion.
There was an immediate shift of portfolio holders out of domestic assets into

black dollars. The premium, within a day shot to above 100 percent. The
high level of the premium in turn encouraged underinvoicing on the export
side and thus deprived the government of foreign exchange and of revenue from
export taxes thereby worsening the financial difficulties of the public
sector.

Brazil, similarly, has had periods where the black market went to a
sharp premium, for example at the outset of the debt crisis in late 1982.
The level of the premium was so high that a peculiarly inefficient arbitrage

occurred. The government allocated foreign exchange for tourists——$1000 for
every man, woman or child. Given a premium of nearly 100% it paid mothers
with ten babies (who fly free of charge) to fly back and forth to Miami,

plundering the central bank. Queues for passports which were required to

obtain foreign exchange were for once even longer than those for food. The
large premium may have cost the government perhaps as much as $U.S. 1 billion
in reserves.

Because the black market is integrated with forward looking asset
markets it is clear that expectations about future political or economic

26

events will be reflected in the premium even before they materialize. Thus
the chance of a Peronist victory pushed up the premium prior to Alfonsin's

election. Similarly anticipated exchange rate action can be seen in the
premium. The anticipation of a maxi--devaluation of the official rate, for
example, would lead to an immediate rise of the premium in the black market.
The increased premium in turn worsens the financial conditions of the

government not only by posting a visible sign of no confidence, but also by
drawing resources away from the official balance.

An interesting fact, in this context, is the decline of the Brazilian
premium over the last year despite the large and deteriorating financial

conditions. Part of the reason is, of course, the extremely high real

interest rate. The rate in Brazil is upward o± 40 percent in real terms and
thus is more than competitive with any capital gains expected in the black

market. But a further fact depressing the premium may well be the fact that
the government has ceased purchasing domestic gold which therefore flows

through the black market. The resulting increased flow supply of black
dollars keeps a lid on the premium and hence may well work to stabilize
expectations.

The dual and black market examples point to the critical role of
financial factors, and in particular expectations, in determining the premium

in the free market. In countries where the budget and the real exchange rate
are out of line speculation about the inevitable timing of the adjustment
cannot but enter the premium and therefore affect rapidly and pervasively the

entire economy. It might be argued that the government by sustaining real
wages via a low official rate financed by external borrowing is helping

workers. But the deficit is increased by the rising premium: The free market
runs a surplus that is privately accumulated while the government borrows

27

abroad to finance "its" deficit. Ulti'ately the real wage t be cut to
generate a trade surplus to finance the external debt. Participants in the
free market may ultimately he the net beneficiaries of the scheme, not labor.
In this sense the r3ramatic !!exican adjustment suggests itself as a better

policy than the pattern observed in Venezuela or Argentine.

5.

Exchange Rate Guarantees.
In the 1970s several countries financed large current eceount

imbalances by encouraging private borrowing abroad. The borrowing was done
by corporations who had access to the world capital market nr by commercial

banks who funded their domestic lending in the world capital market. This
external borrowing had two key features. First it was short or at most

medium-term. Second, the loans were denominated in dollars. Both features
turned out to be critical once external financing became more difficult to

secure and longstanding exchange rate policies became questionable. Sooner
or later every one of the major borrowers had to offer exchange rate
guarantees to persuade domestic firms or banks to maintain their external
indebtedness rather than paying off their loans thus precipitating an even
more acute exchange rate crisis.

The exact modalities differ between countries, but the principles are

much the same: the central bank or Treasury will guarantee for the borrowing
firm the exchange rate at which the firm is allowed to acquire foreign

exchange in the ultimate repayment of the debt. Moreover the exchange rate
that is guaranteed often involves a significant implicit subsidy to assure

that the debt is being rolled rather than prematurely paid off. This system
was used in Argentina in 1981, following the Martinez de Hoz overvaluation to

cope with the shortage of foreign exchange. An estimate by Carta

28

Economica (1983, p.55) places the amount of the subsidy at between 6 and 9

percent of GDP. The stunning amount gives an idea of just how important
quantitatively the issue of external indebtedness was for the Argentinian

economy. It also shows the extreme shortsightedness of policy makers who
guaranteed exchange rates that were totally incompatible with the ongoing
inflation and overvaluation.

The difficulty with an exchange rate guarantee, much the same as that
involved in a dollar—linked internal debt to be discussed below, is the

charge on the budget. If in fact a major devaluation is required despite the
guarantee then the need to pay up on the guarantee creates a massive budget
deficit which, unless it can be tax financed which of course it rarely can,
prejudices the very effect of the devaluation.

Brazil's 432 Accounts: The Brazilian system of exchange rate guarantees
(called 432 accounts after the Regulation 432 that instituted this mechanism)
has been in effect for a number of years and now is proving to be a major

source of difficulty. The institutional features are the following: firms
who have borrowed abroad are required to incur debts for a minimum term of

several years. To avoid exchange rate exposure they do not want to assume
they can, at any time during the currency of the loan, deposit in cruzeiros

the equivalent of the principal. Once the deposit is made the Central Bank
assumes the full service of the loan to maturity and all liabilities of the

borrower cease. But, as a further complication, even after a loan has been
deposited in the Central Bank a borrower can turn around, at any time choose
to withdraw again the deposit from the Central Bank, with a minimum notice
period, and resume the debt service.

In practice the institutional features involve a severe restriction on

the Central Bank's ability to conduct monetary policy. If interest rates

29

were pushed down below the world level (adjusted for depreciation) the
domestic cost of borrowing would fall below the world level and hence firms

would chose to borrow at home and use the proceeds to make the dollar deposit
in the Central Bank to relinqiLsh th- higher cost external debt. The dollar
deposits would amount to a contraction of the monetary base which would force

interest rates immediately back up. The dollar deposit facility this works
precisely like international capital mobility in Mundell—Fleming models.
This can be seen from the balance sheet of the monetary authorities where 432
accounts appear as liabilities.

Assets

Liabilities

Currency + Bank Reserves (B)
432 Accounts (D)

Domestic Credit (C)
Foreign Exchange (R)

Using the balance sheet and the definition of the monetary base as

currency plus bank reserves we can readily express the money supply, M, as
the money multiplier times the monetary base or, using the balance sheet
identity, in terms of foreign exchange, domestic credit and dollar deposits:
(15)

MxB
= x(R+C—D)

But note now that the the fraction of their external debts, V, which firms

i

want to cover by dollar depo$it iepends inversely on home iaterest rates
relative to foreign rates plus anticipated devaluation, i —
(16)

D

h(i —

— u)V

—

u.

h' < 0

The money supply function therefore includes this reaction of private
firms to relative interest rates. In Figure 16 we show the demand for money
as a function

of the

home interest and the money supply function drawn for

given domestic credit and foreign exchange. If domestic and foreign

Figure 16
The Effect of 432 Deposits

1
I"'

E'

i*+u,

N

S

i*+u
E

L(i)

0

M

30

borrowing are highly substitutable then home interest rates cannot fall below

the cost of external borrowing including expected depreciation. The money
supply function becomes flat at that level, including possible a risk

premium. An expansion in domestic credit would simply be offset one-for—one
by firms' increasing dollar deposits thus maintaining the money supply
unchanged.

Even though there is no international capital mobility in the sense
that residents could acquire foreign assets, there is nevertheless the

equivalent effect, at the margin, by firms' ability to shift in and out of

dollar deposits at the Central Bank. This is particularly obvious in the
case of an expected depreciation of the exchange rate. An anticipation of
depreciation increases the cost of servicing dollar debts and, hence, causes
firms to try and borrow in the home market to pay off their external debt by

making 432 deposits. As a result the money supply contracts and home
interest rates rise to the point of matching the increased expected

depreciation. This is shown in Figure 16 as the upward shift of the money
supply function.

Dollar Deposits and Dollar Debts: In countries where capital mobility is
restricted but the restriction is hard to enforce, or where it is outright

impossible, governments have frequently sanctioned the use of domestic dollar

deposits or dollar—linked deposits. The Mex—dollar deposits or Israel's

Patam accounts are examples. The system has two

chief

advantages. First, it

saves the country in the aggregate on foreign exchange. The counterpart of
the private sector's dollar deposits is a small foreign exchange base that

serves as reserves. Alternatively, if the dollar deposits had been "bought"
they would have required selling off national assets or running current

account surplusses. Second, shifts in deposits betweeen dollars and local

31

currency do not introduce great instability since they are merely accounting
entries rather than shifts in reserves or large movements in exchange rates.
The main shortcoming is that offering such deposits increases capital

mobility at the retail level. Dollar deposits will be more attractive to
households and firms the larger is exchange rate risk. Where the
international capital market would be accessible only to firms and large
investors the institution of dollar deposits takes capital mobility to the

corner branch of the bank. Figure 17 shows Mex—dollars as a fraction of
total deposits in a few years up to the 1982 crises. (For a history see
Ortiz (1983b). It is clear from the Figure how, in early 1982 a shift toward
dollar deposits occurred as the country was nearing financial difficulties.
These deposits are more attractive the less financial stability there is

since they represent effectively an insurance against the instability. But
in the aggregate the insurance is difficult to pay. If the government is, in
fact, forced to undertake a major devaluation it may well be the case that
the Banking system, because of partial reserves, is not in a position to

honor the deposits. The resulting runs and bankruptcy will then break the
system unless the government steps in to write down the claims or fiscalize

the system. While small shifts introduce no problem whatsoever, large shifts
due to a loss of confidence mean that the goiernrnent has to assume the debts

of the banking system or write down the value of deposits. The 1982 crises,

in Mexico and in 1984 in Israel, highlight the issue. In Mexico, in the face
of a deteriorating foreign exchange situation, the government converted all
dollar Mex—dollar deposits into pesos at 70 pesos/$U.S. while the N.Y. rate

was about 100 pesos or even more. In Israel the government guaranteed the
Patam accounts thus assuming a major budget responsibility on top of an
already overburdened fiscal system.

Figure 17

Ratio of Dollar to Total Deposits in Mexiuo

1979

1980

1981

1982

It is clear that dollar deposits are an attractive option for a
government with few exchange reserves because there is no dissipation,

through whatever channels, due to capital ourtflows. As confidence problems
emerge rather than having a run on reserves there is merely a shift into

dollar—deposits. Everything stays calmer much longer, allowing the wrong
policies to be conducted well beyond what is safe. In exchange, when the
crisis does happen it is extreme because the whole financial system either

collapses or must be bailed out. For countries with financial stability, as
Fischer (1983) has argued, there are clear gains from dollar—deposits because

of the gain in seignorage on "home—made" dollars. But there is also a
question about financial stability because dollar—deposits, just as exchange

rate guarantees, are an extemely dangerous and costly institution. They
cause exchange rate adjustments to be delayed because the consequences for

the financial system of a devaluation would be too large. The result is that
ultimately, when they do occur, they will be even more destructive, Of
course, one might argue that the presence of these deposits and the large
costs of a situation where things do go wrong lead governments to pursue more
prudent policies for the reason that they seek to avoid the extreme

difficulty. That argument is valid, but still it appears that dollar
deposits are more prominent and more visible when things are starting to go
wrong and the legalization of these deposits buys some extra time for the
government to yet further delay adjustment.
There is a new school of thought that attaches great welfare
significance to capital market liberalization including quite possibly the
unrestricted mobility of capital and the right of financial institutions to

offer any kind of asset. The argument that in such a system a government's
inflation tax base might be seriously eroded would be countered by saying

33

that that is all for the good, forcing government to bring their ship in

order and stop inflationary policies. But in fact things may turn out the
other way: with a reduced tax base the inflation rate might have to be
higher so as to yield the uaxrle revenue. Whichever is the case the analysis

of capital market liberalization cannot be considered without linking it to
the budget and without considering the social costs of offering dollar

deposits with an implicit government guarantee.
Dollar—Linked Internal Debt: The issues raised by dollar—denominated public
debt are much the same as those involved in dollar—deposits. Should public
debt be indexed, and if it is indexed should it be linked to domestic prices

or to the exchange rate. Fischer (1983) has discussed the arguments for and
against indexed public debt. Here we are interested in the foreign exchange

indexation question. This question arises because of the possibility of
real exchange rate changes.

Dollar—linked public debt is common for example in Argentina or in

Brazil. Brazil's ORTNs for example are linked, at the option of the holder,
to the maximum of the increase in the price index or in the exchange rate.
In offering the exchange rate guarantee on the public debt the government

avoids paying an exchange rate risk premium. In exchange it is forced to
make a large transfer payment to government bond holders any time the
exchange rate is depreciated.

The problem with a dollar—indexed debt is that the country in the
aggregate does not have a dollar—indexed income and that the government, most
definitely, does not have a dollar—indexed revenue.

Even on the best

behavior there can be adverse terms of trade shocks such as Chile's decline
in copper export prices or Brazil's increase in oil import prices. If these
shocks are so large as to require real depreciation and have repercussions on

34

the real budget revenue then payment of a dollar—indexed debt means increased

real tax burdens in the face of declining real income. Such a system is
questionable on the economics and extremely hard on the politics. It
ultimately leads to the temptation to write down the claima of the dollar
bond holders, or at least the expectation that this could happen, and
therefore raises borrowing costs

Many of the difficulties of Latin America of the past ten years stem
from a combination of very poorly developed fiscal systems, with a resulting
need for deficit finance, and overdeveloped financial systems with excessive

indexation and dollarization. The combination has meant extreme financial
instability and erosion of the inflation tax base. They have certainly not
stopped inflation, they may well have increased it. The question is which
way to get out of the difficulty: reintroduce primitive financial systems in

the spirit of Henry Simon (1948) or overstabilize the government budget. It
might well be argued that rolling back the financial system is impossible.

But shaping up of the public sector poses no less of a difficulty. It means
starting to raise taxes on people who so far have used their largely untaxed
income and wealth to buy dollar denominated securities while complaining
about the government's lack of fiscal responsibility.

35

El BLI 0 GRAPHY

Abel, A. et al. (1979), "Money Demand During Hyperinflation," Journal of
Monetary Economics, January.
Aizenman, J.(1983), "Adjustment to Monetary Policy and Devaluation Under Two—
Tier and Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes," NBER Working Paper No. 1107,
April.
Barratieri, V. and G. Ragazzi (1971), "Dual Exchange Rates for Capital and
Current Transactions: A Theoretical Examination," Banca Nazionale del
Lavoro, Quarterly Review, December.
Bernstein, E. (1950), "Some Economic Aspects of Multiple Exchange Rates," IMF
Staff Papers, September.
Cumby, R. (1984), "Monetary Policy Under Dual Exchange Rates," NBER Working
Paper Series No. 1424.
Decaluwe, B. and A. Steinherr (1976), "A Portfolio Balance Model for a Two—
Tier Exchange Market," Economica, May.

_______ (1977), "The Two Tier Exchange Market in Belgium," Kredit und

Kapital

Beihefte, Heft 3.
deNacedo, j. (1982), "Exchange Rate Behavior Under Currency
Inconvertibility," Journal of International Economics, September.

de Vries, N. (1965), "Multiple Exchange Rates: Expectations and Experiences."

I Staff Papers.
Dickie, P. and D. Noursi (1975), "Dual Exchange Markets: The Case of the
Syrian Arab Republic," INF Staff Papers, July.
Dornbusch, R. et al (1983), " The Black Market for Dollars in Brazil,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, February.
(1976), "The Theory of Flexible Exchange Rate Regimes and
Macroeconomic Policy," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, No.2.
(1984a), "Argentina Since Martinez de Hoz," unpublished manuscript,
MIT.

(1984b), "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regines," unpublished manuscript,
MIT, September.

(1980), "Inflation Stabilization and Capital Mobility," NBER Working
Paper Series, No. 555.
and C. Pechman (1985), "The Bid—Ask Spread in the Black Market for
Dollars in Brazil," forthcoming Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.
and S. Fischer (1980), "Exchange Rate and the Current Account,"
American Economic Review, December.

36

and A. Moura Silva (1984), "Dollar Debts and Interest Rates in Brazil,"
forthcoming in Revista Brasileira de Economia.

Easterly, W. (1984), "Devaluation in a Dollarized Economy," unpublished
manuscript, MIT, February.
El Cronista Comercial, (1983), Carta Economica, December.

Fischer, Stanley (1982), "Seigniorage and the Case for a National Money,"
Journal of Political Economy, April.

(1983), "Welfare Aspects of Government Issue of Indexed Bonds." In
R. Dornbusch and M.H. Simonsen (eds.), Inflation, Debt and Indexation,
MIT Press.
Fleming, !4. (1976), Essays in International Economics, MacMillan.

(,71
Si ( I /

Capital

"Th1

.aa#*&I.aJ_&5

Mc.b-+a rr,A fl4-1,.
LA.•.WP4
S¼. U 4',-,'
.LIJS.
4. LA.'... V

(A.*A.&

•.LUSA'.L A.

U .1. V

Flows," IMT Staff Papers, March.

Flood, R. (1979), "Capital Mobility and the Choice of Exchange Rate System,"
International Economic Review, June.
(1978), "Exchange Rate Expectations in Dual Exchange Markets,"
Journal of International Economics, February.

and N. Peregrim Marion (1982), "The Transmission of Disturbances
under Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexing,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, February.
Gupta, S. (1980), "An Application of the Monetary Approach to Black Market
Exchange Rates," Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 2.
Haberler, G. (1959), "Using Resources at Hand More Efficiently," American
Economic Review, May.
Isze, A. and G. Ortiz (1984), "Political Risk, Asset Substitution and
Exchange Rate Dynamics: The Mexican Financial Crisis of 1982,"
unpublished manuscript, El Colegio de Mexico and Banco de Mexico,
August.
Kaxninsky, G. (1984), "The Black Market and Its Effects on Welfare and on the
Current Account," unpublished manuscript, Central Bank of Argentina,
March.

Kanesa—Thasan, S. (1966), "Multiple Exchange Rates: The Indonesian
Experience," IMF Papers, July.
Khan, lvi. and L. Ramirez-Roja (1984), "Currency Substitution and Government
Revenue from Inflation," unpublished manuscript, International Monetary
Fund, September.

Kiguel, M. (1984), "Relative Price Dynamics Under Dual Exchange Rate Markets,
Rational Expectations and Currency Substitution," unpublished
manuscript, University of Maryland.

37

Lanyi,

A. (1975), "Separate Exchange Markets for Capital and Current
Transactions," INF Staff Papers, November.

Lizondo, j. (1984), "Exchange Rate Differentials ani T3lance of Payments
Under Dual Exchange Markets," unpublished manuscript, IME.

Macedo, J. (1982), "Exchange Rate Behavior with Currency Inconvertibility,"
Journal of International Economics, February.
Marquez, J. (1984), "Currency Substitution, Duality and Exchange Rate
Indeterminacy: An Expirical Analysis of the Venezuelan Experience,"
Federal Reserve Board, International Finance Discussion Papers, No.242.
Mathieson, D. (1979), "Financial Reform and Capital Flows in a Developing
Economy" INF Staff Papers, September.
McKirrnon, R. (1982), "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from
Chile and Argentina," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series, 17.

and D. Mathieson (1981), "How to Manage a Repressed Economy,"
Essays in International Finance, No. 145, December, Princeton.
Moore, 0. (1958), "The Stabilization of the Bolivar," Public Finance, No.1.
Obstfeld, M. (1984), "Capital Controls, The Dual Exchange Rate, and
Devaluation," NBER Working Paper No. 1324, April.
Olgmi, H. (1984), "An Analysis of the Black Market Exchange Rate in a
Developing Country: The Case of Turkey," Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv,
2.

Ortiz, G. (1983), "Currency Substitution in Mexico," Journal of Money,
Credit,and Banking, May.

(l983b), "Dollarization in Mexico: Causes and Consequences" in P. Aspe
Armella et al. (eds.), Financial Policies and the World Capital Market,
University of Chicago Press.
Peregrim Marion, N. (1981), "Insulation Properties of a Two—Tier Exchange
Market in a Portfolio Balance Model," Economica, February.
Pecliman, C. (1984), 0 Dolar Paralelo No Brasil, Paz e Terra.

Simon, H. (1948), Economic Policy In a Free Society, University of Chicago
Press.
Schmitt, H. (1981), "Economic Stabilization and Growth in Portugal,"
International Monetary Fund, Occasional Papers, No.2.
Sheik, M. (1976), "Black Market for Foreign Exchange, Capital Flows, and
Smuggling," Journal of Development Economics, 1.

38

Swoboda, A. (1974), "The Dual Exchange Rate System and Monetary
Independence," in R. Z. Aliber (ed.), National Monetary Policies and the
International System, University of Chicago Press.
Tsiang, s. C. (1956), "An Experiment with a Flexible Exchange Rate System:
The Case of Peru, 1950—54," IMF Staff Papers.
Wiesner, E. (1978), Politica Monetaria Y Cambiaria en Colombia, Associacion
Bancaria de Colombia, Bogota.
Williamson, J. (1980), (ed.), The Crawling Peg: Future Prospect and Past
Performance, Macmillan.

39

Appendix I. The Dual Exchange Rate Model
The model assumes a single good, purchasing power parity at the
commercial rate, x, and two assets: domestic money and a foreign security (or

foreign money). Throughout we denote by X the rate of depreciation of the
official rate and by u the depreciation rate in the free market.
The portfolio balance is given by:
M/eK

(Al)

L(/e +

i*),

or, solving for

/e

(Ala)

h(M/eK) —

L' < 0

i,

h' < 0

where
e

M
K

i

is the capital account rate
is domestic money
the stock of foreign nominal assets
the foreign interest rate which is assumed zero

Wealth is defined as the sum of real balances and foreign assets
(A2)

a =

m +

k

It is assumed that investment and taxes are zero. A given level of real
government spending, g, is financed by domestic credit creation. The growth
in the real money stock is determined by the rate of depreciation of the
comnercial rate, government spending and the trade surplus, B:
(A3)

d(M/x) =
(g

B) -

(N/x)i/x

The trade surplus is determined by the discrepancy between saving and

real government spending. Real saving is determined by the gap between
target wealth, w, and
(A4)

S =

Accordingly

v(w - a)

actual
-

wealth, a, and by capital gains:

(eK/x)(/e

-

/x)

+

saving has a stock adjustment component and

a component

from the capital gains realized from external assets and
incurred on real balances.

the

arising

inflation losses

40

Noting that the trade surplus is the excess of saving over government
spending we have:

B

(A5)

=

S—g

(2)

and hence using (1),
d(N/x)

(A3a)

m

= (N/x)/x

s

N/i,

and (3):

k

=

eK/x

=

,

v(w
q

=

-

a)

e/x,

+

(x - h(M/eK))k
X

where X is the given rate of depreciation of the commercial rate that
satisfies the condition of steady state deficit finance:

XL(X) = g

(A6)

where in

is

the steady state level of real balances given a policy of spending

at the real rate g.

The system can be studied in terms of the two differential equations
governing the evaluation of the real value of assets:
(A7)

v(w-m-k)+(X-h(m/k))k

(A8)

q (h(m/k) - x)

These two schedules and the corresponding dynamics are shown in the phase
diagram.

In

J
q= 0

m= 0

e

41

For any initial value of the real money stock, m0, adjustment takes

place along the stable trajectory JJ to the steady state at E. In the
adjustment process a trade surplus is accompanied by a real deprecation of
the capital account rate.

Once commercial transactions enter the free market the system of
equations becomes:
(A9)

/m = [v(w-a)

(AlO)

k/K =

(All)

=

-

h(m/k)(1-c)k]/m

J(q,a,u)/K

—

-

ch(m/k)

(1-c)h(m/k)

(1—c)h(iu/k)

where it is assumed that X/X =

0 and where c is the share of free market

goods in the deflator:
(A12)

P =

P(e,x)

In the steady state u =

h(m/k)

=

0.

Thus the steady state system simplifies

to:
(A13)

j(q,q.K(l+L(O)), 0) = 0

(A14)

= L(O)qK

(A15)

w = qK(1+L(O)

where the last two equations imply that:
(A16)

m = sw,

s =

L(O)/(l+L(O))

This system is used in the text for comparative statics.

