                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ARE ALL CREDIT DEFAULT SWAP DATABASES EQUAL?

                                       Sergio Mayordomo
                                        Juan Ignacio Peña
                                       Eduardo S. Schwartz

                                       Working Paper 16590
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16590


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2010




This paper was partially drafted during the visit of Sergio Mayordomo to the Anderson School at UCLA.
We acknowledge financial support from MCI grant ECO2009-12551. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Sergio Mayordomo, Juan Ignacio Peña, and Eduardo S. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are all Credit Default Swap Databases Equal?
Sergio Mayordomo, Juan Ignacio Peña, and Eduardo S. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 16590
December 2010
JEL No. F33

                                              ABSTRACT

The presence of different prices in different databases for the same securities can impair the comparability
of research efforts and seriously damage the management decisions based upon such research. In this
study we compare the six major sources of corporate Credit Default Swap prices: GFI, Fenics, Reuters
EOD, CMA, Markit and JP Morgan, using the most liquid single name 5-year CDS of the components
of the leading market indexes, iTraxx (European firms) and CDX (US firms) for the period from 2004
to 2010. We find systematic differences between the data sets implying that deviations from the common
trend among prices in the different databases are not purely random but are explained by idiosyncratic
factors as well as liquidity, global risk and other trading factors. The lower is the amount of transaction
prices available the higher is the deviation among databases. Our results suggest that the CMA database
quotes lead the price discovery process in comparison with the quotes provided by other databases.
Several robustness tests confirm these results.


Sergio Mayordomo                                     Eduardo S. Schwartz
Comision Nacional del Mercado                        Anderson Graduate School of Management
 de Valores (CNMV)                                   UCLA
Miguel Angel, 11                                     110 Westwood Plaza
28010 Madrid                                         Los Angeles, CA 90095
Spain                                                and NBER
smgomez@cnmv.es                                      eduardo.schwartz@anderson.ucla.edu

Juan Ignacio Peña
Universidad Carlos III
Madrid 126
28903 Getafe
Madrid, Spain
ypenya@eco.uc3m.es
1. Introduction

Over the last decade, the Credit Default Swap (CDS) market has grown rapidly.1 Given

the growth and the size of this market, quoted and transaction prices of CDS contracts

are widely thought to be a gauge of financial markets’ overall situation, as suggested by

the GM/Ford credit episode in 2005, the US subprime fiasco in 2007-2009 or the

Europe’s debt crisis in 2010. Academic and policymakers alike have voiced concerns

with respect to the CDS market’s role in the above mentioned episodes and its possible

influence in other financial markets, credit-oriented or otherwise. However, to properly

address current concerns, careful empirical research is needed and therefore dependable

CDS price data is a key requirement. The CDS market is an Over The Counter (OTC)

market almost entirely populated by institutional investors and therefore, in contrast

with an organized exchange like the NYSE, there are no formally established clearing

and settlement mechanisms providing reliable information on prices. The information

on prices must be gathered from market participants on the basis of their voluntary

participation on periodic surveys, with all the potential shortcomings such a situation

may bring about. For instance, Leland (2009) reports that Bloomberg’s CDS data is

frequently revised weeks after and often disagrees substantially with other data sources

such as Datastream. Given that price data deserve special attention, as the validity and

power of the empirical results must be based on a dependable data source, in this study

we investigate the differences in the main data sources employed by researchers and

policymakers in this area. Specifically, we compare the six data sources for CDS prices



1 The global notional value of CDSs outstanding at the end of 2004, 2005 and 2006 was $8.42, $17.1 and
$34.4 trillion, respectively. The CDS market exploded over the past decade to more than $45 trillion in
mid-2007 and more than $62 trillion in the second half of the same year, according to the ISDA. The size
of the (notional) CDS market in mid-2007 is roughly twice the size of the U.S. stock market (which is
valued at about $22 trillion) and far exceeds the $7.1 trillion mortgage market and $4.4 trillion U.S.
treasuries market. However, the notional amount outstanding decreased significantly during 2008 to $54.6
trillion in mid-2008 and $38.6 trillion at the end of 2008. This declining trend followed in 2009 (31.2 in
mid-2009 and 30.4 at the end of 2009).


                                                                                                        2
commonly used in almost all the extant research: GFI, Fenics, Reuters EOD, Credit

Market Analytics (CMA) DataVision (CMA hereafter), Markit and JP Morgan. The first

five databases are analyzed jointly for American and European firms while the JP

Morgan data is employed additionally as a robustness test for a subset of European

firms.


In this paper we describe the databases’ main features and point out the deviations

between them both in the cross section and in the time series dimension. We also study

the extent to which there is an advantage, in terms of data quality, in choosing one from

the six data sources.


Two price time series for the same single name CDS reported by different data sources

should, in principle, be very close in the sense that both share a common trend, the

underlying true value of the asset. More specifically, their distributional characteristics

(mean, volatility, asymmetry, and kurtosis) as well as their time series behavior

(autocorrelations, degree of integration) should be very tightly related. Even if there are

deviations from the common trend between the price series reported by the different

datasets, one should expect that these deviations are non-systematic (pure measurement

errors) and therefore unrelated both to idiosyncratic factors (firm size, industrial sector)

and to systematic market liquidity or trading activity factors. If all the data sources are

consistent among them, the use of a given data source should not affect the research

results and their financial and policy implications. But if there are significant deviations

among them, the research implications can be sensitive to the specific data base

employed and therefore open to challenge on these grounds. Moreover, any economic

implication gathered by investors or regulators from the academic research could be

unduly influenced by the data source employed.




                                                                                          3
Therefore, there are compelling reasons to test whether the different data sources, on

which almost all the extant empirical studies are based, are consistent among them. If

they are not, and the divergences among them are not purely random, hitherto published

empirical research on this matter should be viewed with considerable caution. This

inconsistency derived from the private price’s providers would also imply a damaging

lack of market transparency affecting all financial agents such as investors, risk

managers, and regulators.


We study the consistency of six different CDS data sources in several dimensions using

the most liquid single name 5-year CDS of the components of the leading market

indexes, iTraxx (European firms) and CDX (US firms). First we look at their basic

statistical properties. Then we address two specific issues: (i) the factors explaining the

divergences from the common trend among different CDS quoted spreads, and (ii) the

relative informational advantage of the prices coming from different CDS databases.


A summary of our results follows. As one can expect, the overall average trend is

usually similar among databases but we find, somewhat unexpectedly, that there are

systematic departures across databases from the common trend. In fact, if we restrict the

comparison to the days in which we have observations in all the data sources

simultaneously (both trades and quotes), we find that for European firms before the

crisis, there is price information on trades in 35% of the days and, perhaps not

coincidentally, there is, on average, a considerable degree of agreement among the

prices provided by the different databases, although some differences can still be found

at the individual (reference entity) level. During the crisis, there is price information on

trades in 15% of the days, the average prices are relatively alike among databases but

some striking differences appear at individual level and in specific time periods.




                                                                                          4
For US firms before the crisis, when there are recorded transactions prices from GFI on

15% of the days, average spreads are roughly similar across databases but again some

differences persist at firm level. However during the crisis, the percentage of days with

information from GFI on transaction prices is only 2%, and we find that average spreads

widen across databases, and also there is a remarkable lack of agreement at the

individual level. In summary, as was also the case with European firms, when there is

enough information on transaction prices databases tend to agree among them. However

during the crisis, US firms’ CDS spreads from different databases diverge to a larger

extent than before the crisis. This fact implies that as the information on transaction

prices become scarcer, prices from different sources tend to diverge from the common

trend. The most extreme disagreements are in the case of American firms during the

crisis, when there is a drastic reduction in the availability of transaction prices from

GFI. This lack of recorded transaction prices could be due to the fact that the CDS

market in the US is based to some extent on voice transactions and to a lower extent in

inter-dealer broker platforms such as GFI or perhaps, to the use of other platforms

instead of GFI.



If we restrict the comparison to the days in which we have no trades and simultaneous

quotes in the corresponding data sources, we find that for European firms before the

crisis, there is, again, a fairly large degree of agreement among the prices provided by

the different databases. During the crisis, the average prices are similar among databases

with some individual exceptions for specific entities and time periods. For US entities

before the crisis, average spreads are similar across databases but again some

differences persist at individual level. However during the crisis, we find that average




                                                                                        5
spreads are less alike, volatility increases, and also there is surprisingly high variation in

average quotes for the same reference entities coming from different databases.



In summary the preliminary analysis shows that, although the different CDS quotes

moved broadly in the same direction, there are very noticeable divergences for some

entities in some days. Also, the discrepancies among databases appear to be more

marked in specific time periods, probably reflecting market turbulences but it is

important to remark that no single database provides quotes that are consistently above

or below the quotes from other databases. We also find evidence suggesting that on

average the days without trade information have higher quote dispersion than the days

with trade price information.



Most importantly, deviations (in absolute value) from the common trend among the

different CDS quoted spreads are not purely random, but are related to idiosyncratic

factors like firm size and also to liquidity, global risk and trading factors. We also find

that the different data sources do not reflect credit risk information equally efficiently.

Our results suggest that the CMA quoted CDS spreads led the credit risk price

discovery process with respect to the quotes provided by other databases. All these

results are robust to potential endogeneity or multicollinearity problems and to different

econometric methodologies.


Our results have a number of important implications for empirical research using CDS

prices. First, for US names with low trade frequency, our results cast doubts on the

reliability of the existing price information because there are very few recorded trade

prices in GFI. Thus, conclusions obtained in papers that have used these data are open,

to some extent, to criticism on these grounds. Second, in studies of price discovery of



                                                                                            6
the CDS market in relation to other markets such as bonds or futures, empirical results

may change depending on the database employed. In particular since there is a data

source (CMA) which seems to lead the others. For instance, Zhu (2006) using Markit

data found that the CDS market and the bond market appear to be equally important in

the incorporation of new information. Would this result hold if CMA data is used

instead of Markit data? Third, the smaller the firm, the lower the market’s liquidity and,

the highest the VIX volatility index, the larger are the deviations from the common

trend in prices across the different databases, and therefore, the less reliable and

comparable research results might be.


This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review. Section 3

describes the data employed in the analysis. Section 4 motivates the research hypotheses

and introduces the methodology. Section 5 shows the empirical results while Section 6

confirms the robustness of the results and presents some extensions. Section 7

concludes.




2. Literature Review

The importance of comparing alternative financial databases is stressed in the classical

papers by Rosenberg and Houglet (1974) and Bennin (1980) on the differences between

CRSP and COMPUSTAT stock price data. However, in more recent times there are

very few papers comparing databases. Schoar (2002) and Villalonga (2004) compare

COMPUSTAT with the Longitudinal Research Database and the Business Information

Tracking Series from the U.S Bureau of the Census, respectively, and show that

different data sources have large impact on the answers to research questions. Despite

the widespread use of CDS databases and the high relevance of their accuracy, to the


                                                                                        7
best of our knowledge there exists no study that examines or compares data as well as

databases. Our paper is a first attempt to fill this gap in the literature.


The first papers that compare, at least to some extent, different CDS data sources are

Nashikkar and Subrahmanyam (2007) and Nashikkar, Subrahmanyam, and Mahanti

(2009). However, this comparison is not the main focus of their paper and these authors

do not present a detailed analysis. They simply conduct a test to ensure consistency

between the CMA and GFI CDS spreads series over a short period when there was an

overlap between the two series. They develop this test just to match GFI and CMA

series and create a longer dataset given that they have the two data sources for different

periods. Moreover, they do not report any results of the tests and simply state that they

find consistency.


Mayordomo, Peña and Romo (2009) employ four different data sources (GFI, CMA,

Reuters EOD and JP Morgan) to study the existence of arbitrage opportunities in credit

derivatives markets focusing their attention to the single names CDSs and asset swaps.

Although they find similar results employing any of the four previous data sources at

the aggregate level, some differences appear at the individual reference entity level.

They report their base results using the GFI’s traded CDSs but when they use the other

data sources they do not find exactly the same number of arbitrage opportunities. That

is, for some individual firms they find arbitrage opportunities using GFI but they do not

find them using some of the other data sources. In some other cases they also find the

opposite.


The Mayordomo et al. (2009) study above suggests that the differences in CDS prices

from different databases can have a material influence on research results and therefore

a careful analysis of the publicly accessible databases is called for. In fact, the problem



                                                                                         8
could be potentially even more serious when researchers work with “unique” databases

coming from a single dealer’s quotes (contributor) and without crosschecking. It is

important to emphasize that we use a broad array of CDS data sources where, for most

of them, prices are put together based on information provided by several market traders

and dealers. Using aggregate prices we focus on the market factors or characteristics

that could affect the consistency among quoted prices. Thus, instead of using individual

dealer’s prices we use aggregated (composite/consensus) prices which allow us to have

a more comprehensive perspective on the market.


The only previous paper that employs different CDS prices (trades and quotes) is Arora,

Gandhi and Longstaff (2010). They examine how counterparty credit risk affects the

pricing of CDS contracts using a proprietary data set. Specifically, their data set spans

from March 2008 to January 2009 and includes contemporaneous CDS transaction

prices and quotations provided by 14 large CDS dealers for selling protection on the

same set of underlying reference firms. The authors find that there are differences across

dealers in how counterparty credit risk is priced. That is, counterparty credit risk is not

priced symmetrically across dealers and they consider that these asymmetries could be

due to differences in the microstructure and legal framework of the CDS market. They

argue that dealers may behave strategically in terms of their offers to sell credit

protection.


We use aggregate data, which are formed after grouping the information of the market

traders and dealers instead of individual dealer prices, to study the potential divergence

among the composite CDS spreads. By concentrating on the aggregate prices we focus

on the market factors or characteristics that could affect the consistency among quoted

prices but we do not try to explain the effect of potential differences among the

individual dealers. As Arora, et al. (2010) sustain, the decentralized nature of the CDS


                                                                                         9
markets makes the transaction prices somewhat difficult to observe. This is why most

empirical research analyses based on the CDS markets use price quotes instead of

transaction prices.



Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) argue that the composite prices include quotations

from a variety of credit derivatives dealers and therefore, these quotations should be

representative of the entire credit derivatives market. We complement our analysis using

also GFI transaction prices and Fenics prices (elaborated by GFI) which are based on a

combination of transaction and judgmental prices, the latter computed using the Hull

and White methodology and therefore not dependent on contributors.2



3. Data

The six publicly available data sources that we employ in this paper are GFI, Fenics,

Reuters EOD, CMA, Markit and JP Morgan. As was mentioned above, the first five

databases are analyzed jointly and JP Morgan data is employed additionally as a

robustness test for the European firms given that we do not have JP Morgan data for the

American firms.

    •   GFI, which provides traded CDS spreads, is a major inter-dealer broker (IDB)

        specializing in the trading of credit derivatives. GFI data contain single name

        CDS transaction prices for 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 years maturities. They are not

        consensus or indicative prices.3 Thus, these prices are an accurate indication of

        where the CDS markets traded and closed for a given day. GFI data have been

2
  As explained in Section 3, we also use an additional single sources data (JP Morgan). JP Morgan data
refer to individual dealer’s prices and we use them in the robustness analysis.
3
  Consensus and indicative data are trusted less nowadays given the increased market’s volatility. There
exist differences of up to 100% between consensus prices from leading providers compared to actual
trades on GFI systems. The reason is that consensus process is inherently slow and the prices originate
from back office staff which can be swayed by the positions they already hold in their books, and also
perhaps because they do not have a front office’s market view.


                                                                                                     10
         used by Hull, Predescu, and White (2004), Predescu (2006), Saita (2006),

         Nashikkar and Subrahmanyam (2007), Fulop and Lescourret (2007), or

         Nashikkar, Subrahmanyam, and Mahanti (2009) among others.

    •    Fenics (elaborated by GFI) data are a mixture of traded, quoted and estimated

         CDS spreads. Fenics’ data are credit curves for the whole term structure of

         maturities, generated hourly (all trading days) for more than 1900 reference

         entities. Data points in a given name’s credit curve can be actual trades or mid

         prices calculated from the bid/offer quotes. If there are no market references, the

         Fenics CDS spread is computed using the Hull and White methodology to

         ensure that a credit curve always exists for each reference entity.4 Fenics data

         have been used in Mayordomo et al. (2009) among others5.

    •    Reuters EOD provides CDS composite prices. Reuters takes CDS quotes each

         day from over 30 contributors around the world and offers end of day data for

         single names CDSs. Before computing a daily composite spread, it applies a

         rigorous screening procedure to eliminate outliers or doubtful data. Mayordomo

         et al. (2009), among others, employ CDSs data from Reuters.

    •    Credit Market Analytics (CMA) DataVision reports consensus data (bid, ask and

         mid) sourced from 30 buy-side firms, including major global Investment Banks,

         Hedge Funds, and Asset Managers. Among the papers that employ CMA data

         are Nashikkar and Subrahmanyam (2007) and Nashikkar, Subrahmanyam, and

         Mahanti (2009).

4
  Although Fenics is computed using the approximations mentioned above, it is a reasonably accurate
data source. For instance, the median of the absolute difference in basis points between five years CDS
premiums as defined by Fenics and the actual quotes or transaction prices registered in other databases for
the period between April 2001 and May 2002, is equal to 1.16, 2.01 and 3.82 bps for AAA/AA, A and
BBB ratings for a total of 2,659, 9,585 and 8,170 companies respectively.
5
  GFI is a broker which also reports the Fenics prices. The data reported by GFI are transactions prices or
bid/quotes in which capital is actually committed. This data is only available when there is a trade. When
there is not, GFI constructs the Fenics curve which is available daily with no gaps. To compute the Fenics
curve, GFI uses its own information on transactions or quotes. If for a given day neither prices nor quotes
are available, Fenics data is computed by means of Hull and White’s methodology.


                                                                                                       11
   •   Markit provides composite prices. The Markit Group collects more than a

       million CDS quotes contributed by more than 30 major market participants on a

       daily basis. The quotes are subject to filtering that removes outliers and stale

       observations. Markit then computes a daily composite spread only if it has two

       or more contributors. Once Markit starts pricing a CDS contract, data will be

       available on a continuous basis, although there may be missing observations in

       the data. Markit is one of the most widely employed dataset. Papers that employ

       this dataset include: Acharya and Johnson (2007), Zhang, Zhou and Zhu (2009),

       Jorion and Zhang (2007), Jorian and Zhang (200), Zhu (2006), Micu et al.

       (2004), and Cao, Yu, and Zhong (2010).

   •   Our last database is J.P. Morgan quotes. It contains mid-market data provided by

       J. P. Morgan which is one of the leading players and most active traders in the

       CDS market. The data from J.P. Morgan is employed for a subgroup of

       European firms as part of the robustness tests (data is not available for US

       firms). This dataset is employed in Aunon-Nerin, Cossin, Hricko, and Huang

       (2002), Blanco, Brennan, and Marsh (2005), and Chen, Cheng, and Liu (2008)

       among others.

To summarize, three of the data sources (Reuters EOD, CMA and Markit) employ data

from a variety of contributors (over 30 potential dealers/traders) to report composite

prices. GFI reports traded CDS spreads. Fenics is a mixture of traded, quoted and

calculated CDS spreads all of them based on the same data source and without

depending on contributors. Finally, the last data source is obtained from one of the most

active traders in the CDS market (JP Morgan) and reports mid-quoted prices obtained




                                                                                      12
from their own traders. Thus, the information reported by Reuters EOD, CMA and

Markit could also include the information of JP Morgan’s quoted CDS spreads6.



For our analysis we use US firms included in the CDX index, as well as European firms

included in the iTraxx index. At any point in time, both the CDX and iTraxx indexes

contain 125 names each but the composition of the indexes changes every six months.

We do not use all the single names CDSs in these indexes but concentrate on the most

liquid single names CDSs. As in Christoffersen, Ericsson, Jacobs, and Xisong (2009)

we use only the single name CDSs which constitute the iTraxx and CDX indexes over

the whole sample period which spans from January 2004 to March 2010. We end up

with 47 (43) firms which stay in the iTraxx (CDX) index during the whole sample

period and for which we are able to obtain equity price information7. We guarantee a

minimum consistency between the single name CDS spread obtained from the different

data sources by requiring that all of them have the same maturity (5-year), currency

denomination (Euros for the European and US Dollars for the American CDSs),

seniority (senior CDS spreads), and restructuring clause (Modified-Modified

Restructuring for the European and Modified Restructuring for the American CDSs).




6
  CMA and GFI span from January 1, 2004 to March 29, 2010 for all firms. Markit spans from January 1,
2004 to December 8, 2009 for all firms. Fenics spans from January 1, 2004 to June 3, 2009 for most of
the firms and from January 1, 2004 to March 29, 2010 in the remaining seven firms. Reuters spans from
December 3, 2007 to March 29, 2010. JP Morgan spans from January 1, 2005 to August 13, 2009. For
this reason, in the robustness test in which we add JP Morgan data we limit the length of our sample from
January 1, 2005 to August 13, 2009 to focus in the cases in which we have observations from JP Morgan.
7
  It could be argued that this selection procedure could introduce some survivorship bias in our sample. It
should be noted that the components of the indexes are investment grade CDSs firms which are the most
actively traded names in the six months prior to the index roll. If in a given period a single name CDS is
excluded from the index it is not necessary due to the fact that the firm enters financial distress but simply
because of liquidity reasons. On the other hand if a name is downgraded to non-investment it is, of
course, excluded from the index. Notice however that one should expect that the agreement among
databases on the CDS price for a given name should be higher for the most liquid names. Thus, this
possible survivorship bias will tend to make the prices from different databases more in agreement than
they are in fact. Consequently if we find significant disagreement among prices from different sources,
the empirical evidence is even more compelling.


                                                                                                          13
As we said before, two price time series for the same financial instrument reported by

different data sources should, in principle, be very close. To provide a telling illustration

that this is not necessarily the case for CDS contracts, Figure 1 depicts 5-year CDS

quotes from Reuters, Fenics, Markit and CMA for two European entities (AXA and

Hannover) and for two US entities (Baxter and Dominion Resources). The sample

period is from September 1, 2008 to January 1, 2009. Four notable features emerge

from the figures (which can be deemed as typical behavior for firms over this time

period). First, although the different CDS quotes moved broadly in the same direction,

there are very noticeable divergences in a given day. For instance on October 10, 2008

the following quotes for AXA were reported: CMA 247 b.p., Markit 229 b.p., Fenics

193 b.p. and Reuters 191 b.p., implying a difference around 30% between the highest

and the lowest quote. Similar disagreements can be observed in the other three entities.

Second, the discrepancies among databases appear to be more marked in specific time

periods, probably reflecting market turbulences.        The first week of October 2008

(Dominion, Hannover, AXA) or the first week of December 2009 (Baxter) is a case in

point. Third, no single database provides quotes that are consistently above or below the

quotes from other databases. Fourth, the speed of adjustment to market news is not the

same across databases as the case of Dominion at the end of September 2008 or the case

of Hannover at mid-October 2008 suggest. In both cases, the Fenics quotes reacted to

market events in a different way than the other three databases.


Table 1 shows the main descriptive statistics for the single name CDS of the firms that

we study, for the first five databases: GFI, Fenics, Reuters EOD, CMA, and Markit. We

report statistics on Number of Trades or Quotes, Number of Trades or Quotes per day,

Mean, Standard Deviation, Median, Skewness and Kurtosis of the CDS spreads as well




                                                                                          14
as the coefficient of the AR(1) based on the CDS spreads. In Panel A we report the

names classified by index and sector for both the American and European firms.



Panels B, C, D, E, and F, provide the CDS descriptive statistics for the European single

name CDSs. The information is divided for the periods before and during the financial

crisis to make easier potential comparisons among data sources in these two periods.

Each of the five previous panels corresponds to a different data source. Panel B reports

the CDS traded spreads information obtain from GFI while Panels C, D, E, and F

provide the information obtain from CMA, Markit, Fenics, and Reuters EOD,

respectively. Before the crisis there is price information on trades in 35% of the days

and there is, on average, a considerable degree of agreement among the prices provided

by the different databases. The asymmetry is always positive and there is a high degree

of persistence with first order autocorrelation coefficient near one in all cases. However

there are a few cases where some noteworthy differences can be found.



During the crisis however there is information on transaction prices only in 15% of the

days. The skewness is usually positive but there are some noticeable differences in

persistence: GFI prices are clearly less persistent (0.83) than the quotes from the other

databases. In fact, all the names which trade less than the 10% of the days have first-

order autocorrelation coefficients around 0.6. One important implication of this is that

unit root test based on an AR(1) specification will tend to give different results,

rejecting non-stationarity for GFI data (especially in the cases of low trade frequency

names) but not rejecting it for the other databases. The discrepancies, even in the cases

in which a comparable number of observations across the different data sources are

available, are much more frequent and more remarkable as the cases of PPR, Volvo,



                                                                                       15
Enel and some others suggest. Specifically, in the case of Volvo there is a difference of

33 b. p. between the highest average price (Reuters, 253b.p.) and the lowest (CMA, 220

b.p.). Other discrepancies are found even between the datasets (CMA and Markit) with

more similar quotes, as in the cases of PPR (16 b.p.) and Enel (9 b.p.).


Panels G, H, I, J, and K, provide the CDS descriptive statistics for the American single

name CDSs. As in the European case, the information is divided for the periods before

and during the crisis. Panel G reports the information obtained from GFI while Panels

H, I, J, and K provide the information obtain from CMA, Markit, Fenics, and Reuters

EOD, respectively. Before the crisis there is price information on trades in 15% of the

days and there is, on average, a fair amount of agreement among the prices provided by

the different databases. The skewness is always positive but with a fair degree of

variation from 0.72 for Fenics to 0.06 for GFI. In all cases there is a high degree of

persistence with first order autocorrelation coefficient near one. However, as is the case

with European firms, there are a few names with a relatively similar number of

observations where some salient differences can be found. Before the crisis, Cigna’s

CDS quoted spreads obtained from Fenics are more than 30% higher than CMA and

Markit quotes. On the other hand, General Electric’s CDS spreads obtained from Fenics

are 62% lower than the ones obtained from CMA and Markit.



Transaction prices are only available in 2% of the days during the crisis, and the

discrepancies are both more frequent and more remarkable. For instance in the case of

American International Group there is a difference of 111 b.p. between the Reuters

quote (825 b.p.) and the CMA quote (714 b.p.) and 80 b.p. between the Reuters quote

(815 b.p.) and the Markit quote (745 b.p.). Other notable disagreements between the

highest and the lowest prices in names with a relatively similar number of observations


                                                                                       16
across the different data sources are found for Comcast (the average difference between

Markit and Reuters CDS spreads is 61 b.p.), General Electric (the average difference

between CMA and Reuters is 34 b.p.), and XL Capital (the average difference between

CMA and Reuters is 57 b.p. and between CMA and Markit 34 b.p.), among others. The

GFI transaction data is less persistent than the quoted prices from the other databases.

Therefore, the implications for unit root test also apply to US entities. In summary, the

preliminary analysis suggests that the crisis has had a strong effect on the degree of

disagreement of the different databases in several individual reference entities, and

especially so for US names



As the actual sample size of the different data sources differ (because of missing values

and slightly different periods covered), we report aggregated summary statistics for all

observations in Panel L, in Panel M for the cases in which we have common

observations (trades and quotes) in all the data sources, and in Panel N for the cases in

which there is no trade but there are quotes in all the data sources. The implications one

may gather from these panels are relevant for assessing the degree of databases’ overall

agreement in the common average trend. As expected, for European firms before the

crisis the common trend is readily apparent in the prices provided by the different

databases in the three panels. During the crisis, there are some discrepancies in the

average values and in the volatilities in Panel L. In Panels M and N there are few

discrepancies but it is interesting to remark that averages and volatilities are lower in

Panel M than in Panel N suggesting that average quotes tend to be higher and more

volatile in the days where there are no transaction prices available.


For US firms before the crisis the common trend is also readily apparent. However

during the crisis, there are many quite remarkable discrepancies in the average values



                                                                                       17
and in the volatilities in Panel L. In Panels M and N there are also discrepancies but it is

worth noting that, as it was also the case with the European firms, averages and

volatilities are lower in Panel M than in Panel N reinforcing the above suggestion that

average quotes tend to be higher and more volatile in the days where there are no

transaction prices available.


We should emphasize that the total aggregate descriptive statistics across all the firms,

which are reported in Panels L, M and N, do not provide information about potential

discrepancies at the individual reference entity level or in a given date. That is, although

the total averages are in most cases fairly close, there could be some noteworthy

discrepancies both at the entity (as the preliminary analysis above suggest) and also at

the cross-sectional level that cannot be captured by these statistics.



To clarify this point, we first compute the absolute value of the average difference

across pairs of data sources8 (CMA - Markit, CMA - Fenics, CMA - Reuters, Markit -

Fenics, Markit - Reuters, Fenics – Reuters) and then divide it by the average CDS

spread across the four previous data sources (CMA, Markit, Fenics, and Reuters) for

each firm every day. Then, we calculate the average of the previous series every day

across the total number of firms. This is the Data Sources’ Average Absolute

Discrepancies (AAD) time series. The AAD time series is shown in Figure 2 for days

with trades (Trade) and for days without trades (No Trade). The average value of Trade

is 0.031 and its volatility is 0.021. The average value of No Trade is 0.053 and its

volatility is 0.017. The two sample unpooled t-test with unequal variances has a t-

statistic of 33.68 under the null of equal means, suggesting that on average the days

without trade information have higher quote dispersion. The AAD series show a very

8
    GFI data is not used due to the scarcity of transaction prices during the crisis.


                                                                                         18
dynamic behaviour, with some noticeably turbulent episodes, for instance in 2005 given

the impact of the crisis experienced by General Motors (GM) and Ford in May 2005 on

the credit default swap (CDS) market. Both firms’ CDS premia increased sharply just

before the downgrading of their credit ratings in May 2005. All other CDS premia also

rose markedly during this period for US and European firms. The more salient episodes

in the AAD series are in September 2008 in the days surrounding the Lehman Brothers

collapse when the AAD took its highest value to date (10%). In summary the data

suggest that discrepancies from the common trend among databases are persistent and

related with market-wide significant episodes. We address the modelling of these

discrepancies in Section 4.



Additionally, in Panels O and P of Table 1 we report the unit root test for all CDS

names in our sample, computed using the quotes time series whenever we have quotes

in the four data sources (CMA, Markit, Fenics, and Reuters EOD) at the same time.9



Table 2 reports summary statistics for the distribution of the quoted and the traded CDS

spreads referencing the firms in Table 1. Panel A provides the distribution of the

number of quoted spreads on a given day for a single name CDS through the four data

sources (CMA, Markit, Reuters and Fenics). Panel B reports the distribution of the

range of the mean absolute difference, in basis points, among all the possible pairs of

quoted spreads from the previous data sources on a given day for a single CDS. Panel C

provides the distribution of the range of the mean absolute difference, in basis points,

between all the possible pairs formed by the GFI traded CDS spread and one of the


9
  We do not report the unit root test for GFI given the low number of observations available, which limits
the comparison among the quoted CDS spreads which include more observations than the traded ones,
and also due the consequent test’s low power, see Shiller and Perron (1985). Actually, in the US sample
we cannot test the existence of a unit root due to lack of trades.


                                                                                                      19
different quoted CDS spreads. In almost 80% of the cases we observe the CDS spread

on a given firm at least in three different data sources. The mean absolute difference

among the different data sources is higher than one basis point in 55.3% of the cases

and it is higher than five basis points in 13.3% of the cases. The mean absolute

difference among the traded CDS spread on one hand and the quoted CDS on the other

hand (Panel C of Table 2) is slightly higher than the mean differences observed in Panel

B of Table 2. Actually the mean difference is smaller than one basis point in 40.9% of

the cases.




4. Research Hypotheses and Methodology

The main analysis of the data is based on two testable hypotheses. These hypotheses

and the methodology employed to perform the empirical tests are detailed in this

section.


Hypothesis 1: The volatility of the deviations from the common trend of the quoted

prices provided by the different CDS data sources is not related to systematic factors.


In other words, large deviations (in absolute value) from the common trend appear

randomly among databases and are unrelated with risk and liquidity factors (global or

idiosyncratic). The test of Hypothesis 1 is based on a regression in which the dependent

variable is the logarithm of the standard deviation of the 5-year quoted CDS spreads

reported by the different data sources which is denoted by log(sd(CDS))i,t This variable

is computed with the j available CDS quoted spreads (j = 1,..,4 where 1= CMA, 2 =

Markit, 3 = Reuters and 4 = Fenics) for a given underlying firm i (i = 1,..,90) on every
                                                         n                    n
date t as follows: log( sd (CDS )) i ,t = log((1 / n∑ [CDS j ,i ,t − (1 / n ∑ CDS j ,i ,t )] 2 ) 0.5 ) where
                                                    j =1                    j =1
                                                                                                      ,




                                                                                                        20
n is the number of data sources from which we observe CDS spreads, with the

maximum n equal four whenever CMA, Markit, Reuters and Fenics report the CDS

spreads for firm i at time t.


By defining the dependent variable in this way10 we get rid of the common trend (the

average) and concentrate on the deviations from the common trend. The regression

equation is as follows:

                           log(sd (CDS))i ,t = α + β ′X k ,i ,t + ui ,t    (1)

where the vector X k ,i ,t includes k explanatory variables: the logarithm of the firm

market capitalization, a trade dummy, the number of days without a trade, the

interaction of the number of days without a trade one day ago and the trade dummy , the

CDS bid-ask spread, the VIX Index and a number of databases dummy.11 The vector

β ′ includes the regression coefficients corresponding to these k variables while the

parameter α is the intercept of the regression. The residual term is denoted by ui,t . The

trade dummy is equal to one if there is a trade in the GFI platform at the current date in

the 5-year maturity contract, and zero otherwise. 12 The number of days without a trade

variable measures the number of days without a trade up to the current date. The

interaction variable is constructed as the interaction between the number of days without

a transaction up to one day ago and the trade dummy. The last variable intends to give

an indication about how many data points were used to compute the dependent variable

and is a dummy which equals one when all, or all minus one, of the data sources report

10
   We take logs to induce the data to meet the assumptions of the regression method that is to be applied;
because the distribution of the standard deviation variable is strongly right skewed (the skewness of the
original series is 25.10 while the skewness of the log series is 0.21).
11
   Hausman’s test rejects the random effects specification in favor of a fixed-effects specification,
with a p-value of 0.05.
12
   We are considering trades for the 5-year maturity contract only given that the number of trades in the
other maturity contracts is very low. The total number of trades according to GFI information during the
sample period and for the firms that we consider is 26,126 while the number of trades which occurred in
the other maturities (1 and 3 years contracts) is 1,100 confirming that the most liquid contract is the 5-
year CDS contract.


                                                                                                      21
a price.13 If the null hypothesis is true no significant coefficients should be found in

equation (1) because differences in price dispersion between databases should be purely

random.




Hypothesis 2: The different data sources reflect credit risk information equally

efficiently or, equivalently, all databases contribute equally to the price discovery

process. Given that transaction prices are very scarce for some firms, only quoted prices

are employed and therefore the comparison is among CMA, Markit, Fenics and Reuters.


To test Hypothesis 2 we employ the Gonzalo and Granger’s (1995) model which is

based on the following Vector Error Correction Model (VECM) specification and it is

used to study the effectiveness of the different data sources in terms of price discovery:
                                                     p
                                ΔX t = αβ ′X t −1 + ∑ Γi ΔX t −i + ut               (3)
                                                    i =1


where equation (3) is formed by a vector autoregressive (VAR) system formed by two

equations defined from the vector Xt which includes a pair of CDS quotes or prices of

the same underlying firm from two different databases and an error correction term

which is defined by the product β ′X t −1 where β’ = (1− β2 − β3 ) are estimated in an

auxiliary cointegration regression. The series for the pair of CDS prices included in X t −1

must be cointegrated to develop this analysis and the cointegrating relation is defined by

β ′X t −1 = ( CDS SOURCE   A ,t −1   − β 2 − β 3CDS SOURCE   B ,t −1   ) which can be interpreted as the long-

run equilibrium. The parameter vector α’ =(α1 , α2 ) contains the error correction

coefficients measuring each price’s expected speed in eliminating the price difference

and it is the base of the price discovery metrics. The parameter vector Γi for i= 1,..p,

13
 We do not employ values from zero to four given that we only have observations on Reuters EOD after
December 2007 which is very close to the beginning of the crisis and may reflect something different to
what we want to study in this paper.


                                                                                                           22
with p indicating the total number of lags, contains the coefficients of the VAR system

measuring the effect of the lagged first difference in the pair of CDS quotes on the first

different of such quotes at time t.14             Finally, ut denotes a white noise vector. The

percentages of price discovery of the CDS quote i (where i =1, 2) can be defined from

the following metrics GGi, i=1,2 which are based on the elements of the vector α’:

                                 α2                         − α1
                      GG1 =              ;       GG 2 =                           ( 4)
                              − α1 + α 2                  − α1 + α 2



The vector α’ contains the coefficients that determine each market’s contribution to

price discovery. Thus, given that GG1+GG2=1 we conclude that market 1 leads the

process of price discovery with respect to market 2 whenever market 1 price discovery

metric GG1 is higher than 0.5. If the null hypothesis is true (no dominant market) the

percentage of price discovery will be the same for the names from all databases and

equal to 0.5. We estimate the price discovery metric for each firm using pairs of CDS

spreads and then test whether the average price discovery metric is significantly higher

than 0.5 using the mean t-statistic: Mean t − stat =                   ( Mean ( PDMetrics ) − 0 .5)   ,
                                                                  Std . Dev ( PDMetrics ) / # metrics

where # metrics denotes the number of firms for which it is estimated the price

discovery metric from a given pair of CDS spreads.



5. Empirical Results

5.1 Regression Results: Hypothesis 1

Table 3 reports the average time-series correlations among dependent and explanatory

variables in equation (1). The variables with a highest correlation with the dependent

variable are the CDS bid-ask spread (0.414) and the VIX Index (0.456). The highest

14
     The optimal number of lags is determined by means of the Schwarz information criteria.


                                                                                                    23
correlation among explanatory variables is also the one between the CDS bid-ask spread

and the VIX Index (0.480). Our main objective, however, is to examine the joint effect

of these explanatory variables on the dispersion among the CDS spreads obtained from

the different data sources.



Table 4 shows the regression results obtained from fitting equation (1) to data from the

five databases. Column 1 reports the results for the whole sample whereas Column 2

reports the results for European firms and Column 3 for US firms. Negative and

significant coefficients for the explanatory variable measuring size (log (market cap))

are found suggesting that the CDS prices for large firms tend to be more in agreement

among databases than the prices for small firms. Or in other words, the volatility of the

deviations from the common trend is lower for large firms. This effect is also noticeably

stronger for US firms. The coefficients for the explanatory dummy variable “trade” are

negative and significant suggesting that when there are transaction prices available for a

given day, the quotes from different contributors tend to agree more closely. This is in

agreement with the results on basic statistical properties summarized in the Section 5.1

above. Consequently, the positive (but only significant for US firms) effect found for

the variable days w/o trade implies that the longer the period without transaction price

information, the greater the disagreement among quotes because, the weaker is the

referential value of the previous price. The interaction between the trade dummy and

the number of days without a trade one day ago has a negative sign (but non-significant

for European firms) indicating that the effect of the trade is more influential when the

number of days without price trade information is larger.15




15
   One possible explanation is that traders will pay more attention to the new information reported by GFI
when there has been no recorded trading activity for some time.


                                                                                                       24
Regarding the liquidity variable, the bid-ask spread, has, as expected, positive and

significant coefficients implying that the more illiquid is the market, the more difficult

is to infer appropriate prices and the higher are the deviations from the common trend

among the different data sources. The effect of the VIX index is positive and significant.

The higher the global risk, the higher the dispersion from the common trend among

individual CDS spreads. 16, 17


The dummy variable Max Quotes is equal to one when at least three data sources report

a price and zero otherwise. The intuition is that the higher the number of quotes

employed to calculate the cross-sectional standard deviation, the higher should this

standard deviation be. This variable is significant and has a positive sign as expected.



To summarize, the empirical evidence strongly rejects Hypothesis 1. The volatility of

the deviations from the common trend of the quoted prices provided by the different

CDS data sources is not random but related to systematic factors. In other words, large

deviations (in absolute value) from the common trend among databases do not appear

randomly but are significantly related with risk and liquidity factors. The economic

implication of this result is that, in specific market circumstances, the deviations of the

prices from the common trend will tend to grow on average. Some prices will be closer

to the trend and some prices will be far away from it but the average distance between

them will increase, making the prices less homogeneous and making it more difficult

for agents to asses the CDS fair value and for researcher using the data to decide what

database gives the market prices’ most reliable account. Also, model (1) does a pretty

16
   These variables should not cause any collinearity problem given that the correlation is 0.480. However,
we further investigate this aspect and others regarding potential endogeneity problems derived from the
use of the VIX and CDS liquidity variables in the robustness test section.
17
   Our results do not change materially when we proxy the global risk measure by means of the VDAX
Index, the difference between LIBOR and Treasury Bill, the CDS indexes (iTraxx and CDX) or the
square of the MSCI Index returns instead of the VIX index.


                                                                                                      25
good job in explaining the dispersion among prices for the overall sample as measured

by the R2 (48%), and also for the European (37%) and US (46%) samples.18


As the bulk of the CDS spreads that we employ in our analysis are based on the

information revealed by the traders or dealers, it is possible that the degree of

divergence among the different data sources may be influenced by the number of

contributors which are reporting quoted or traded CDS spreads. In an extreme case in

which all the composite prices are constructed using the same group of contributors, the

prices should be very similar and the volatility of the deviations from the common trend

should be close to zero. The problem is that we do not have access to the identity of the

contributors that are reporting prices to the different data sources. However, we have

access to the number of contributors that are reporting prices to Markit for the 5-year

CDS spread. The different data sources may have different contributors but there should

be some common group of contributors which presumably are the most influential

traders and for that reason the most active agents in terms of contributed prices.

Moreover, there could be other contributors whose participation is less significant in the

sense that they report prices less frequently, or they could report prices to a few data

sources but not to the others. This could imply that when the number of contributors is

small the prices might be provided by the most influential and active traders which, on

the other hand, could be common to all the data sources. Therefore, we conjecture that

the lower the number of contributors, the higher should be the importance of the

common contributors and the lower the divergence from the common trend among the

different data sources. To test this conjecture we include the variable “number of

18
   We also performed separate analysis before and during the crisis. We find that the explanatory
variables referred to the trades are not significant before the crisis but they are significant and with the
same signs as reported in Table 4 for the crisis period. We also considered the use of a crisis dummy but
since the liquidity is much lower during the crisis and the number of trades in US is much lower during
that period the use of the crisis dummy may cloud the effect of some of the potential explanatory
variables that we use. Moreover, we use the VIX as a potential proxy for times of financial distress


                                                                                                        26
contributors” as an additional explanatory variable in equation (1) and run the

corresponding regression. The results are shown in Column (2) of Table 5; Column (1)

repeats the benchmark results from Table 4 for comparison purposes. The coefficient on

the number of contributors is positive and significant which is consistent with our

conjecture on the effect of the number of contributors. The coefficients for the

remaining variables do not change materially in sign or in magnitude with respect to the

ones obtained in the baseline regression (Column (1) of Table 5).


To test if these results are affected by possible collinearity due to the relatively high

correlation between both the CDS bid-ask spread and the VIX Index with the number of

contributors (-0.212 and -0.361, respectively) we repeat the previous regression but

using as explanatory variable the residual of the regression of the number of

contributors onto the VIX Index and the CDS bid-ask spread. The residual proxies the

number of contributors net of the global risk and the illiquidity effect in the CDS

market. These results are shown in Column (3) of Table 5.19 The results are almost

identical to the ones observed in Column (2) and consistent with our conjecture on the

effect of the most relevant contributors, and also that collinearity between the three

previous variables is not a serious issue in our case.


It should be mentioned that transactions are not necessarily made through the GFI

platform, but they could occur in any other platform. The advantage of GFI data is not

that it includes all the CDS contracts traded but that it is a transparent source in which

the market participants can observe real transaction prices and not just quotes. Although

there is no available data for all the transaction prices since the beginning of our whole

sample, we can employ an additional information source for a shorter time period;


19
   In order to estimate the coefficients presented in Column (3) of Table 5 we use the bootstrap
methodology to correct any potential bias in the standard errors due to the use of a generated regressor.


                                                                                                      27
namely, a “trade information warehouse” that captures the majority of information on

CDS trades covering corporate and sovereign borrowers. This warehouse is established

by the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation (DTCC) which keeps a record of

outstanding CDSs involving major dealers as counterparties. According to the DTCC

calculations around 90-95% of the CDS trades are settled and confirmed through them.

The DTCC does not provide all the trade details, which are private information, but it

reports weekly data on the gross and net exposures and the number of CDS outstanding

contracts on 1,000 corporate and sovereign borrowers. We have this weekly information

for the 90 firms that constitute our sample from the 7th of November, 2008 to the last

sample date (the 29th of March, 2010).


To test for the importance of trades in the deviations of the CDS prices, we substitute

the trading controls employed in equation (1) by a weekly variable which reports the

total number of outstanding CDS contracts traded on a given reference firm. This allows

us to control for both the cumulative information on a given firm attending to the total

number of contracts and the trend in trading activity. The hypothesis to test is if a higher

number of CDS contacts traded on a given reference firm lowers the volatility of the

deviations from the common trend across data sources. We find that the total number of

CDS contracts traded on a reference firm has a significant and negative effect on the

dispersion between data sources while the sings and levels of significance of the other

variables remain unchanged with respect to the ones observed in the baseline regression

results (Column (1) of Table 4). The implication of this is that the higher the market

activity, the lower is the volatility of the deviations from the common trend of the

quoted prices provided by the different CDS data sources. This fact is obviously at odds

with Hypothesis 1 being true.        Additionally, given that we are employing daily

information but this variable is constructed on a weekly frequency, we lagged the



                                                                                         28
variable one week and obtain a significant negative coefficient on that variable while

the signs and the significance of the other variables remain unchanged. We also use the

number of weekly traded contracts, lagged one week, instead of the total number of

outstanding traded contracts and obtain similar results.20



5.3 Regression Results: Hypothesis 2

Table 6 reports the results of testing Hypothesis 2 on price discovery analysis using

quoted prices (transaction prices are too scarce to be included in the analysis). A

statistical significance test for the null hypothesis that the estimated price discovery

proportions GGi are equal to 0.5, is also included. The test rejects the null in all cases

with the exception of CMA vs Markit in Europe and Fenics vs Reuters also in Europe.

Therefore in these two cases both databases contribute equally to the price discovery

process. However, in all other cases the results indicate that there is a leader database

and a follower database. CMA is the data source that contributes to a higher extent to

the “formation of prices” with newer and more influential information, especially for

the total sample and for the US sample, followed by Markit. As mentioned above, for

European firms CMA and Markit are almost equally informative in terms of price

discovery. The less informative database in this realm seems to be Fenics. The results

strongly reject the hypothesis that the price discovery process is evenly spread among

data bases, and therefore Hypothesis 2 is not supported by the data.




6. Robustness Tests and Extensions

In this section, we report the results of several checks of the test of Hypothesis 1

presented in Table 4. First, we deal with potential problems of endogeneity and
20
     Detailed results are available upon request.


                                                                                       29
multicollinearity. Second, we repeat the previous analysis for a sub sample of European

firms and adding a new data source: JP Morgan. Third, we consider alternative

econometric techniques: pooled regressions and Prais-Winsten regressions after filling

the missing observations. Finally, we analyze the sensitivity of the results to different

data transformations: (i) using as the dependent variable the ratio between the logarithm

of the standard deviation of the CDS quotes and the logarithm of mean CDS spread; (ii)

excluding first the Reuters EOD quotes and second the Fenics quotes; (iii) limiting the

sample period up to December 2009, June 2009 and December 2007;21 (iv) using single

source datasets constructed without aggregating data (Fenics/GFI and JPMorgan); and

(v) grouping the firms by sector.22




6.1. Multicollinearity and Endogeneity Tests

In order to deal with potential problems of multicollinearity and endogeneity derived

from the use of both the VIX and CDS bid-ask variables, we run a series of panel

regressions based on different variations of the baseline regression (1) whose results are

reported in Table 4. First, we run an identical panel regression but omitting the VIX

Index, the CDS bid-ask spread and both. The results, not presented to save space, are

qualitatively very similar to those in Column (1) of Table 4 confirming the significance

of the other explanatory variables and suggesting that endogeneity and collinearity are

not a serious issue in our case. As expected, the explanatory power of the panel

regressions is lower given that we are omitting two powerful explanatory variables: the

VIX Index and the CDS bid-ask spread.

21
   These alternative sampling periods are used to test whether the results may contain some bias due to the
lack of observations in some data sources or due to the effect of the different rules for dealing with the
collateral in the CDS contracts. We limit the sample up to December 2009 and June 2009 because the
data obtained from Fenics and Markit are available up to such periods, respectively. We limit the sample
up to December 2007 to take into account potential differences in terms of the standard underlying
collateral which is used for the different data sources.
22
   All the results of this section are available upon request.


                                                                                                       30
As an additional test for potential endogeneity between the standard deviation between

the different data sources and the VIX and CDS bid-ask spread variables, we run a

regression in which we use a one period (day) lag in both variables. This is a standard

procedure to deal with potential endogeneity and we find similar results to the ones

reported in Column (1) of Table 4.


Finally, to test whether the results are biased by collinearity reasons due to the high

correlation between the bid-ask spread and the VIX we run regression (1) but instead of

the VIX Index using as explanatory variable the residual of the regression of the VIX

Index onto the bid-ask spread. The residual proxies the VIX net of the illiquidity effect

in the CDS market. We also run the regression but instead of the CDS bid-ask spread

using as explanatory variable the residual of the regression of the CDS bid-ask spread

onto the VIX Index. The residual proxies the illiquidity in the CDS market net of the

global risk effect. These results are reported in Columns (2) and (3) of Table 7 and they

are almost identical to those in Table 4, which are also reported in Column (1) of Table

7 for comparison. In order to estimate the coefficients presented in Columns (2) and (3)

of Table 7 we use the bootstrap methodology to correct any potential bias in the

standard errors due to the use of generated regressors. The results suggest that

collinearity between the two previous variables is not a serious issue in our case.


6.2. Adding a new data source

Our previous analysis is based on five different data sources (GFI, Fenics, CMA, Markit

and Reuters EOD). We did not employ the data from J.P. Morgan because data for US

firms was not available. However, for the sake of robustness we repeat the previous

analysis for the sub sample of European firms adding a new data source: JP Morgan.

These data was employed by Mayordomo et al. (2009) in the analysis of arbitrage



                                                                                      31
opportunities in the credit derivatives markets. This new analysis is developed attending

to the sample length of JP Morgan, that is, we use observations from January 1, 2005 to

August 13, 2009 for the different data sources.



First we run regression (1) but including the data for JP Morgan and find similar results

to those in Column (2) of Table 4 for the European firms. If we also include variable for

the number of contributors, its effect on the dependent variable is also positive. The

lower the number of contributors, the lower is the discrepancy among the different data

sources. We also find that collinearity and endogeneity are not a serious issue in our

case.


Finally, we repeat the price discovery analysis for the six data sources and find that the

CMA database leads the price discovery process with respect all other databases,

including JP Morgan. The second more efficient data source is Markit which reflects

credit risk more efficiently than JP Morgan, Fenics and Reuters EOD. The latter are all

equally efficient.



6.3. Using other econometric methodologies


As a robustness test we repeat the previous analysis using alternative econometric

techniques: pooled OLS regressions and Prais-Winsten regressions after filling the

missing observations. We compare the results against the ones in Table 4 and show the

robustness test results in Table 8.


To test whether the assumption of firm fixed effects affect significantly the results, we

pool all the data and run a pooled OLS regression. As can be seen in Column (2) of

Table 8 the effects of all the potential determinants of the CDS quotes’ divergence are



                                                                                       32
similar to those presented in Table 4 and repeated in Column (1) of Table 8 for

comparison, with the exception of the coefficient of the interaction term which now

turns positive.23 Therefore, the assumption of firm fixed effects does not have a major

effect on the results.


Our data form an unbalanced panel and so, we also run a Prais-Winsten regression with

correlated panels, corrected standard errors (PCSEs) and robust to heteroskedasticity,

contemporaneous correlation across panels and serial autocorrelation within panels. The

correlation within panels is treated as a first-order autocorrelation AR(1) and the

coefficient of this process common to all the panels.24,25 The results are reported in

Column (3) of Table 8. The only difference with respect to the baseline results (Column

(1) of Table 8) is that the interaction variable is not significant.


6.4. Testing the robustness of the results to data transformations


The dependent variable that we employ in the previous analysis is defined in logs in

order to limit the effect of potential outliers which could appear in the quoted spreads

due to any mistake in the contributed prices. By using the logs we also limit potential

problems derived from a skewed distribution given that the value of the mean is almost

four times the value of the median. We repeat regression (1) using as the dependent

variable the ratio between the logarithm of the standard deviation among the CDS




23
   Note that the correlation between the dependent variable and the interaction term is very low (-0.005).
24
   Each element in the covariance matrix of the disturbances is computed with all available observations
that are common to the two panels contributing to the covariance.
25
   The panel is unbalanced because we do not have information on some variables from the beginning of
the sample. However, there are no missing values once we include the first realization of the series. There
were some missing observations in the VIX Index across the 90 firms due to the US holidays (i. e.: third
Monday in January and February, Last Monday in May, July 4, First Monday of September, Fourth
Thursday in November, etc.). However, we exclude these days from our analysis. There were some
missing values in the market capitalization variable which are related with holidays in the corresponding
country. Nevertheless, due to the low variability in this variable, we substitute the missing data with the
first previous day’s data available.


                                                                                                       33
quotes and the logarithm of mean across the CDS quotes. The results are almost

identical to the ones reported in Table 4.


The data obtained from Reuters EOD are available from December 2007 whereas the

remaining data sources have information starting from January 2004. To avoid any

potential bias due to the different length of the sample period covered by the different

data sources we repeat the previous analysis without including the Reuters EOD quotes.

We do not report these results to save space but they are almost identical to the ones

reported in Table 4.


The data obtained from Fenics and Markit are available up to June 2009 and December

2009, respectively. To test if the results are biased by the lack of date in a given data

source after a given date, we estimate equation (1) using data first up to June 2009, and

after up to December 2009. The sign and magnitude of the coefficients are very similar

to the ones reported in the first column of Table 4 and are available upon request.


All the data sources but Fenics are based on the traders or dealers prices. As was

mentioned in Section 3, Fenics data can be actual trades or mid prices calculated from

the bid/offer quotes. If none of these are available, GFI, which is the responsible of the

Fenics quotes, calculates the CDS spread using the Hull and White methodology to

ensure a credit curve always exists for each reference entity. Thus, we repeat regression

(1) using as the dependent variable the logarithm of the standard deviation among the

CMA, Markit, Reuters EOD and JPMorgan quotes (excluding Fenics) on the

corresponding explanatory variables.26 Results are consistent with the ones obtained

when we include Fenics in our analysis.


26
  We restrict our analysis to the European subsample in which we have information on JPM given that
the use of the whole sample imply that the standard deviations across quotes calculated in the period
before the crisis is obtained with just two contributors (CMA and Markit).


                                                                                                  34
Since the beginning of the financial crisis counterparty risk in the CDS contracts has

been partially mitigated through the use of collateralization. Actually, full

collateralization of CDS liabilities has become the market standard. The ISDA Margin

Survey 2009 reports that 74 percent of CDS contracts executed during 2008 were

subject to collateral agreements. In order to limit any potential difference in the use of

this collateral by the CDS data source we repeat the same analysis using a sub sample

which spans up to December 2007 given that the use of the collateral was more limited

before 2008. The results do not materially differ from the ones reported in the first

column of Table 4. The only significant difference is that the coefficient of interaction

of the number of days without a trade one day ago and the trade dummy, although with

a positive sign is not significant now (p-value = 0.23).



One problem of using composite and consensus prices is that we do not know the

contributors who “contribute” to form these prices or how these prices are obtained. We

only observe the final price which is obtained by averaging different dealers quoted and

traded prices. However, for a sample of European firms we observe JPM quoted and

traded prices and Fenics constructed, quoted and traded (by means of GFI) prices

although in any of the two cases we cannot distinguish between traded and

quoted/constructed spreads. Both JPM and Fenics CDS spreads are obtained from single

sources and not by aggregating data. As an additional robustness analysis, we test if the

previous results are maintained when we compare prices obtained from two single (not

composite) sources: the most active inter-dealer broker (GFI/Fenics) and the most active

broker (JP Morgan). We focus our analysis on the results reported in Table 4 and

regress the difference between the 5-year JPM and Fenics CDS spreads both in absolute

and relative terms on the same explanatory variables that are employed in equation (1).



                                                                                       35
The difference between JPM and Fenics CDS spread in relative terms is obtained as the

absolute difference between both data sources divided by the mean between JPM and

Fenics spreads. Since there is a high correlation between the CDS bid-ask spread and

the VIX Index (0.714) for the cases in which we have observations on both JPM and

Fenics we include only one of these variable in the regression. Results are shown in

Table 9. Even when we compare data sources which are formed individually without

attending to a conglomerate of traders, the differences persist and can be explained by

the same variables as the baseline case in Table 4, independently of whether the

difference between the two quotes are reported in absolute (Columns (1) and (2)) or

relative terms (Columns (3) and (4)).




7. Conclusions

We study the consistency of the six most widely used CDS data bases: GFI, Fenics,

Reuters EOD, CMA, Markit and JP Morgan, for the period from 2004 to 2010 using the

most liquid single name 5-year CDS of the components of the leading market indexes,

iTraxx (European firms) and CDX (US firms). We find that there are significant

differences among them in several dimensions.



Our main empirical findings are:



   1) When timely information on traded prices is available, the different price

       sources largely agree among them in aggregate terms. However as the

       information on transaction prices become scarcer, prices from different sources

       tend to diverge from the common trend. The most extreme disagreements are in




                                                                                    36
       the case of American reference entities during the crisis, where very few

       transaction prices are available in the GFI database.



   2) Deviations (in absolute value) from the common trend among the different CDS

       quoted spreads are not purely random but related to idiosyncratic factors like

       firm size and also to liquidity, global risk and trading factors. Prices tend to

       diverge more from the common trend in the case of for smaller firms. Increases

       in market illiquidity, idiosyncratic stock market volatility and global volatility

       increase the divergence from the common trend among prices coming from

       different data bases.



   3) CMA quoted CDS spreads led the credit risk price discovery process with

       respect to the quotes provided by the other databases.



Extensive robustness tests support these results. Since our analysis is based on the most

liquid CDS prices, we would expect that the differences we find for these prices in the

different databases would be even larger for less liquid CDSs not included in our study.



Our analysis has important implications for research studies and industry participants.

First, for US names with low trade frequency, no reliable information exists because

there are almost no recorded trade prices in the GFI platform. Second, in studies of price

discovery of the CDS market with respect other markets and given that there is a data

source (CMA) leading the others, empirical results may change depending on the

database employed. Third, the smaller the firm, the higher volatility of the deviations

from the common trend of the quoted prices provided by the different CDS data sources

and therefore the less reliable and comparable research results might be. Fourth, in


                                                                                       37
times of high illiquidity or increased stock market volatility CDS prices from different

databases will tend to substantially diverge from the common trend making it more

difficult for agents to disentangle the CDS fair value from the different prices they

receive from the databases and for researcher using the data to decide what database

gives the market prices’ most reliable account.


Looking forward, the analysis of how the discrepancy among the different CDS

contributors may affect the relation between the CDS and corporate Bond spreads is a

topic worth studying. Also the consequences of using different CDS sources on testing

the degree of informational efficiency of the different markets where credit risk is

traded is also an interesting avenue for future research.


References

Acharya, V. and Johnson, T. (2007), “Insider Trading in Credit Derivatives”. Journal of
Financial Economics 84, 110-141.

Arora, N., Gandhi, P., and Longstaff, F. (2009), “Counterparty Credit Risk and the
Credit Default Swap Market”. Working Paper, UCLA.

Aunon-Nerin, D., Cossin, D., Hricko, T. and Huang, Z. (2002), “Exploring for the
Determinants of Credit Risk in Credit Default Swap Transaction Data: Is Fixed-Income
Markets' Information Sufficient to Evaluate Credit Risk?”. Working paper, HEC-
University of Lausanne and FAME.

Bennin, R. (1980) “Error rates in CRSP and Compustat: a second look”. Journal of
Finance, 35, 1267-1271.

Blanco, R., Brennan, S. and Marsh, I. W. (2005), “An Empirical Analysis of the
Dynamic Relationship between Investment Grade Bonds and Credit Default Swaps”.
Journal of Finance 60, 2255-2281.

Cao, C., Yu, F., and Zhong, Z. (2010), “The information content of option-implied
volatility for credit default swap valuation”. Journal of Financial Markets,
Forthcoming.

Chen, L., Lesmond, D.A. and Wei, J. (2007), “Corporate Yield Spreads and Bond
Liquidity”. Journal of Finance 62, 119-149.




                                                                                     38
Chen, R.-R., Cheng, X., Liu, B. (2008), “Estimation and evaluation of the term structure
of credit default swaps: An empirical study”. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics,
43, 339-349.

Christoffersen, P. F., Ericsson, J., Jacobs, K., and Xisong, J. (2009), “Exploring
Dynamic Default Dependence”. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1400427.

Collin-Dufresne, P., Goldstein, R. and Martin, S. (2001), “The Determinants of Credit
Spread Changes”. Journal of Finance, 56, 2177-2207.

Delianedis, G. and Geske, R. (2001), “The Components of Corporate Credit Spreads:
Default, Recovery, Tax, Jumps, Liquidity, and Market Factors”. University of
California, Working Paper.

Elton, E., Gruber, D., Agrawal, D. and Mann, C. (2001), “Explaining the Rate Spread
on Corporate Bonds”. Journal of Finance, 56, 247-277.

Fulop, A. and Lescourret, L. (2007), “An Analysis of Intra-Daily Patterns on the CDS
Market”. Working Paper, ESSEC Business School.

Gonzalo, J. and Granger, C.W.J. (1995), “Estimation of Common Long-Memory
Components in Cointegrated Systems”. Journal of Business and Economics Statistics
13, 27-35.


Hull, J., Predescu, M. and White, A. (2004), “The Relationship between Credit Default
Swap Spreads, Bond Yields, and Credit Rating Announcements”. Journal of Banking
and Finance 28, 2789-2811.

Jorion, P., and Zhang, G. (2007), “Good and bad credit contagion: Evidence from credit
default swaps”. Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 84, Issue 3, June 2007, Pages
860-883.

Jorion, P., and Zhang, G. (2009), “Credit Contagion from Counterparty Risk”. Journal
of Finance, Volume 64, Number 5, pp. 2053-2087(35).

Leland , H. (2009), “Structural Models and the Credit Crisis”. Presented at the China
International Conference of Finance. July 8, 2009.
http://haas.berkeley.edu/groups/finance/CHINA7.pdf

Longstaff, F. A, Mithal, S. and Neis, E. (2005), “Corporate Yield Spreads: Default Risk
or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market”. Journal of Finance
60, 2213-2253.

Mayordomo, S., Peña, J.I., and Romo, J. (2009): “Are There Arbitrage Opportunities in
Credit Derivatives Markets: A New Test and an Application to the case of CDS and
ASPs”. Working Paper Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.

Micu, M., Remolona, E., and Wooldridge, P. D. (2004) “The Pricing Impact of Rating
Announcements: Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market”. BIS Quarterly
Review.


                                                                                        39
Nashikkar, A. J., Subrahmanyam, M. G. and Mahanti, S. (2009), “Limited Arbitrage
and Liquidity in the Market for Credit Risk”. NYU Working Paper No. FIN-08-011.

Nashikkar, A. J. and Subrahmanyam, M. G. (2007), “Latent Liquidity and Corporate
Bond Yield Spreads”. NYU Working Paper No. FIN-07-013.

Perraudin, W. and Taylor, A. (2003), “Liquidity and Bond Market Spreads”. Bank of
England, Working Paper.

Predescu, M. (2006), “The Performance of Structural Models of Default for Firms with
Liquid CDS Spreads”. Working Paper, Rothman School of Management, University of
Toronto.

Rosenberg, B. and Houglet, M. (1974), “Error Rates in CRSP and COMPUSTAT Data
Bases and Their Implications”, Journal of Finance, 29, 1303-1310.

Schoar, A. S. (2002), “Effects of corporate diversification on productivity”, Journal of
Finance, 57, pp. 2379-2403.

Saita, L., (2006), “The Puzzling Price of Corporate Default Risk”. Working paper,
Standford Graduate School of Business.

Villalonga, B. (2004), “Diversification discount or premium? New evidence from BITS
establishment-level data”, Journal of Finance, 59, pp. 479-506.

Yu, F. (2006), “How Profitable is Capital Structure Arbitrage?”. Financial Analysts
Journal 62, 47-62.

Zhang, B. Y., Zhou, H., and Zhu, H. (2009) “Explaining Credit Default Swap Spreads
with the Equity Volatility and Jump Risks of Individual Firms”. Review of Financial
Studies 2009 22(12):5099-5131.

Zhu, H. (2006), “An Empirical Comparison of Credit Spreads Between the Bond
Market and the Credit Default Swap Market”. Journal of Financial Services Research
29, 211-235.




                                                                                     40
                   Table 1: Firm Names by Sector and CDS Index (iTraxx and CDX)
This table shows the descriptive statistics for the single name 5-year CDS. Panel A shows the names classified by
index and sector. We use European and American firms included in the iTraxx and the CDX indexes, respectively,
over the whole sample period. Panels B, C, D, E, and F, provide the CDS descriptive statistics for the European
single name CDSs. The information is divided before and during the crisis. Each of the five previous panels
corresponds to different data sources. Panel B reports the CDS traded spreads information for GFI (Number of Trades
or Quotes, Trades per day, Mean, Std Dev., Median, Skewness, and Kurtosis of the CDS spreads as well as the
coefficient of the AR(1) based on the CDS spreads) while Panels C, D, E, and F reports the information for CMA,
Markit, Fenics, and Reuters EOD, respectively. Panels G, H, I, J, and K, provide the CDS descriptive statistics for the
American single name CDSs. The information is divided before and during the crisis. Panel G reports the information
obtained from GFI while Panels H, I, J, and K provide the information obtained from CMA, Markit, Fenics, and
Reuters EOD, respectively. As the actual sample size of the different data sources differ (because of missing values
and slightly different periods covered), we report the summary statistics for the cases in which we have common
observations (trades and quotes) in all the data sources in Panel L. Finally, Panels M and N report the unit root tests
for all the European and American single name CDSs. In the last two panels, I(1) is used to indicate that the series
have a unit root and are integrated of order one and I(0) to indicate that the series are stationary.




                                                                                                                   41
Panel A
iTraxx Firm Name                      Ticker   Sector       CDX Firm Name                        Ticker   Sector
AKZO Nobel NV                         AKZO     Auto/Indust. Alcoa Inc.                           AA       Auto/Indust.
Bayer Aktiengesellschaft              BAYG     Auto/Indust. Carnival Corporation                 CCL      Auto/Indust.
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG           BMWG     Auto/Indust. CSX Corporation                      CSX      Auto/Indust.
Compagnie de Saint-Gobain             SGOB     Auto/Indust. The Dow Chemical Company             DOW      Auto/Indust.
EADS NV                               AERM     Auto/Indust. Eastman Chemical Company             EMN      Auto/Indust.
Siemens Aktiengesellschaft            SIEG     Auto/Indust. Honeywell International Inc          HON      Auto/Indust.
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft         VOWG     Auto/Indust. Union Pacific Corporation            UNP      Auto/Indust.
Aktiebolaget Volvo                    VOLV     Auto/Indust.
Accor                                 ACCP     Consumers Altria Group, Inc.                      MO       Consumers
British American Tobacco PLC          BATS     Consumers AutoZone, Inc.                          AZO      Consumers
Carrefour                             CARR     Consumers Baxter International Inc.               BAX      Consumers
Marks and Spencer PLC                 MKSA     Consumers Bristol-Myers Squibb Company            BMY      Consumers
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton      LVMH     Consumers Campbell Soup Company                   CPB      Consumers
Metro AG                              METB     Consumers Cardinal Health, Inc.                   CAH      Consumers
Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV    PHG      Consumers Loews Corporation                       LTR      Consumers
PPR                                   PRTP     Consumers Safeway Inc.                            SWY      Consumers
Sodexho Alliance                      SODE     Consumers Southwest Airlines Co.                  LUV      Consumers
Unilever NV                           UN       Consumers The Walt Disney Company                 DIS      Consumers
                                                            Whirlpool Corporation                WHR      Consumers
Edison SPA                            EDN      Energy       Anadarko Petroleum Corporation       APC      Energy
Electricite de France                 EDF      Energy       Arrow Electronics, Inc.              ARW      Energy
EnBW Energie Baden-Wuerttemberg       EBKG     Energy       ConocoPhillips                       COP      Energy
Enel SPA                              ENEI     Energy       Constellation Energy Group, Inc.     CEG      Energy
EDP - Energias de Portugal SA         EDP      Energy       Devon Energy Corporation             DVN      Energy
E.ON AG                               EONG     Energy       Dominion Resources, Inc.             D        Energy
Fortum Oyj                            FUMC     Energy       Progress Energy, Inc.                PGN      Energy
Iberdrola SA                          IBE      Energy       Sempra Energy                        SRE      Energy
Repsol YPF SA                         REP      Energy       Transocean Inc.                      RIG      Energy
RWE Aktiengesellschaft                RWEG     Energy       Valero Energy Corporation            VLO      Energy
GDF Suez                              GDF      Energy
Veolia Environnement                  VIE      Energy
Aegon NV                              AEGN     Financials Ace Limited                            ACE      Financials
AXA                                   AXAF     Financials American Express Company               AXP      Financials
Barclays Bank PLC                     BCSB     Financials American International Group, Inc.     AIG      Financials
Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft        CBKG     Financials Boeing Capital Corporation             BA       Financials
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft      DB       Financials Cigna Corporation                      CI       Financials
Hannover Rueckversicherung AG         HNRG     Financials General Electric Capital Corporation   GE       Financials
Banca Monte Dei Paschi Di Siena Spa   BMPS     Financials Marsh & McLennan, Inc.                 MMC      Financials
Muenchener Rueckversicherung          MUVG     Financials Simon Property Group, L.P.             SPG      Financials
Swiss Reinsurance Company             RUKN     Financials Wells Fargo & Company                  WFC      Financials
                                                            XL Capital Ltd.                      XL       Financials
Bertelsmann AG                        BTGG     TMT          AT&T Inc.                            T        TMT
Deutsche Telekom AG                   DTA      TMT          CenturyTel, Inc.                     CTL      TMT
France Telecom                        FTE      TMT          Comcast Cable Communications, LLC    CMCC     TMT
Hellenic Telecommunications           OTE      TMT          Omnicom Group Inc.                   OMC      TMT
Koninklijke KPN NV                    KPN      TMT          Time Warner Inc.                     TWX      TMT
Telecom Italia SPA                    TLIT     TMT
Telefonica SA                         TEF      TMT
Vodafone Group PLC                    VOD      TMT




                                                                                                                       42
Panel B: GFI
                                                       Before 9th August 2007                                          After 9th August 2007
                                      Trades Trad/Days Mean Std Dev Median      Skew    Kurt    AR(1) Trades Trad/Days Mean Std Dev Median     Skew    Kurt AR(1)
Accor                                  318     0.351    68       19      67      0.34   -0.23    0.97   99     0.149   121       59     112     0.51   -0.73 0.96
Aegon NV                               348     0.385    27        5      28     -0.38    2.43    0.95   28     0.042   137       88     130     1.69    4.25 0.56
AKZO Nobel NV                          318     0.351    34        8      33      0.29   -0.96    0.97   59     0.089    56       19      58     0.14   -0.31 0.85
AXA                                    322     0.356    29        6      29     -0.09   -0.12    0.98   20     0.030    97       37      96     0.15   -0.11 0.67
Barclays Bank PLC                      270     0.298    11       3       11      4.39   29.45    0.97 104      0.157    98       46      94     0.57   -0.14 0.93
Bayer Aktiengesellschaft               320     0.354    36        9      37      0.01   -1.37    0.97   33     0.050    52       18      49     0.81    0.80 0.78
Bertelsmann AG                         213     0.235    42       10      45     -0.75   -0.63    0.96 111      0.167   137       75     135     0.62   -0.18 0.95
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG            279     0.308    26       7       26     -0.30   -0.91    0.98 110      0.166   107       85      90     2.37    6.80 0.94
British American Tobacco PLC           352     0.389    56       17      56      0.22    0.44    0.99   72     0.108    77       31      74     0.53   -0.33 0.90
Carrefour                              413     0.456    24        5      22      0.30    0.13    0.96 143      0.215    57       24      55     0.53    0.08 0.94
Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft         340     0.376    23        8      20      2.54   11.71    0.90   75     0.113    83       28      75     0.56   -0.73 0.81
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft       352     0.389    17       5       16      2.95   13.79    0.97   99     0.149    85       36      85     0.23   -1.03 0.91
Deutsche Telekom AG                    407     0.450    38       7       39      0.09    2.11    0.90 291      0.438    87       37      84     2.13   15.47 0.79
EADS NV                                 98     0.108    23        4      23      1.34    2.87    0.80 110      0.166    93       62      82     2.39    6.29 0.89
Edison SPA                             211     0.233    42       19      35      1.29    1.35    0.97   32     0.048    76       28      74     0.47   -0.44 0.70
Electricite de France                  304     0.336    22        6      23     -0.37   -0.82    0.96   91     0.137    66       31      56     1.11    0.67 0.94
EnBW Energie Baden-Wuerttemberg        241     0.266    29       10      28      0.14   -1.18    1.00   34     0.051    56       13      55     0.54    1.60 0.33
Enel SPA                               317     0.350    25        7      27     -0.07    0.27    1.00 114      0.172   133      108     100     2.78    7.59 0.93
EDP - Energias de Portugal SA          292     0.323    28        7      26     -0.25   -0.38    0.98   67     0.101    96       30      98    -0.41   -0.34 0.81
E.ON AG                                334     0.369    21        5      20      0.72    0.37    0.96   72     0.108    66       23      62     0.12   -0.31 0.86
Fortum Oyj                             235     0.260    32        8      33     -0.67    0.79    0.95   25     0.038    67       25      68     1.18    1.44 0.54
France Telecom                         650     0.718    43       12      42      0.21   -0.59    0.99 239      0.360    73       29      79     0.13   -1.00 0.98
Hannover Rueckversicherung AG          276     0.305    29        7      28      0.38    1.48    0.96   23     0.035    61       15      60     1.40    3.27 0.23
Hellenic Telecommunications            453     0.501    45        9      44     -0.18   -0.64    0.96 193      0.291    90       33      90     0.35   -0.53 0.95
Iberdrola SA                           300     0.331    25        5      23      0.14   -1.39    0.96   65     0.098    97       32      91     1.11    1.18 0.80
Koninklijke KPN NV                     567     0.627    51       15      48      1.03    0.45    0.99 219      0.330    77       31      74     0.67   -0.40 0.97
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton       319     0.352    36        9      35      0.01   -0.15    0.98 100      0.151    77       39      64     1.41    1.88 0.93
Marks and Spencer PLC                   55     0.061    41       13      38      1.92    3.10    0.90 211      0.318   187      107     170     0.65   -0.19 0.97
Metro AG                               420     0.464    47       11      45      0.31   -0.40    0.98 130      0.196   143       94     114     0.94   -0.04 0.95
Banca Monte Dei Paschi Di Siena Spa    324     0.358    20        3      19     -0.06    1.83    0.92   42     0.063    78       26      75     0.19   -0.52 0.72
Muenchener Rueckversicherung           325     0.359    25        3      26     -1.57    7.22    0.89   28     0.042    50       21      48     1.11    1.81 0.64
Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV     129     0.143    33        9      33     -0.06   -1.05    0.96 108      0.163    67       27      63     0.61    0.46 0.90
PPR                                    474     0.524    85       38      72      0.78   -0.58    0.99 137      0.206   201      126     191     2.03    5.21 0.96
Repsol YPF SA                          289     0.319    42       11      39      0.18   -1.43    0.99   43     0.065   147       99     106     1.75    2.55 0.80
RWE Aktiengesellschaft                 335     0.370    23        6      22      0.34    0.07    0.97   54     0.081    55       20      50     0.45   -0.17 0.85
Compagnie de Saint-Gobain              211     0.233    34        7      36      0.71    1.23    0.94   49     0.074   144       54     125     0.84    0.61 0.80
Siemens Aktiengesellschaft             134     0.148    22        6      22      0.06   -1.31    0.96 113      0.170    83       42      73     0.63   -0.34 0.96
Sodexho Alliance                         .        .      .        .       .        .       .       .    84     0.127    65       22      61     0.57   -0.37 0.87
GDF Suez                                 .        .      .        .       .        .       .       .    31     0.047    59       15      57     2.61    7.20 0.71
Swiss Reinsurance Company              317     0.350    23        4      23      1.95   12.94    0.83   25     0.038   114       56     114     1.15    2.39 0.67
Telecom Italia SPA                     728     0.804    57       11      55      0.40    0.16    0.96 336      0.506   153       83     141     1.09    1.13 0.98
Telefonica SA                          614     0.678    39        9      39      0.24   -0.64    0.97 263      0.396    95       42      88     0.72    0.22 0.97
Unilever NV                            215     0.238    17        3      16      0.79   -0.37    0.93   92     0.139    41       16      38     0.55   -0.70 0.91
Veolia Environnement                   344     0.380    42       36      34      5.96   37.25    0.86   75     0.113    94       31      90     0.52   -0.59 0.85
Vodafone Group PLC                     471     0.520    30        7      27      0.89    0.07    0.97 229      0.345    90       42      80     0.72   -0.26 0.98
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft          415     0.459    55       16      59     -0.58   -0.39    0.99 116      0.175   118       70     103     1.34    2.17 0.93
Aktiebolaget Volvo                     262     0.290    37        6      38     -0.85    0.06    0.94   77     0.116   139      108     107     2.05    3.93 0.95
Average                                331     0.366    35       10      33      0.55    2.58    0.95 104      0.156    95       47      87     0.95    1.47 0.83




                                                                                                                                         43
Panel C: CMA
                                                Before 9th August 2007                          After 9th August 2007
                                    Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew       Kurt AR(1) Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew      Kurt AR(1)
Accor                                905    58     20       56     0.74    0.14 0.99  664   127      57     125 0.31      -0.75 0.99
Aegon NV                             905    21      8       23     0.16    0.47 0.99  664   191     124     144 1.10       0.52 0.99
AKZO Nobel NV                        905    30      7       28     1.03    0.47 0.99  664    74      33      68    0.87    0.27 0.99
AXA                                  905    22      8       23    -0.09   -0.91 0.98  664   110      55      97    0.74   -0.36 0.99
Barclays Bank PLC                    905    10      3        9     3.62   23.15 0.99  664   108      51      94    0.66   -0.10 0.99
Bayer Aktiengesellschaft             905    30      8       28     0.61   -0.32 0.99  664    62      25      53    1.28    1.24 0.99
Bertelsmann AG                       905    36      9       35    -0.06   -0.30 0.99  664   150      88     139 0.50      -0.79 1.00
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG          905    21      8       21     0.27   -0.46 1.00  664   144     111     103 1.32       0.83 0.99
British American Tobacco PLC         905    45     18       43     0.67   -0.08 1.00  664    74      30      66    1.19    1.35 0.99
Carrefour                            905    21      6       21     0.38   -0.11 0.98  664    59      21      58    0.60    0.97 0.99
Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft       905    18      8       17     1.64    6.19 0.98  664    81      26      74    0.84    0.32 0.97
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft     905    15      4       15     2.85   18.36 0.97  664    90      32      86    0.30   -0.32 0.98
Deutsche Telekom AG                  905    41     10       40     0.57    0.16 0.99  664    90      32      90    0.41   -0.07 0.99
EADS NV                              902    25      6       24     0.48   -0.73 0.99  664   126     104      90    2.07    4.23 1.00
Edison SPA                           905    32     17       29     1.09    0.35 1.00  664    75      35      76    0.92    0.60 0.99
Electricite de France                905    17      7       17     0.33   -0.67 0.99  664    59      31      49    1.23    1.09 0.99
EnBW Energie Baden-Wuerttemberg      905    22      9       21     0.79   -0.13 0.99  664    49      15      52    0.18    0.33 0.98
Enel SPA                             905    20      6       20     0.93    1.05 0.99  664   152     138      96    1.98    3.00 1.00
EDP - Energias de Portugal SA        905    23      8       22     0.41   -0.37 0.99  664    81      33      78    0.47   -0.66 0.99
E.ON AG                              905    19      5       18     0.50    0.68 0.99  664    64      23      59    0.72    0.92 0.99
Fortum Oyj                           905    25     10       26     0.17   -0.78 1.00  664    60      25      50    1.55    2.41 0.99
France Telecom                       905    41     13       41     0.21   -0.59 0.99  664    69      27      60    0.39   -1.08 0.99
Hannover Rueckversicherung AG        905    23     10       23     0.63    0.66 0.99  664    64      24      62    0.73    0.56 0.98
Hellenic Telecommunications          905    45      9       45    -0.32   -0.69 0.98  664    91      33      85    0.66   -0.12 0.99
Iberdrola SA                         905    22      5       22     0.33   -0.58 0.98  664    96      44      88    1.14    1.26 0.99
Koninklijke KPN NV                   905    53     16       50     0.88    0.02 0.99  664    77      28      70    0.82    0.18 0.99
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton     905    32     10       31     0.45   -0.23 0.99  664    75      40      62    1.54    1.80 0.99
Marks and Spencer PLC                905    72     49       49     1.64    3.29 0.99  664   192     112     164 0.88       0.18 0.99
Metro AG                             905    42     11       42     0.54   -0.24 0.99  664   140      90     111 1.09       0.43 0.99
Banca Monte Dei Paschi Di Siena Spa  905    16      6       16     0.33    0.50 0.99  664    80      28      77    0.61    0.21 0.98
Muenchener Rueckversicherung         905    19      8       21    -0.12   -0.84 0.99  664    51      19      47    1.33    2.51 0.98
Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV   905    31      9       32     0.03   -0.73 0.99  664    67      31      54    1.05    0.53 0.99
PPR                                  905    75     37       61     1.13    0.09 1.00  664   259     166     214 1.15       0.26 1.00
Repsol YPF SA                        905    36     10       35     0.86    0.65 1.00  664   137      99     102 1.90       3.01 1.00
RWE Aktiengesellschaft               905    19      6       19     0.76    0.73 0.99  664    52      18      47    0.48   -0.06 0.98
Compagnie de Saint-Gobain            905    32      6       31     0.89    1.97 0.98  664   181     108     149 1.17       0.79 1.00
Siemens Aktiengesellschaft           905    18      5       17     0.66   -0.48 0.99  664    83      45      69    1.18    1.29 0.99
Sodexho Alliance                     905    43     19       39     0.48   -1.13 1.00  664    59      21      53    0.76   -0.17 0.99
GDF Suez                             905    13      4       13     0.18    0.08 0.97  664    53      23      51    1.64    3.29 0.99
Swiss Reinsurance Company            905    19      6       20    -0.20    0.54 0.99  664   212     190     126 1.29       0.45 1.00
Telecom Italia SPA                   905    56     11       55     0.35    0.38 0.98  664   180     105     148 1.03       0.24 1.00
Telefonica SA                        905    39      9       38     0.34   -0.52 0.99  664   100      39      94    0.88    0.93 0.99
Unilever NV                          905    19      5       17     1.00    0.47 0.98  664    39      15      35    0.98    0.59 0.99
Veolia Environnement                 905    33      9       32     0.95    0.22 0.99  664    95      38      85    0.63   -0.41 0.99
Vodafone Group PLC                   905    30      6       29     0.63   -0.16 0.99  664    95      43      85    1.01    0.33 0.99
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft        905    45     19       45     0.05   -1.33 1.00  664   139      78     118 0.77      -0.13 0.99
Aktiebolaget Volvo                   905    32      7       31     0.38   -0.80 0.98  664   220     161     178 0.75      -0.58 1.00
Average                              905    31     10       29     0.64    1.01 0.99  664   105      58      89    0.96    0.67 0.99




                                                                                                             44
Panel D: Markit
                                               Before 9th August 2007                              After 9th August 2007
                                    Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew       Kurt    AR(1) Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew      Kurt    AR(1)
Accor                                905    58     20       56     0.76    0.19    1.00 587    123     59      116 0.47      -0.74    1.00
Aegon NV                             905    21      7       23     0.02   -0.18    1.00 587    198    129      158 0.88      -0.05    0.99
AKZO Nobel NV                        905    30      7       27     1.06    0.51    0.99 587     76     35       70    0.73   -0.18    0.99
AXA                                  412    15      6       13     1.90    6.30    0.99 587    113     58      101 0.54      -0.72    0.99
Barclays Bank PLC                    905    10      3        9     3.30   20.23    1.01 587    110     53       98    0.50   -0.49    0.99
Bayer Aktiengesellschaft             905    30      8       28    0.64    -0.32    0.99 587     64     26       57    1.09    0.70    0.99
Bertelsmann AG                       905    36      9       34    -0.05   -0.27    0.99 587    150     94      121 0.46      -1.06    1.00
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG          905    21      8       21    0.28    -0.46    1.00 587    151    116      110 1.12       0.29    1.00
British American Tobacco PLC         905    45     18       44    0.66    -0.12    1.00 587     76     31      70     0.98    0.81    0.99
Carrefour                            905    22      6       21    0.39    -0.02    0.99 587     59     22       57    0.62    0.57    0.99
Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft       905    18      8       16    1.62     5.81    0.99 587     82     27      74     0.68   -0.12    0.98
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft     905    15      4       15    2.87    17.78    0.98 587     90     33      88     0.19   -0.69    0.98
Deutsche Telekom AG                  905    41     10       39    0.57     0.10    0.99 587     93     33       95    0.20   -0.21    0.99
EADS NV                              905    26      7       24     0.76   -0.25    0.99 587    131    109       91    1.85    3.20    1.00
Edison SPA                           905    32     17       28     1.10    0.34    1.00 587     74     37       69    0.94    0.21    0.99
Electricite de France                683    15      5       15    0.26    -0.51    1.00 587     60     32      49     1.10    0.60    0.99
EnBW Energie Baden-Wuerttemberg      561    17      5       17    0.26    -0.67    0.99 587     48     15       51    0.33    0.15    0.99
Enel SPA                             905    20      6       19     0.96    1.19    1.00 587    161    143       99    1.77    2.13    1.00
EDP - Energias de Portugal SA        704    20      6       21    -0.17   -1.07    1.00 587     78     33       76    0.57   -0.54    0.99
E.ON AG                              905    19      5       18     0.51    0.67    0.99 587     65     24       61    0.55    0.45    0.99
Fortum Oyj                           905    25     10       26     0.17   -0.78    1.00 587     61     26       51    1.37    1.78    0.99
France Telecom                       905    41     12       40     0.22   -0.57    0.99 587     71     28       74    0.17   -1.13    0.99
Hannover Rueckversicherung AG        905    23     10       23    0.51     0.22    0.99 587     64     25       61    0.67    0.14    0.98
Hellenic Telecommunications          905    45      9       45    -0.35   -0.68    0.99 587     89     34      81     0.80   -0.10    0.99
Iberdrola SA                         905    22      5       22    0.28    -0.57    0.99 587     99     46       91    1.01    0.80    0.99
Koninklijke KPN NV                   905    52     16       50    0.85    -0.08    1.00 587     80     29      79     0.64   -0.01    0.99
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton     905    32     10       31    0.47    -0.20    1.00 587     78     42       62    1.35    1.10    0.99
Marks and Spencer PLC                905    72     49       49     1.65    3.35    0.99 587    200    116      183 0.68      -0.20    0.99
Metro AG                             905    42     11       42     0.55   -0.22    0.99 587    144     93      129 0.90      -0.07    0.99
Banca Monte Dei Paschi Di Siena Spa  905    16      6       16    0.31     0.21    1.00 587     78     29       74    0.72    0.20    0.98
Muenchener Rueckversicherung         905    19      8       21    -0.18   -0.94    1.00 587     52     19       49    1.12    1.71    0.98
Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV   905    30      9       32     0.03   -0.74    1.00 585     70     33       57    0.84    0.09    0.99
PPR                                  559    52     12       49     1.32    2.29    0.98 585    275    170      226 0.96      -0.15    1.00
Repsol YPF SA                        905    36     10       35     0.89    0.63    1.00 585    142    105      103 1.69       2.08    1.00
RWE Aktiengesellschaft               905    19      6       19     0.77    0.68    1.00 585     53     19       48    0.33   -0.45    0.99
Compagnie de Saint-Gobain            905    32      6       31     0.87    1.90    0.99 585    190    111      163 0.91       0.16    1.00
Siemens Aktiengesellschaft           905    18      5       17    0.63    -0.57    1.00 585     86     47       71    0.99    0.74    0.99
Sodexho Alliance                      .      .      .        .       .       .       .   472    64     22       58    0.60   -0.75    0.99
GDF Suez                              .      .      .        .       .       .       .   332    64     24       55    1.56    1.28    0.99
Swiss Reinsurance Company             .      .      .        .       .       .       .   411   293    201      212 0.70      -0.86    1.00
Telecom Italia SPA                   905    56     11       54    0.34     0.27    0.98 587    187    110      153 0.85      -0.15    1.00
Telefonica SA                        905    39      9       38    0.28    -0.70    0.99 585    102     41       98    0.70    0.45    0.99
Unilever NV                          905    19      5       18     0.94    0.29    0.99 585     40     16       36    0.85    0.13    0.99
Veolia Environnement                 905    33      9       31    1.00     0.34    1.00 587     98     40       96    0.43   -0.72    0.99
Vodafone Group PLC                   905    30      6       29     0.63   -0.26    0.99 587     98     45       94    0.82   -0.05    0.99
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft        905    45     19       45    0.04    -1.34    1.00 587    145     80      126 0.56      -0.44    0.99
Aktiebolaget Volvo                   905    32      8       31    0.37    -0.86    0.99 585    225    170      168 0.61      -0.93    1.00
Average                              869    30     10       29     0.69    1.16    0.99 575    110     60       94    0.82    0.19    0.99




                                                                                                                 45
Panel E: Fenics
                                              Before 9th August 2007                              After 9th August 2007
                                   Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew       Kurt    AR(1) Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew       Kurt    AR(1)
Accor                               902    58     20       56     0.79    0.32    0.99 447    109     57       92     0.99    0.44    0.99
Aegon NV                            904    21      8       23     0.29    1.95    0.98 446    206    151      147 0.85        0.14    0.99
AKZO Nobel NV                       904    30      7       27    1.09     0.75    0.98 446     76     39       64     0.53   -0.87    0.99
AXA                                 904    22      8       23    -0.20   -1.06    0.99 446    123     65      109 0.39       -0.72    0.99
Barclays Bank PLC                   904    10      3        9     3.62   24.29    0.98 446    114     57      116 0.25       -1.04    0.98
Bayer Aktiengesellschaft            900    30      8       28    0.65    -0.31    0.99 250     52     18       50     0.75    0.78    0.98
Bertelsmann AG                      904    36      9       35    0.02    -0.14    0.99 446    130     98       89     1.05   -0.21    1.00
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG         904    21      9       21    1.34     8.57    0.95 446    160    135      102 0.97       -0.28    0.99
British American Tobacco PLC        902    46     18       44    0.63    -0.25    0.99 447     79     35       75     0.70   -0.03    0.99
Carrefour                           904    22      6       21     0.40    0.30    0.97 446     58     25       58     0.72    0.42    0.98
Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft      903    18      8       17    1.71     6.66    0.97 446     81     28       75     0.71   -0.14    0.97
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft    724    14      4       14    3.79    23.99    0.96 659     89     31       87     0.18   -0.54    0.97
Deutsche Telekom AG                 903    41     10       39    0.54     0.05    0.98 446     97     36      99     -0.03   -0.53    0.98
EADS NV                             895    26      7       24     0.77   -0.23    0.98 454    142    120       94     1.46    1.58    0.99
Edison SPA                          896    33     17       28     1.12    0.39    0.99 456     71     40       54     1.01   -0.26    0.99
Electricite de France               904    18      7       17    0.36    -0.61    0.99 446     63     36       52     0.84   -0.14    0.99
EnBW Energie Baden-Wuerttemberg 902        22     10       21    0.83    -0.05    0.99 447     47     17       44     0.63   -0.03    0.98
Enel SPA                            896    20      6       20     1.00    1.22    1.00 453    177    156       99     1.34    0.65    0.99
EDP - Energias de Portugal SA       895    23      8       22    0.31    -0.53    0.99 454     77     37       61     0.72   -0.73    0.98
E.ON AG                             902    19      5       19    0.49     0.74    0.98 447     66     27       64     0.35   -0.23    0.98
Fortum Oyj                          903    25     10       26     0.14   -0.76    1.00 446     65     29       57     1.09    0.87    0.98
France Telecom                      896    41     13       40    0.23    -0.57    0.98 453     79     27       85    -0.34   -0.77    0.98
Hannover Rueckversicherung AG       903    24     11       23    2.05    13.87    0.95 446     69     25      68      0.19   -0.22    0.98
Hellenic Telecommunications         904    45      9       45    -0.29   -0.65    0.98 449     92     37       87     0.50   -0.82    0.99
Iberdrola SA                        902    23      5       22    0.30    -0.57    0.99 447    100     52       86     0.81   -0.06    0.99
Koninklijke KPN NV                  904    53     16       50     0.91    0.15    0.99 446     87     29       86     0.29    0.09    0.98
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton 904       32      9       32    0.27    -0.26    0.99 450     83     47       63     0.97   -0.05    0.99
Marks and Spencer PLC               896    72     49       48    1.71     3.69    0.98 474    217    125      208 0.37       -0.58    0.99
Metro AG                            904    42     11       42    0.53    -0.24    0.99 450    138    104       87     1.01   -0.26    0.99
Banca Monte Dei Paschi Di Siena Spa 904    16      6       17     0.25    0.17    0.99 450     81     33       78     0.54   -0.43    0.98
Muenchener Rueckversicherung        904    19      8       21    0.00     0.14    0.96 450     56     19      55      0.59    0.85    0.97
Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV  896    31      9       32    0.01    -0.87    0.99 453     72     35       60     0.58   -0.60    0.99
PPR                                 903    75     37       61     1.13    0.13    1.00 451    291    190      240 0.70       -0.75    0.99
Repsol YPF SA                       903    36     10       35     0.83    0.51    0.98 451    153    122       86     1.46    1.23    0.99
RWE Aktiengesellschaft              904    19      6       19     0.81    0.94    0.99 450     55     21       53     0.09   -0.82    0.98
Compagnie de Saint-Gobain           903    32      6       30    0.90     1.72    0.98 451    200    118      183 0.42       -1.01    0.99
Siemens Aktiengesellschaft          902    18      6       17    0.73    -0.30    0.99 451     89     53       75     0.73   -0.11    0.99
Sodexho Alliance                    397    27      6       26    0.79     0.26    0.98 659     60     21       53     0.75   -0.28    0.98
GDF Suez                            397    12      4       12    0.01    -0.62    0.99 659     53     24       51     1.61    2.91    0.99
Swiss Reinsurance Company           902    19      6       20    -0.20    0.64    0.98 451    252    220      129 0.65       -1.27    0.99
Telecom Italia SPA                  896    56     11       54    0.37     0.44    0.97 458    197    122      165 0.59       -0.79    0.99
Telefonica SA                       903    39      9       38    0.34    -0.54    0.98 449    106     45      102 0.49       -0.10    0.98
Unilever NV                         798    18      4       17     1.50    3.13    0.96 603     40     15       36     0.82    0.10    0.98
Veolia Environnement                902    33      9       31     1.01    0.39    0.99 450     96     45       80     0.61   -0.82    0.99
Vodafone Group PLC                  903    30      6       29    0.60    -0.30    0.98 448    106     49      101 0.50       -0.52    0.99
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft       904    45     19       45     0.03   -1.35    1.00 447    147     88      124 0.49       -0.71    0.99
Aktiebolaget Volvo                  902    30      8       28    0.63    -0.69    0.99 449    204    183      103 0.88       -0.78    1.00
Average                             874    31     10       29    0.75     1.80    0.98 462    111     66       90     0.68   -0.16    0.99




                                                                                                                46
Panel F: Reuters EOD
                                              Before 9th August 2007                      After 9th August 2007
                                    Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew Kurt AR(1) Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew      Kurt    AR(1)
Accor                                                                           539   143     50     137     0.38   -0.74    0.99
Aegon NV                                                                        539   217    115     170     1.17    0.29    0.99
AKZO Nobel NV                                                                   540    83     30      73     1.07    0.22    0.99
AXA                                                                             538   123     51     106     0.76   -0.49    0.99
Barclays Bank PLC                                                               538   122     45     113     0.70   -0.40    0.98
Bayer Aktiengesellschaft                                                        513    67     25      57     1.31    0.81    0.99
Bertelsmann AG                                                                  536   173     80     160     0.38   -0.89    0.99
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG                                                     537   167    110     115     1.25    0.47    0.99
British American Tobacco PLC                                                    538    81     27      73     1.52    2.07    0.99
Carrefour                                                                       535    65     18      62     1.12    2.15    0.98
Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft                                                  535    87     23      80     0.92    0.08    0.97
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft                                                533    99     25      95     0.53   -0.36    0.97
Deutsche Telekom AG                                                             530    99     27      97     0.76    0.18    0.99
EADS NV                                                                         538   141    100      95     1.85    3.12    1.00
Edison SPA                                                                      527    82     34      82     0.65    0.30    0.99
Electricite de France                                                           529    66     29      57     1.35    1.17    0.99
EnBW Energie Baden-Wuerttemberg                                                 514    53     12      54     0.59    1.34    0.98
Enel SPA                                                                        529   173    142     102     1.74    1.97    1.00
EDP - Energias de Portugal SA                                                   528    89     31      89     0.33   -0.61    0.99
E.ON AG                                                                         514    70     20      63     1.42    1.77    0.98
Fortum Oyj                                                                      514    65     25      54     1.68    2.67    0.99
France Telecom                                                                  514    74     26      77     0.25   -1.11    0.99
Hannover Rueckversicherung AG                                                   524    69     22      66     0.82    0.68    0.98
Hellenic Telecommunications                                                     512    99     30      93     0.79   -0.21    0.99
Iberdrola SA                                                                    524   107     40      95     1.36    1.34    0.99
Koninklijke KPN NV                                                              514    80     27      79     0.81    0.52    0.99
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton                                                517    83     40      64     1.48    1.21    0.99
Marks and Spencer PLC                                                           514   223    102     194     0.96    0.06    0.99
Metro AG                                                                        517   162     85     141     0.99    0.09    0.99
Banca Monte Dei Paschi Di Siena Spa                                             513    88     26      82     1.01    0.40    0.97
Muenchener Rueckversicherung                                                    513    53     17      49     1.48    3.33    0.97
Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV                                              511    74     31      57     0.97    0.08    0.99
PPR                                                                             510   300    162     240     1.03   -0.27    1.00
Repsol YPF SA                                                                   508   155    105     111     1.61    1.81    0.99
RWE Aktiengesellschaft                                                          514    57     16      50     0.95   -0.04    0.98
Compagnie de Saint-Gobain                                                       552   202    101     167     1.18    0.51    0.99
Siemens Aktiengesellschaft                                                      514    95     42      73     1.43    1.71    0.99
Sodexho Alliance                                                                554    63     20      58     0.77   -0.33    0.99
GDF Suez                                                                        514    57     22      52     1.72    2.86    0.99
Swiss Reinsurance Company                                                       535   238    190     139     1.22    0.26    1.00
Telecom Italia SPA                                                              517   208     97     164     1.10    0.00    0.99
Telefonica SA                                                                   518   109     34     101     1.25    1.24    0.99
Unilever NV                                                                     554    42     14      38     1.05    0.61    0.99
Veolia Environnement                                                            554   104     35      98     0.66   -0.47    0.99
Vodafone Group PLC                                                              535   105     41      96     1.04    0.27    0.99
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft                                                   514   161     72     134     0.83   -0.21    0.99
Aktiebolaget Volvo                                                              551   253    155     203     0.58   -0.77    1.00
Average                                                                         527   118     55      99     1.04    0.61    0.99




                                                                                                        47
Panel G: GFI
                                                      Before 9th August 2007                                       After 9th August 2007
                                     Trades Trad/Days Mean Std Dev Median      Skew    Kurt AR(1) Trades Trad/Days Mean Std Dev Median     Skew   Kurt    AR(1)
Ace Limited                            18     0.020     32       0       32       .       .    .     8     0.012   118       24     123      .       .       .
Alcoa Inc.                             61     0.067     30       5      27      1.46    5.93 0.58    2     0.003   159      165     159      .       .       .
Altria Group, Inc.                    258     0.285    139      49      139    -0.13   -0.82 1.00   13     0.020    69       28      65      .       .       .
American Express Company              190     0.210    26        5      29      0.42   1.29 0.94    61     0.092   209      148     180    1.80   3.20     0.81
American International Group, Inc.    442     0.488     24       0      24        .       .    .   157     0.236    59      133      24    3.95   14.82    1.03
Anadarko Petroleum Corporation         59     0.065     38       7       37     1.10   -0.01 0.91    8     0.012   123       91      98      .       .       .
Arrow Electronics, Inc.               263     0.291    105      31      105     0.19   -1.42 1.00   11     0.017    74       24      82      .       .       .
AT&T Inc.                             301     0.333     39      10       37     0.39   -0.71 0.99    7     0.011    66       34      77      .       .       .
AutoZone, Inc.                        129     0.143     88      14       90    -0.73    1.01 0.86    8     0.012    95       49      85      .       .       .
Baxter International Inc.              48     0.053     40      10      43     -1.06   -0.12 0.96    2     0.003    26        4      26      .       .       .
Boeing Capital Corporation            156     0.172     35      10      39     -0.29   -1.43 0.99    5     0.008    73       43      67      .       .       .
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company           59     0.065     36      11       39    -0.64   -0.79 0.97    3     0.005    26        5      24      .       .       .
Campbell Soup Company                   .        .       .       .        .       .       .    .     .        .      .        .       .      .       .       .
Cardinal Health, Inc.                  80     0.088     72      41      65      0.44   -1.26 0.95    2     0.003    49       16      49      .       .       .
Carnival Corporation                   34     0.038     21       1       22    -0.53   -1.36 0.91    5     0.008    62       38      82      .       .       .
CenturyTel, Inc.                      286     0.316     88      24       88     0.08   -0.96 0.96   10     0.015   101       33      96      .       .       .
Cigna Corporation                       .        .       .       .        .       .       .    .     .        .      .        .       .      .       .       .
Comcast Cable Communications, LLC 228         0.252     62      17       67    -0.25   -1.02 0.97   11     0.017    64       18      59      .       .       .
ConocoPhillips                         54     0.060     29       4      30     -1.63    1.09 0.80    2     0.003    94       17      94      .       .       .
Constellation Energy Group, Inc.      102     0.113     45      11      52     -0.31   -1.71 0.86   16     0.024   132       87      94      .       .       .
CSX Corporation                       115     0.127     54      14       50     0.35   -0.68 0.92    3     0.005   112       17     110      .       .       .
Devon Energy Corporation               70     0.077     39       4      40      0.29   -0.36 0.84    6     0.009    77       35      85      .       .       .
Dominion Resources, Inc.              122     0.135    46       11      47     -0.10   -0.79 0.91    7     0.011    60       14      57      .       .       .
The Dow Chemical Company              135     0.149     42      10      44     -0.11   -1.27 0.94    4     0.006   180      180      93      .       .       .
Eastman Chemical Company              118     0.130    61        7      61      0.36   -0.60 0.90    8     0.012    84       40      81      .       .       .
General Electric Capital Corporation  329     0.364     27       5      26     -0.30   -0.20 0.96   42     0.063   158      137     125    1.85    2.62    0.83
Honeywell International Inc             6     0.007     17       4      19     -1.23   -0.34 4.25    6     0.009    42       14      34      .       .       .
Loews Corporation                      20     0.022     64       8      60      3.17   10.23 0.16    4     0.006    80       8       82      .       .       .
Marsh & McLennan, Inc.                 21     0.023    81       13      72      0.72   -1.41 0.83    5     0.008    77       18      70      .       .       .
Omnicom Group Inc.                    124     0.137     42      11       41     0.22   -0.53 0.87    6     0.009   126      126      66      .       .       .
Progress Energy, Inc.                 115     0.127     53       8      53      0.50    5.77 0.80   14     0.021    50       15      44      .       .       .
Safeway Inc.                          268     0.296     71      12      71      0.19    0.56 0.94    3     0.005    65       23      60      .       .       .
Sempra Energy                         124     0.137     45       9       41     0.48   -0.85 0.89    8     0.012    61       27      56      .       .       .
Simon Property Group, L.P.             53     0.059     49       7       51    -1.27    0.66 0.96   16     0.024   243      202     183      .       .       .
Southwest Airlines Co.                134     0.148    55       16      47      0.39   -1.57 0.97    2     0.003   215       86     215      .       .       .
Time Warner Inc.                      192     0.212     57      16      57      0.33   -1.25 0.97   14     0.021    99       46     110      .       .       .
Transocean Inc.                        37     0.041     39       5      40     -0.43    4.16 0.55    5     0.008   214      119     260      .       .       .
Union Pacific Corporation              92     0.102     43       6       46    -0.65   -1.02 0.95    4     0.006    59       23      64      .       .       .
Valero Energy Corporation              79     0.087     58      14       55     1.12    0.22 0.95    3     0.005   108       91      56      .       .       .
The Walt Disney Company               205     0.227     47      15       46     0.04   -1.06 0.98    9     0.014    53       15      60      .       .       .
Wells Fargo & Company                 199     0.220     22       6       26    -0.17    0.28 0.96   76     0.114    96       62      86    1.53    2.23    0.89
Whirlpool Corporation                 125     0.138     59      20       64    -0.22   -1.65 0.95    6     0.009   113       76      89      .       .       .
XL Capital Ltd.                       309     0.341     52       2       52     0.00    0.00 0.00    2     0.003    98      118      98      .       .       .
Average                               140     0.155     50      12      51      0.06    0.15 0.95   14     0.021    99       60      89    2.28    5.72    0.89




                                                                                                                                  48
Panel H: CMA
                                                Before 9th August 2007                              After 9th August 2007
                                     Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew       Kurt    AR(1) Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew      Kurt    AR(1)
Ace Limited                           905    40     14      41      0.14   -0.76    0.99  664    80     32      73     0.60    0.26    0.98
Alcoa Inc.                            905    27     9       25      0.75   -0.42    0.99  664   282    244     207     1.20    0.53    1.00
Altria Group, Inc.                    905    88     55      80      0.60   -0.66    1.00  664    85     33      86     0.09   -0.75    0.99
American Express Company              905    21     7       21      0.32    0.44    0.99  664   208    154     165     1.38    1.26    0.99
American International Group, Inc.    905    20      9      19      1.36    3.08    0.99  664   714    717     535     1.47    2.00    0.98
Anadarko Petroleum Corporation        905    34      7      34      1.18    2.54    0.98  664   107     72      78     1.48    0.95    1.00
Arrow Electronics, Inc.               905    76     28      67      1.04    0.01    1.00  664    95     48      82     1.62    2.93    0.99
AT&T Inc.                             905    32     11      32      0.57    2.71    0.99  664    90     43      80     0.82    3.41    0.99
AutoZone, Inc.                        905    31     22      69      0.03   -0.84    0.99  664    84     37      72     0.98    0.78    0.99
Baxter International Inc.             905    27     13      25      0.69    0.11    1.00  664    30      9      27     0.50   -0.77    0.99
Boeing Capital Corporation            905    22     12      20      0.64   -0.60    1.00  664   102     75      82     0.99    0.33    0.99
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company          905    22     10      20      0.86   -0.09    1.00  664    38     12      35     0.70   -0.15    0.99
Campbell Soup Company                 905    22     7       23      0.01   -0.84    0.98  664    31     10      30     0.81    0.43    0.98
Cardinal Health, Inc.                 905    47     30      35      2.11    4.72    0.99  664    55     17      52     0.70    0.76    0.98
Carnival Corporation                  905    32     13      28      1.20    0.30    0.99  664   155    103     128     1.31    0.94    1.00
CenturyTel, Inc.                      905    74     20      71      1.22    1.11    0.99  664   108     45      98     0.49   -0.77    0.99
Cigna Corporation                     905    38     14      37      0.49   -0.20    0.99  664   124     76     110     1.03    0.78    0.99
Comcast Cable Communications, LLC 905        45     16      41      0.59   -0.65    1.00  664   124     58     119     0.80    1.15    0.99
ConocoPhillips                        905    22      5      22     -0.32   -0.08    0.99  664    56     25      48     1.19    0.60    0.99
Constellation Energy Group, Inc.      905    36     11      36      0.06   -0.86    0.99  664   196    120     163     1.05    0.68    0.98
CSX Corporation                       905    40     13      37      0.59   -0.46    0.99  664    97     45      81     0.60   -0.99    0.99
Devon Energy Corporation              905    36     13      34      0.72   -0.06    0.99  664    59     24      56     0.85    0.23    0.99
Dominion Resources, Inc.              905    39     13      40     -0.01   -0.67    0.99  664    58     21      52     1.72    2.80    0.99
The Dow Chemical Company              905    31     11      28      0.72   -0.54    0.98  664   168    155     113     1.66    1.93    1.00
Eastman Chemical Company              905    51     10      50      0.42   -0.28    0.98  664    78     41      63     1.38    0.99    0.99
General Electric Capital Corporation  905    21      7      21      0.31   -0.91    1.00  664   262    205     191     1.10    0.56    0.99
Honeywell International Inc           905    20      7      18      1.23    0.63    0.99  664    52     27      45     1.38    1.59    0.99
Loews Corporation                     905    31     17      27      0.81   -0.30    1.00  664    57     20      55     0.25   -0.36    0.99
Marsh & McLennan, Inc.                905    55     28      46      3.12   15.76    0.97  664    67     19      64     0.78    0.54    0.98
Omnicom Group Inc.                    905    30     11      30      0.34   -0.56    0.99  664   109     94      69     1.58    1.19    1.00
Progress Energy, Inc.                 905    39     17      44     -0.26   -0.78    1.00  664    54     14      53     0.18   -1.03    0.98
Safeway Inc.                          905    60     16      60      0.28   -0.44    0.99  664    73     23      71     0.13    0.18    0.99
Sempra Energy                         905    35     13      39     -0.10   -0.38    0.99  664    74     30      71     0.36   -0.72    0.99
Simon Property Group, L.P.            905    36     13      36      0.14   -1.10    0.99  664   248    202     162     1.54    1.30    1.00
Southwest Airlines Co.                905    44     15      42      0.59   -0.31    0.99  664   181     95     169     1.16    1.66    0.99
Time Warner Inc.                      905    50     17      47      0.40   -0.85    0.99  664   101     48      88     0.54   -0.69    0.99
Transocean Inc.                       905    32     7       30      0.69   -0.44    0.98  664   110     78      86     1.69    1.87    1.00
Union Pacific Corporation             905    35      9      36      0.44    0.46    0.98  664    63     24      58     1.07    1.28    0.99
Valero Energy Corporation             905    44     14      42      0.94    1.67    0.99  664   176     81     189 -0.07      -0.81    0.99
The Walt Disney Company               905    31     16      29      0.59   -0.52    1.00  664    52     22      47     1.15    1.50    0.99
Wells Fargo & Company                 905    15     6       14      0.82    0.62    0.99  664   110     54      97     1.24    2.05    0.98
Whirlpool Corporation                 905    50     13      48      0.41   -0.60    0.99  664   185    129     141     1.28    0.75    1.00
XL Capital Ltd.                       905    41     11      43     -0.07    1.12    1.00  664   358    298     250     1.02   -0.24    0.99
Average                               905    38     14      37      0.62    0.47    0.99  664   129     86     106     0.97    0.72    0.99




                                                                                                                   49
Panel I: Markit
                                                Before 9th August 2007                              After 9th August 2007
                                     Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew       Kurt    AR(1) Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew      Kurt    AR(1)
Ace Limited                           905    40     15       40     0.57    1.10    0.99 586     81     34      75     0.43   -0.28    0.99
Alcoa Inc.                            905    27      9       25     0.89    0.01    0.99 586    291    260     190     1.04    0.01    1.00
Altria Group, Inc.                    905    88     55       81     0.58   -0.71    1.00 584     82     33      83     0.22   -0.73    1.00
American Express Company              905    21      7       21     0.24    0.11    1.00 586    226    158     182     1.19    0.72    0.99
American International Group, Inc.    905    20      9       19     1.37    3.24    1.00 586    745    756     503     1.23    0.96    0.99
Anadarko Petroleum Corporation        905    34      7       34     1.19    2.41    0.99 586    114     75      85     1.25    0.29    1.00
Arrow Electronics, Inc.               905    76     28       67     1.05    0.03    1.00 586     95     51      82     1.57    2.44    0.99
AT&T Inc.                             431    26      8       23     0.59   -0.97    0.99 584     92     46      83     0.64   -0.10    0.99
AutoZone, Inc.                        905    67     22       68    -0.02   -0.93    1.00 586     87     38      78     0.76    0.31    0.99
Baxter International Inc.             905    26     13       24     0.68    0.03    1.00 586     29      9      26     0.69   -0.61    0.99
Boeing Capital Corporation            905    22     12       20     0.66   -0.61    1.00 586    108     78      91     0.77   -0.18    0.99
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company          905    22     10       20     0.86   -0.11    1.00 586     38     13      35     0.72   -0.35    0.99
Campbell Soup Company                 905    22      7       22    -0.02   -0.86    1.00 586     31     10      28     0.92    0.33    0.99
Cardinal Health, Inc.                 905    47     30       35     2.13    4.80    0.99 586     55     18      50     0.63    0.23    0.99
Carnival Corporation                  905    32     13       27     1.17    0.18    1.00 586    163    107     134     1.09    0.38    1.00
CenturyTel, Inc.                      905    74     20       71     1.20    1.03    0.99 586    109     47      99     0.43   -0.94    0.99
Cigna Corporation                     905    38     14       37     0.91    1.77    0.99 586    127     81     115     0.83    0.13    1.00
Comcast Cable Communications, LLC 905        44     17       40     0.46   -0.70    1.00 586    130     59     127     0.65    0.79    0.99
ConocoPhillips                        905    22      5       22    -0.33   -0.11    1.00 586     59     26      50     0.97    0.12    0.99
Constellation Energy Group, Inc.      905    36     11       36     0.06   -0.88    1.00 586    203    125     178     0.76   -0.29    0.99
CSX Corporation                       905    40     13       36     0.57   -0.48    1.00 586    102     45      89     0.41   -1.15    0.99
Devon Energy Corporation              905    36     13       34     0.70   -0.13    1.00 586     60     25      57     0.69   -0.22    0.99
Dominion Resources, Inc.              905    39     12       40    -0.08   -0.62    1.00 586     59     22      52     1.58    2.22    0.99
The Dow Chemical Company              905    31     11       27     0.71   -0.55    0.99 586    177    164     112     1.43    1.09    1.00
Eastman Chemical Company              905    50     10       49     0.40   -0.44    0.99 586     82     43      65     1.15    0.33    0.99
General Electric Capital Corporation  905    21      7       21     0.33   -0.94    1.00 586    276    218     205     0.91    0.10    0.99
Honeywell International Inc           905    20      7       18     0.96    0.26    1.00 586     54     29      45     1.18    0.88    1.00
Loews Corporation                     905    31     17       27     0.82   -0.30    1.00 586     56     21      54     0.26   -0.75    0.99
Marsh & McLennan, Inc.                905    55     28       46     3.13   15.75    0.98 586     66     19      61     1.02    1.11    0.99
Omnicom Group Inc.                    905    29     11       30     0.33   -0.58    1.00 586    114     98      70     1.37    0.50    1.00
Progress Energy, Inc.                 905    39     16       44    -0.30   -0.83    1.00 584     52     14      50     0.33   -0.93    0.99
Safeway Inc.                          905    59     15       60     0.23   -0.56    1.00 584     72     24      70     0.18   -0.12    0.99
Sempra Energy                         905    35     12       39    -0.15   -0.47    0.99 586     74     31      72     0.33   -0.91    0.99
Simon Property Group, L.P.            905    36     13       36     0.10   -1.17    1.00 584    264    211     176     1.29    0.50    1.00
Southwest Airlines Co.                905    44     15       42     0.58   -0.35    1.00 584    187    100     175     0.91    0.90    0.99
Time Warner Inc.                      905    50     17       47     0.39   -0.87    1.00 584    107     48     106     0.34   -0.78    0.99
Transocean Inc.                       905    32      7       30     0.65   -0.54    0.99 584    117     80      89     1.49    1.18    1.00
Union Pacific Corporation             905    35      9       35     0.38    0.32    0.99 584     64     26      60     0.90    0.71    0.99
Valero Energy Corporation             486    36      7       36    -0.08   -0.74    0.99 584    174     87     186     0.02   -1.09    1.00
The Walt Disney Company               905    30     15       29     0.59   -0.51    1.00 586     52     23      46     1.01    0.92    0.99
Wells Fargo & Company                 905    15      6       14     0.80    0.51    1.00 586    112     58      99     1.08    1.33    0.99
Whirlpool Corporation                 905    50     13       47     0.35   -0.76    0.99 584    196    135     152     1.04    0.13    1.00
XL Capital Ltd.                       905    41     11       43    -0.03    0.70    1.00 584    392    304     283     0.83   -0.66    0.99
Average                               884    38     14       36     0.60    0.36    1.00 585    134     89     109     0.85    0.20    0.99




                                                                                                                   50
Panel J: Fenics
                                                Before 9th August 2007                              After 9th August 2007
                                     Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew       Kurt    AR(1) Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew      Kurt AR(1)
Ace Limited                           904    44     16       42    0.87     1.19    0.99 460     81      38      77    0.49   -0.25 0.99
Alcoa Inc.                            904    28     11       26    2.27     8.39    0.98 450    146     104     108 0.61      -1.03 1.00
Altria Group, Inc.                    904    89     55       80    0.57    -0.71    1.00 447     85      45      75    0.68   -0.54 0.99
American Express Company              903    22      7       21    0.11    -0.16    1.00 454    248     178     205 0.84      -0.19 0.98
American International Group, Inc.    904    21      7       20    0.84     0.24    0.99 450    707    1002     104 1.54      1.16 0.97
Anadarko Petroleum Corporation        904    35      8       34    1.02     0.56    0.98 453    131      81      95    0.63   -1.23 1.00
Arrow Electronics, Inc.               904    77     28       68    1.05     0.04    0.99 453     97      48      88    0.85   0.28 0.99
AT&T Inc.                             904    33     11       32     0.51   -0.30    0.99 450     96      57      78    0.89   0.01 0.99
AutoZone, Inc.                        903    67     23       67    0.03    -0.85    0.98 454    100      43      99    0.50   -0.04 0.99
Baxter International Inc.             903    28     13       25    0.79     0.15    1.00 448     31       7      31    0.21   -0.65 0.97
Boeing Capital Corporation            904    21     10       18    1.09     0.11    0.99 448     86      57      69    0.42   -1.23 1.00
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company          904    21     10       20    0.80     0.04    0.99 446     43      15      42    0.19   -0.96 0.99
Campbell Soup Company                 904    22      7       23    0.06    -0.75    0.99 450     57      27      51    0.30   -1.10 0.99
Cardinal Health, Inc.                 724    46     25       39    1.79     4.62    0.99 659     56      15      51    1.38   2.12 0.99
Carnival Corporation                  618    21      3       21    0.63     2.85    0.95 659     86      49      77    0.67   -0.44 0.99
CenturyTel, Inc.                      534    67     10       69    -0.35   -0.71    0.95 659    120      62      91    1.22   0.87 0.99
Cigna Corporation                     904    50     25       51    0.79     0.28    0.99 453     59      31      49    0.47   -0.92 0.99
Comcast Cable Communications, LLC .           .      .        .       .       .       .   480    68      34      57    1.51   3.21 0.96
ConocoPhillips                         .      .      .        .       .       .       .    .      .       .       .      .      .     .
Constellation Energy Group, Inc.      904    37     11       36    0.05    -0.81    0.99 453    188     116     149 0.38      -1.28 0.99
CSX Corporation                       904    40     14       37    0.50    -0.57    0.99 450    122      57     120 0.47      -0.64 0.99
Devon Energy Corporation              904    35      7       34    0.22    -0.94    0.99 450     72      28      72    0.29   -0.62 0.99
Dominion Resources, Inc.              903    39     12       40    -0.06   -0.60    0.99 451     62      22      57    0.89   0.23 0.99
The Dow Chemical Company              904    31     11       29    0.60    -0.79    0.99 450    175     189      87    1.39   0.51 1.00
Eastman Chemical Company              904    50     10       50    0.77     0.32    0.98 446     86      45      67    0.82   -0.59 0.99
General Electric Capital Corporation  904    13      3       13    3.10    17.08    0.99 449    114      70      83    0.58   -0.99 0.99
Honeywell International Inc           896    20      8       18    0.91     0.30    0.99 457     46      17      45    0.18   -1.08 0.99
Loews Corporation                     904    35     20       33    1.05     0.97    0.99 450     64      27      69    0.03   -0.51 0.99
Marsh & McLennan, Inc.                775    61     26       57    2.96    13.35    0.94 627     79      18      72    1.44   2.25 0.98
Omnicom Group Inc.                     .      .      .        .       .       .       .    .      .       .       .      .      .     .
Progress Energy, Inc.                 904    40     16       44    -0.20   -0.65    0.99 450     52      15      50    0.80   0.88 0.93
Safeway Inc.                          904    60     16       60    0.86     2.97    0.94 450     71      23      68    0.51   -0.35 0.99
Sempra Energy                         904    35     12       39    -0.11   -0.65    0.99 449     71      32      66    0.79   0.06 0.98
Simon Property Group, L.P.            903    36     12       39    -0.14   -1.38    1.00 451    262     229     163 0.90      -0.61 0.99
Southwest Airlines Co.                904    44     15       43    0.42    -0.33    0.99 450    166     105     153 0.91      0.03 0.99
Time Warner Inc.                      904    48     15       47    0.43    -0.35    0.99 450    124      50     131 -0.02     -0.72 0.99
Transocean Inc.                        .      .      .        .       .       .       .    .      .       .       .      .      .     .
Union Pacific Corporation             904    35      9       36    0.27    -0.04    0.98 450     70      29      68    0.24   -0.75 0.99
Valero Energy Corporation              .      .      .        .       .       .       .    .      .       .       .      .      .     .
The Walt Disney Company                .      .      .        .       .       .       .    .      .       .       .      .      .     .
Wells Fargo & Company                 903    15      6       14    1.04     2.08    0.99 451    117      72     101 1.13      0.85 0.98
Whirlpool Corporation                 904    51     14       50    0.25    -0.66    0.98 450    191     146     136 1.14      0.00 0.99
XL Capital Ltd.                        .      .      .        .       .       .       .    .      .       .       .      .      .     .
Average                               877    39     14       38    0.72     1.23    0.98 473    120      86      86    0.71   -0.12 0.99




                                                                                                                   51
Panel K: Reuters EOD
                                               Before 9th August 2007                      After 9th August 2007
                                     Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew Kurt AR(1) Quotes Mean Std Dev Median Skew      Kurt    AR(1)
Ace Limited                                                                      560    87     29       75    0.85    1.09    0.98
Alcoa Inc.                                                                       179   637    179      630 0.62      -0.06    0.99
Altria Group, Inc.                                                               560    92     28       90    0.17   -0.54    0.99
American Express Company                                                         559   232    153      180 1.35       0.98    0.99
American International Group, Inc.                                               556   825    757      587 2.02      8.31     0.92
Anadarko Petroleum Corporation                                                   561   116     72       86    1.29    0.34    1.00
Arrow Electronics, Inc.                                                          560   103     46       85    1.88    3.36    0.99
AT&T Inc.                                                                        482   103     40       85    1.21    0.60    0.99
AutoZone, Inc.                                                                   559    90     34       78    0.99    0.79    0.99
Baxter International Inc.                                                        560    31      8       30    0.49   -0.67    0.98
Boeing Capital Corporation                                                       561   106     60       88    1.03    0.21    0.99
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company                                                     477    41     12       39    0.68   -0.63    0.98
Campbell Soup Company                                                            560    33      9       32    0.84    0.53    0.99
Cardinal Health, Inc.                                                            557    58     15       56    0.89    1.28    0.98
Carnival Corporation                                                             508   102     44       85    0.78   -0.82    1.00
CenturyTel, Inc.                                                                 561   117     41      105 0.55      -0.95    0.99
Cigna Corporation                                                                561   136     75      128 0.97       0.56    0.99
Comcast Cable Communications, LLC                                                538    69     32       59    1.90    4.15    0.99
ConocoPhillips                                                                   561    59     25       49    1.25    0.54    0.99
Constellation Energy Group, Inc.                                                 561   216    113      178 0.96      -0.01    0.99
CSX Corporation                                                                  173   130     44      145 -0.14     -1.40    0.99
Devon Energy Corporation                                                         558    64     22       61    1.02    0.35    0.99
Dominion Resources, Inc.                                                         561    61     21       54    1.63    2.24    0.99
The Dow Chemical Company                                                         555   189    156      130 1.56       1.39    1.00
Eastman Chemical Company                                                         556    86     41       67    1.28    0.50    0.99
General Electric Capital Corporation                                             562   297    198      206 0.97       0.05    0.99
Honeywell International Inc                                                      560    57     26       48    1.39    1.52    0.99
Loews Corporation                                                                553    61     16       57    0.38   -0.13    0.98
Marsh & McLennan, Inc.                                                           561    70     18       68    0.72   0.98     0.99
Omnicom Group Inc.                                                               561   120     95       75    1.43    0.58    1.00
Progress Energy, Inc.                                                            551    57     13       59    0.02   -0.85    0.98
Safeway Inc.                                                                     536    78     19       79    0.56    0.78    0.98
Sempra Energy                                                                    551    80     27       78    0.07   -0.93    0.98
Simon Property Group, L.P.                                                       552   276    205      181 1.41      0.72     1.00
Southwest Airlines Co.                                                           561   200     83      175 1.50       1.88    0.99
Time Warner Inc.                                                                 561   109     48      105 0.40      -0.71    0.99
Transocean Inc.                                                                  501   124     81       89    1.46   0.85     0.99
Union Pacific Corporation                                                        561    67     23       60    1.28    1.45    0.99
Valero Energy Corporation                                                        559   196     70      199 0.04      -0.62    0.99
The Walt Disney Company                                                          561    55     20       49    1.40    1.86    0.99
Wells Fargo & Company                                                            559   120     50      104 1.69       2.77    0.98
Whirlpool Corporation                                                            561   204    124      154 1.26       0.49    1.00
XL Capital Ltd.                                                                  530   415    298      309 0.77      -0.92    0.99
Average                                                                          533   148     81      123 1.00       0.74    0.99




                                                                                                          52
Panel L: Using all the observations
                         Before 9th August 2007                                      After 9th August 2007
            Average                                                Average
           Number of                                              Number of
 Europe                     Mean           S.D.        Median                     Mean          S.D.           Median
           Quotes or                                              Quotes or
            Trades                                                 Trades
GFI          331              35            20           32         104             95          71               85
CMA          905              31            20           27         664            105          89               78
Markit       869              30            18           27         575            110          94               80
Fenics       874              31            20           27         462            111          101              78
Reuters                                                             527            118          93               89
            Average                                                Average
           Number of                                              Number of
   US                       Mean           S.D.        Median                     Mean          S.D.           Median
           Quotes or                                              Quotes or
            Trades                                                 Trades
GFI          140              50            33            47         14             99          119              67
CMA          905              40            27            34        664            128          186              76
Markit       884              38            23            34        585            134          195              79
Fenics       877              39            24            35        473            120          209              74
Reuters                                                             533            148          203              83
Panel M: Using the observations in the days in which there is a trade and quotes in all the data sources
                         Before 9th August 2007                                      After 9th August 2007
            Average                                                Average
           Number of                                              Number of
 Europe                     Mean           S.D.        Median                     Mean          S.D.           Median
           Trades and                                             Trades and
             Quotes                                                 Quotes
GFI           306             36            17            33          51           128           82             105
CMA           306             35            16            32          51           128           82             104
Markit        306             35            16            32          51           128           81             104
Fenics        306             36            16            32          51           128           82             105
Reuters                                                               51           127           81             103
            Average                                                Average
           Number of                                              Number of
   US                       Mean           S.D.        Median                     Mean          S.D.           Median
           Trades and                                             Trades and
             Quotes                                                 Quotes
GFI           122             54            36            44          11           131          129             95
CMA           122             52            36            44          11           149          124             111
Markit        122             52            36            44          11           148          122             113
Fenics        122             51            37            44          11           130          115              92
Reuters                                                               11           147          123             109
Panel N: Using the observations in the days in which there is not a trade but quotes in all the data sources
                         Before 9th August 2007                                      After 9th August 2007
            Average                                                 Average
 Europe     Number          Mean           S.D.        Median       Number        Mean          S.D.           Median
            Quotes                                                  Quotes
CMA          553              28            19           25          264           135          114              96
Markit       553              28            19           25          264           135          113              96
Fenics       553              28            19           25          264           136          114              97
Reuters                                                              264           135          113              96
            Average                                                 Average
   US       Number          Mean           S.D.        Median       Number        Mean          S.D.           Median
            Quotes                                                  Quotes
CMA          749              36            20           33          339           151          224              91
Markit       749              36            20           33          339           153          224              93
Fenics       749              37            21           34          339           140          239              88
Reuters                                                              339           147          230              86




                                                                                                                      53
Panel O: Unit Root Europe
                                           Before 9th August 2007              After 9th August 2007
                                      CMA      Markit Fenics Reuters   CMA        Markit Fenics Reuters
Accor                                 I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(0)     I(1)
Aegon NV                              I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
AKZO Nobel NV                         I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
AXA                                   I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Barclays Bank PLC                     I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(0)     I(1)
Bayer Aktiengesellschaft              I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Bertelsmann AG                        I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG           I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
British American Tobacco PLC          I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Carrefour                             I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft        I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(0)         I(0)    I(0)     I(0)
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft      I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Deutsche Telekom AG                   I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
EADS NV                               I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Edison SPA                            I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Electricite de France                 I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
EnBW Energie Baden-Wuerttemberg       I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Enel SPA                              I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
EDP - Energias de Portugal SA         I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
E.ON AG                               I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Fortum Oyj                            I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
France Telecom                        I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Hannover Rueckversicherung AG         I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Hellenic Telecommunications           I(1)      I(0)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Iberdrola SA                          I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Koninklijke KPN NV                    I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton      I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Marks and Spencer PLC                 I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Metro AG                              I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Banca Monte Dei Paschi Di Siena Spa   I(1)      I(1)     I(1)           I(1)        I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Muenchener Rueckversicherung          I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Koninklijke Philips Electronics NV    I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
PPR                                   I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Repsol YPF SA                         I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
RWE Aktiengesellschaft                I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Compagnie de Saint-Gobain             I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Siemens Aktiengesellschaft            I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Sodexho Alliance                      I(1)        -      I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
GDF Suez                              I(1)        -      I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Swiss Reinsurance Company             I(1)        -      I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Telecom Italia SPA                    I(0)      I(0)     I(0)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Telefonica SA                         I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Unilever NV                           I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Veolia Environnement                  I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(0)         I(1)    I(0)     I(1)
Vodafone Group PLC                    I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft         I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Aktiebolaget Volvo                    I(1)      I(1)     I(1)          I(1)         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)




                                                                                              54
Panel P: Unit Root US
                                          Before 9th August 2007        After 9th August 2007
                                       CMA Markit Fenics Reuters   CMA Markit Fenics Reuters
Ace Limited                            I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Alcoa Inc.                             I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Altria Group, Inc.                     I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
American Express Company               I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(0)     I(1)
American International Group, Inc.     I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(0)
Anadarko Petroleum Corporation         I(0)    I(0)     I(0)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Arrow Electronics, Inc.                I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
AT&T Inc.                              I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
AutoZone, Inc.                         I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Baxter International Inc.              I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Boeing Capital Corporation             I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company           I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Campbell Soup Company                  I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Cardinal Health, Inc.                  I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Carnival Corporation                   I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
CenturyTel, Inc.                       I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Cigna Corporation                      I(1)    I(1)     I(0)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Comcast Cable Communications, LLC      I(1)    I(1)       -        I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
ConocoPhillips                         I(1)    I(1)       -        I(1)      I(1)      -      I(1)
Constellation Energy Group, Inc.       I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
CSX Corporation                        I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Devon Energy Corporation               I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Dominion Resources, Inc.               I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
The Dow Chemical Company               I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Eastman Chemical Company               I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
General Electric Capital Corporation   I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Honeywell International Inc            I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Loews Corporation                      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(0)    I(1)     I(1)
Marsh & McLennan, Inc.                 I(0)    I(0)     I(0)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Omnicom Group Inc.                     I(1)    I(1)       -        I(1)      I(1)      -      I(1)
Progress Energy, Inc.                  I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(0)      I(0)    I(0)     I(0)
Safeway Inc.                           I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Sempra Energy                          I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Simon Property Group, L.P.             I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Southwest Airlines Co.                 I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Time Warner Inc.                       I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Transocean Inc.                        I(1)    I(1)       -        I(1)      I(1)      -      I(1)
Union Pacific Corporation              I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Valero Energy Corporation              I(0)    I(1)       -        I(1)      I(1)      -      I(1)
The Walt Disney Company                I(1)    I(1)       -        I(1)      I(1)      -      I(1)
Wells Fargo & Company                  I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
Whirlpool Corporation                  I(1)    I(1)     I(1)       I(1)      I(1)    I(1)     I(1)
XL Capital Ltd.                        I(1)    I(1)       -        I(1)      I(1)      -      I(1)




                                                                                         55
           Table 2: The distribution of the quoted and traded CDS spreads
Summary statistics for the distribution of the quoted and traded 5y CDS spreads for the firms in
Table 1. Panel A provides the distribution of the number of quoted spreads on a given day for a
single name CDS. The first column reports the number of observations for which there are 1, 2, 3
and 4 quotes, respectively. The second column reports the percentage of cases in which there are
1, 2, 3, and 4 quotes, respectively, and is obtained as the ratio of second column and the total
number of days. The last column of Panel A reports the cumulative percentage across the range
of quotes. Panel B reports the distribution of the range of the mean absolute difference, in basis
points, among all the possible pairs of quoted spreads on a given day for a single 5-year CDS.
For instance, the first row in the first column reports the number of days in which the absolute
difference between the different pairs of databases is lower than 1 basis point, and so on. Panel C
provides the distribution of the range of the mean absolute difference, in basis points, between all
the possible pairs formed by the GFI traded CDS spread and one of the different quoted CDS
spreads. The sample period is January 2004 to March 2010.

Panel A
            Number of                  Number of                                  Cumulative
                                                             Percentage
             Quotes                    Observations                               Percentage
                 1                        1870                  0.013               0.013
                 2                       18428                  0.131               0.144
                 3                       93168                  0.660               0.804
                 4                       27744                  0.196               1.000
            Total Days                   141210
           Total Trades                   26126                 0.185

Panel B
          Range of the                                                            Cumulative
        mean difference                Observations          Percentage
      among quotes (in b.p.)                                                       Percentage
             Dif < 1                       63172                0.447                0.447
          1 < Dif < 2                     30232                 0.214                0.661
           2 < Dif < 3                    13234                 0.094                0.755
           3 < Dif < 4                     7558                 0.054                0.809
          4 < Dif < 5                      4808                 0.034                0.843
          5 < Dif < 6                      3460                 0.025                0.867
          6 < Dif < 7                      2762                 0.020                0.887
          7 < Dif < 8                      2137                 0.015                0.902
          8 < Dif < 9                      1645                 0.012                0.914
         9 < Dif < 10                      1306                 0.009                0.923
         10 < Dif < 11                      1100                0.008                0.931
         11 < Dif < 12                      941                 0.007                0.937
         12 < Dif < 13                      749                 0.005                0.943
         13 < Dif < 14                      620                 0.004                0.947
         14 < Dif < 15                      610                 0.004                0.951
         15 < Dif < 16                      422                 0.003                0.954
         16 < Dif < 17                      405                 0.003                0.957
         17 < Dif < 18                      292                 0.002                0.959
         18 < Dif < 19                      295                 0.002                0.961
         19 < Dif < 20                      283                 0.002                0.963
            Dif >= 20                      5179                 0.037                1.000
          Total Quotes                    141210




                                                                                                       56
                      Table 2 Continued: The distribution of the quoted
                                  and traded CDS spreads


Panel C
         Range of the
       mean difference                                              Cumulative
                                  Observations      Percentage
    between the traded and                                          Percentage
    quoted spreads (in b.p.)
            Dif < 1                  10886            0.409               0.409
          1 < Dif < 2                5409             0.203               0.612
          2 < Dif < 3                2594             0.097               0.709
          3 < Dif < 4                1663             0.062               0.772
          4 < Dif < 5                1224             0.046               0.818
          5 < Dif < 6                 858             0.032               0.850
          6 < Dif < 7                 628             0.024               0.873
          7 < Dif < 8                 407             0.015               0.889
          8 < Dif < 9                 297             0.011               0.900
         9 < Dif < 10                 261             0.010               0.910
        10 < Dif < 11                 243             0.009               0.919
        11 < Dif < 12                 172             0.006               0.925
        12 < Dif < 13                 235             0.009               0.934
        13 < Dif < 14                 168             0.006               0.940
        14 < Dif < 15                 117             0.004               0.945
        15 < Dif < 16                 101             0.004               0.948
        16 < Dif < 17                 106             0.004               0.952
        17 < Dif < 18                  72             0.003               0.955
        18 < Dif < 19                  43             0.002               0.957
        19 < Dif < 20                  22             0.001               0.958
           Dif >= 20                  620             0.023               0.981
         Total Quotes                26126




                                                                                  57
                                                                      Table 3: Time-serial correlation between variables
This table reports the correlation coefficients between the dependent and explanatory variables employed in equation (1). Log(Std. Dev. CDS spreads), the dependent variable in equation (1),
refers to the cross-sectional standard deviation among the CDS spreads reported by the different data sources in a given day. Log (Mkt. Cap.) refers to the logarithm of the firm market
capitalization. Trade is a dummy variable which is equal to one if there is a trade registered in GFI in the current date and to zero otherwise. Days w/o a trade represents the number of days
without a trade up to the current date. Interaction Trade and Days w/o trade is constructed as the interaction between the number of days without a transaction up to one day ago and a dummy
variable (Trade) which equals one if there is a trade the current date. CDS Bid-Ask Spread refers to the daily CDS bid-ask spread which is obtained from CMA. VIX Index represents the value
of the VIX Index. Max quotes refers to a dummy variable which equals one when all the data sources available at a given date report a quote and is equal to zero otherwise.

Observations = 138653                Log(Std. Dev. CDS spreads) Log(Mkt. Cap.)     Trade    Days w/o trade Interaction Trade and Days w/o trade CDS Bid-Ask Spread VIX Index Max Quotes
Log(Std. Dev. CDS spreads)
Log(Mkt. Cap.)                                 -0.059
Trade                                          -0.157               0.065
Days w/o a trade                               0.152                -0.058         -0.206
Interaction Trade and Days w/o trade           -0.005               0.000          0.156        -0.032
CDS Bid-Ask Spread                             0.414                -0.080         -0.099       0.017                     -0.001
VIX Index                                       0.456               -0.051         -0.133       0.041                     0.010                         0.480
Max Quotes                                      0.057                0.025         0.099        -0.157                    0.008                        -0.053           -0.041




                                                                                                                                                                                           58
                      Table 4: Determinants of the standard deviation
                                among the CDS data sources
This table reports the regression coefficients of the unbalanced panel regressions. The dependent
variable is the standard deviation among the different CDS data sources (CMA, Markit, Fenics,
Reuters EOD). The database includes ninety European and US firms (47 of the firms are
European and the rest are American) which are the most liquid CDSs included in either the
Itraxx or the CDX Index since the launching of the indexes, from January 2004 to April 2010.
The estimation uses a fixed-effects model robust to heteroskedasticity. Column (1) reports the
results for the whole sample of firms, Column (2) reports the results for the subsample of
European firms, and Column (3) reports the results for the subsample of American firms. The t-
statistics are reported between brackets.

                                                (1)               (2)                 (3)
Log(Mkt. Cap.)                                -0.095           -0.048              -0.187
                                             (-10.53)          (-5.91)           (-12.17)
Trade                                         -0.079           -0.061              -0.078
                                             (-10.01)          (-7.11)            (-4.95)
Days w/o a trade                              0.0003           0.0000              0.0004
                                             (10.80)            (1.05)            (13.21)
Interaction Trade and Days w/o trade         -0.0006           0.0003             -0.0013
                                              (-1.97)           (0.61)             (-3.47)
CDS Bid-Ask Spread                             0.041            0.075               0.030
                                             (14.76)           (34.77)            (11.39)
VIX Index                                      0.045            0.032               0.051
                                             (64.85)           (49.05)            (77.25)
Max Quotes                                     0.290            0.080               0.565
                                             (32.86)            (7.86)            (37.42)
Constant                                       0.938           -0.370               3.327
                                              (4.30)           (-1.89)              (9.00)
R-squared                                      0.481            0.371               0.458
Number of observations                       138653             71605              67048
Number of groups                                 90               47                  43
Observations per group       Minimum            940              940                 1150
                              Average          1541              1524                1559
                             Maximum           1569              1569                1569
F-statistic                                 6922.270          4315.440           3337.690
Prob. > F-statistic                               0                0                   0
Condition Index                                6.64              7.60                6.19




                                                                                                    59
     Table 5: Determinants of the standard deviation among the CDS data
     sources using the number of contributors as an explanatory variable
This table reports the regression coefficients of the unbalanced panel regressions. The
dependent variable is the standard deviation among the different CDS data sources (CMA,
Markit, Fenics, Reuters EOD). The database includes ninety European and US firms (47 of
the firms are European and the rest are American) which are the most liquid CDSs included
in either the Itraxx or the CDX Index since the launching of the indexes, from January 2004
to April 2010. The estimation uses a fixed-effects model robust to heteroskedasticity.
Column (1) reports the baseline regression's results for the whole sample of firms without
using the number of contributors as an explanatory variable. Column (2) reports the results
obtained by adding the number of contributors as an additional explanatory variable to the
ones in Column (1). Column (3) reports the results obtained using as an additional
explanatory variable a generated regressor which is obtained after regressing the number of
contributors on the VIX Index and the CDS bid-ask spread and then using the residual to
proxy the number of contributors net of the global risk and the illiquidity effect in the CDS
market. In order to estimate the coefficients presented in Column (3) of this table we use the
bootsptrap methodology to correct any potential bias in the standard errors due to the use of
a generated regressor. The t-statistics are reported between brackets.
                                                  (1)              (2)               (3)
Log(Mkt. Cap.)                                 -0.095            -0.105            -0.105
                                              (-10.53)         (-10.33)           (-10.27)
Trade                                          -0.079            -0.134            -0.134
                                              (-10.01)         (-16.75)           (-15.95)
Days w/o a trade                               0.0003            0.0004            0.0004
                                              (10.80)           (14.61)           (14.73)
Interaction Trade and Days w/o trade           -0.001           -0.0003           -0.0003
                                               (-1.97)          (-1.09)            (-1.10)
CDS Bid-Ask Spread                              0.041            0.041             0.041
                                              (14.76)           (14.33)           (13.70)
VIX Index                                       0.045            0.048             0.046
                                              (64.85)           (66.66)           (63.80)
Max Quotes                                      0.290            0.338             0.338
                                              (32.86)           (29.74)           (30.23)
Number of Contributors                                           0.014             0.014
                                                                (21.33)           (19.86)
Constant                                        0.938            0.854             1.101
                                                (4.30)           (3.49)            (4.46)
R-squared                                       0.481            0.495             0.495
Number of observations                        138653            128179            128179
Number of groups                                  90               90                90
Observations per group       Minimum              940              332               332
                              Average            1541             1424              1424
                             Maximum             1569             1492              1492
F-statistic                                  6922.270          5870.500
Prob. > F-statistic                                0                0
Wald Chi2                                                                        47673.88
Prob. > Wald Chi2                                                                     0
Condition Index                                  6.64            10.67             10.67




                                                                                                 60
           Table 6: Price Discovery Analysis by Pairs of CDS spreads
This table reports the results of the price discovery analysis. First, we estimate the Gonzalo-
Granger (GG) price discovery metrics for different pairs of 5-year single name CDS spreads
using different data sources. The estimations are based on a VECM in which the VAR-
length is selected according to the Schwarz information criteria. Then we calculate the
average Gonzalo-Granger metric for all the firms, the European and the American firms for
the different pairs of data sources. When the price discovery metric is higher than 0.5, the
corresponding data source leads the price discovery process. The symbols ***, **, and *
(^^^, ^^, and ^) summarize the statistical significance test and indicate that the average price
discovery metric (GG) corresponding to a given data source is significantly higher (lower)
than 0.5 at a significance level of 99, 95 and 90%, respectively.

CMA versus Markit GG Price Discovery Metrics
                                     Total                    Europe                US
CMA                                 0.574**                   0.502              0.660***
Markit                              0.426^^                   0.498              0.340^^^

CMA versus Fenics GG Price Discovery Metrics
                                     Total                    Europe                US
CMA                                0.734***                  0.754***            0.708***
Fenics                             0.266^^^                  0.246^^^            0.292^^^

CMA versus Reuters EOD GG Price Discovery Metrics
                                    Total                     Europe                US
CMA                               0.798***                   0.859***            0.718***
Reuters EOD                       0.202^^^                   0.141^^^            0.282^^^

Markit versus Fenics GG Price Discovery Metrics
                                       Total                  Europe                US
Markit                               0.771***                0.800***            0.735***
Fenics                               0.229^^^                0.200^^^            0.265^^^

Markit versus Reuters EOD GG Price Discovery Metrics
                                      Total           Europe                        US
Markit                              0.783***         0.893***                    0.644***
Reuters EOD                         0.217^^^         0.107^^^                    0.356^^^

Fenics versus Reuters EOD GG Price Discovery Metrics
                                      Total                   Europe                US
Fenics                              0.398^^^                  0.461              0.318^^^
Reuters EOD                         0.602***                   0.539             0.682***




                                                                                                   61
   Table 7: Determinants of the standard deviation among the CDS data sources using
               proxies for the VIX Index and the CDS illiquidity measure
This table reports the regression coefficients of the unbalanced panel regressions. The dependent variable
is the standard deviation among the different CDS data sources (CMA, Markit, Fenics, Reuters EOD).
The database includes ninety European and US firms (47 of the firms are European and the rest are
American) which are the most liquid CDSs included in either the Itraxx or the CDX Index since the
launching of the indexes, from January 2004 to April 2010. The estimation uses a fixed-effects model
robust to heteroskedasticity. Column (1) reports the baseline regression results which are the same as in
Column (1) of Table 4. Column (2) provides the results obtained when we use as an explanatory variable
a generated regressor which is obtained as the residual of a regression in which the VIX Index is
regressed on the CDS bid-ask spread. Column (3) reports the results obtained when we use as an
explanatory variable a generated regressor which is obtained as the residual of a regression in which the
CDS bid-ask spread is regressed on the VIX Index. In order to estimate the coefficients presented in
Columns (2) and (3) we use the bootstrap methodology to correct any potential bias in the standard errors
due to the use of generated regressors. The t-statistics are reported between brackets.
                                                              (1)               (2)             (3)
 Log(Mkt. Cap.)                                             -0.095            -0.095          -0.095
                                                          (-10.53)          (-10.18)        (-10.15)
 Trade                                                     -0.079            -0.079           -0.079
                                                          (-10.01)          (-10.05)        (-11.27)
 Days w/o a trade                                          0.0003            0.0003           0.0003
                                                           (10.80)           (11.54)         (11.29)
 Interaction Trade and Days w/o trade                     -0.0006           -0.0006          -0.0006
                                                           (-1.97)           (-2.12)         (-1.81)
 CDS Bid-Ask Spread                                         0.041              0.082
                                                           (14.76)           (38.96)
 VIX Index                                                  0.045                              0.057
                                                           (64.85)                          (206.26)
 VIX Index net of the CDS Bid-Ask Spread effect                               0.045
                                                                             (64.96)
 CDS Bid-Ask Spread net of the VIX Index effect                                                0.041
                                                                                             (13.54)
 Max Quotes                                                  0.290             0.290           0.290
                                                           (32.86)           (33.99)         (31.30)
 Constant                                                   0.938              1.642           0.928
                                                            (4.30)            (7.09)          (4.11)
 R-squared                                                  0.481              0.482           0.482
 Number of observations                                   138653            138653           138653
 Number of groups                                              90                90              90
 Observations per group                  Minimum              940               940             940
                                           Average           1541            1540.6          1540.6
                                         Maximum             1569              1569            1569
 F-statistic                                             6922.270
 Prob. > F-statistic                                        0.000
 Wald Chi2                                                                 40905.47         60080.36
 Prob. > Wald Chi2                                                             0.000           0.000
 Condition Index                                             6.64              5.06             6.1




                                                                                                             62
  Table 8: Determinants of the standard deviation among the CDS data sources
                     using alternative regression methods
This table reports the regression coefficients of the unbalanced panel regressions. The dependent
variable is the standard deviation among the different CDS data sources (CMA, Markit, Fenics,
Reuters EOD). The database includes ninety European and US firms (47 of the firms are
European and the rest are American) which are the most liquid CDSs included in either the
Itraxx or the CDX Index since the launching of the indexes, from January 2004 to April 2010.
We estimate the coefficients of the determinants of the standard deviation among the CDS data
sources by means of different methodologies. Column (1) reports the results obtained using a
fixed-effects model robust to heteroskedasticity as in Column (1) of Table 4. The results
presented in Column (2) are obtained by means of a pooled-regression. Column (3) reports the
results obtained using a Prais-Winsten regression with correlated panels corrected standard
errors (PCSEs) and robust to heteroskedasticity, contemporaneous correlation across panels and
serial autocorrelation within panels. The correlation within panels is treated as a first-order
autocorrelation AR(1) and the coefficient of this process common to all the panels. Each
element in the covariance matrix of the disturbances is computed with all available observations
that are common to the two panels contributing to the covariance. The t-statistics are reported
between brackets.
                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)
 Log(Mkt. Cap.)                                 -0.095             -0.012             -0.019
                                               (-10.53)            (-4.96)            (-4.87)
 Trade                                          -0.079             -0.270             -0.081
                                               (-10.01)           (-31.14)           (-10.06)
 Days w/o a trade                               0.0003             0.0011             0.0012
                                                (10.80)            (54.31)            (29.88)
 Interaction Trade and Days w/o trade          -0.0006             0.0009             0.0001
                                                (-1.97)             (2.72)             (0.28)
 CDS Bid-Ask Spread                              0.041              0.055              0.033
                                                (14.76)            (16.76)            (37.84)
 VIX Index                                       0.045              0.041              0.043
                                                (64.85)            (46.94)            (39.18)
 Max Quotes                                      0.290              0.384              0.394
                                                (32.86)            (44.12)            (17.00)
 Constant                                        0.938             -1.144             -0.937
                                                 (4.30)           (-19.79)            (-9.34)
 R-squared                                       0.481              0.292              0.093
 Number of observations                         138653            138653             138653
 Number of groups                                  90                                    90
 Observations per group       Minimum              940                                   940
                                Average         1540.6                              1540.589
                              Maximum             1569                                  1569
 F-statistic                                   6922.27            5799.58
 Prob. > F-statistic                             0.000              0.000
 Autorregressive (AR(1)) coefficient                                                    0.63
 Wald Chi2                                                                           4712.68
 Prob. > Wald Chi2                                                                     0.000




                                                                                                    63
     Table 9: Determinants of the differences between JPM and Fenics CDS spreads
This table reports the regression coefficients of the unbalanced panel regressions. The database includes
ninety European and US firms (47 of the firms are European and the rest are American) which are the
most liquid CDSs included in either the Itraxx or the CDX Index since the launching of the indexes,
from January 2004 to April 2010. The estimation uses a fixed-effects model robust to heteroskedasticity.
Columns (1) and (2) report the coefficients of the determinants of the JPM and Fenics CDS spreads
difference in absolute terms when we exclude the CDS Bid-Ask Spread and the VIX Index variables,
respectively. Columns (3) and (4) provide the coefficients of the determinants of the JPM and Fenics
CDS difference in relative terms when we exclude the CDS Bid-Ask Spread and the VIX Index
variables, respectively. The difference in relative terms is obtained as the ratio between the difference in
absolute terms and the mean between JPM and Fenics spreads. The t-statistics are reported between
brackets.
                                                 (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)
 Log(Mkt. Cap.)                                -2.325           0.029             -0.012          -0.009
                                             (-18.31)           (0.26)          (-10.41)         (-7.37)
 Trade                                         -0.634           -0.019            -0.006          -0.005
                                              (-9.05)          (-0.25)           (-9.67)         (-7.96)
 Days w/o a trade                              0.016            0.012             0.000           0.000
                                              (14.04)          (11.14)           (13.55)         (13.14)
 Interaction Trade and Days w/o trade          -0.004           -0.012          0.00002         0.00001
                                              (-0.68)          (-1.08)            (0.74)          (0.26)
 VIX Index                                    0.3171                             0.0003
                                              (42.29)                            (11.38)
 CDS Bid-Ask Spread                                            1.0290                            0.0013
                                                               (32.18)                           (13.36)
 Constant                                     53.738            -2.658            0.330           0.252
                                              (17.74)          (-0.98)           (12.00)          (8.91)
 R-squared                                     0.203            0.320             0.108           0.115
 Number of observations                        46772            46772             46772           46772
 Number of groups                                 43               43                43              43
 Observations per group      Minimum             891              891               891             891
                                Average         1088             1088              1088            1088
                             Maximum            1149             1149              1149            1149
 F-statistic                                 369.480           250.080          114.520         109.030
 Prob. > F-statistic                              0                0                 0               0
 Condition Index                                4.40             2.99              4.40            2.99




                                                                                                           64
                               AXA                                                             Hannover Rueckversicherung AG
                        CMA    Markit     Reuters      Fenics                                  CMA       Markit    Reuters     Fenics
                                                                                         120
                  280
                                                                                         110

                  230                                                                    100
  Basis Points




                                                                       Basis Points
                                                                                         90
                  180                                                                    80

                                                                                         70
                  130
                                                                                         60
                   80                                                                    50
                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08




                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08
                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20




                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20
                      9/


                      9/


                      9/


                      0/


                      0/


                      1/


                      1/


                      2/


                      2/




                                                                                             9/


                                                                                             9/


                                                                                             9/


                                                                                             0/


                                                                                             0/


                                                                                             1/


                                                                                             1/


                                                                                             2/


                                                                                             2/
                    /0


                    /0


                    /0


                    /1


                    /1


                    /1


                    /1


                    /1


                    /1




                                                                                           /0




                                                                                           /1




                                                                                           /1
                                                                                           /0


                                                                                           /0




                                                                                           /1


                                                                                           /1


                                                                                           /1




                                                                                           /1
                  02


                  16


                  30


                  14


                  28


                  11


                  25


                  09


                  23




                                                                                         02


                                                                                         16




                                                                                         11




                                                                                         23
                                                                                         30


                                                                                         14


                                                                                         28




                                                                                         25


                                                                                         09
                               Baxter                                                                 Dominion Resources
                         CMA     Markit      Reuters      Fenics                                CMA       Markit     Reuters      Fenics
                   65                                                                    150
                   60                                                                    140
                   55                                                                    130
                   50                                                                    120
   Basis Points




                                                                          Basis Points
                   45                                                                    110
                   40                                                                    100
                   35                                                                     90
                   30                                                                     80
                   25                                                                     70
                   20                                                                     60
                                                                                          50
                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08


                          08
                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20


                        20




                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                 08
                      9/


                      9/


                      9/


                      0/


                      0/


                      1/


                      1/


                      2/


                      2/




                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                               20
                    /0


                    /0


                    /0


                    /1


                    /1


                    /1


                    /1


                    /1


                    /1




                                                                                             9/


                                                                                             9/


                                                                                             9/


                                                                                             0/


                                                                                             0/


                                                                                             1/


                                                                                             1/


                                                                                             2/


                                                                                             2/
                  02


                  16


                  30


                  14


                  28


                  11


                  25


                  09


                  23




                                                                                           /0


                                                                                           /0


                                                                                           /0


                                                                                           /1


                                                                                           /1


                                                                                           /1


                                                                                           /1


                                                                                           /1


                                                                                           /1
                                                                                         02


                                                                                         16


                                                                                         30


                                                                                         14


                                                                                         28


                                                                                         11


                                                                                         25


                                                                                         09


                                                                                         23
Figure 1: Single name CDS spreads from different data sources. This figure shows the CDS spreads time series (in basis points) for the different
data sources (CMA, Markit, Reuters and Fenics) during the period September 2008 – January 2009.




                                                                                                                                                   65
                               Data Sources' Average Absolute Discrepancy (in %)

      0.14
      0.12
      0.10
      0.08
      0.06
      0.04
      0.02
      0.00
    /0 04
    /0 04
    /1 04
    /0 04
    /0 05
    /0 05
    /1 05
    /0 05
    /0 06
    /0 06
    /1 06
    /0 06
    /0 07
    /0 07
    /1 07
    /0 07
    /0 08
    /0 08
    /1 08
    /0 08
    /0 09
    /0 09
    /1 09
    /0 09
          10
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
  05 /20
        20
      1/
      1
      4
      7
      0
      1
      4
      7
      0
      1
      4
      7
      0
      1
      4
      7
      0
      1
      4
      7
      0
      1
      4
      7
      0
    /0
  05




                                                       Trade      No Trade

Figure 2. Data Sources’ Average Absolute Discrepancies (AAD). This figure shows the cross-sectional deviations
across data sources over time. The series is computed as the absolute value of the average difference across pairs of
data sources (CMA - Markit, CMA - Fenics, CMA - Reuters, Markit - Fenics, Markit - Reuters, Fenics – Reuters)
divided by the average CDS spread across the four previous data sources (CMA, Markit, Fenics, and Reuters) for each
firm. Then, we calculate the average of the previous series date by date across the total number of entities.




                                                                                                                        66
