                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              LOCAL VERSUS AGGREGATE LENDING CHANNELS:
   THE EFFECTS OF SECURITIZATION ON CORPORATE CREDIT SUPPLY IN SPAIN

                                            Gabriel Jiménez
                                             Atif R. Mian
                                           José-Luis Peydró
                                             Jesús Saurina

                                         Working Paper 16595
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16595


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




The results or views expressed in this study are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those
of the Banco de España, European Central Bank and Eurosystem. Corresponding Author: Mian, (510)
643 1425, atif@haas.berkeley.edu. We thank Michael Weber for excellent research assistance and
Asim Khwaja and Amir Sufi for extremely helpful comments and discussion. We would also like to
thank seminar participants at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, European Central
Bank, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, New York Federal Reserve, University of Michigan (Ross), Notre
Dam, and University of California Berkeley for comments. Financial support from the Coleman Fung
Risk Management Research Center at University of California Berkeley is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Gabriel Jiménez, Atif R. Mian, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Local Versus Aggregate Lending Channels: The Effects Of Securitization On Corporate Credit
Supply In Spain
Gabriel Jiménez, Atif R. Mian, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina
NBER Working Paper No. 16595
December 2010
JEL No. E44,G01,G21

                                              ABSTRACT

While banks may change their supply of credit due to bank balance sheet shocks (the local lending
channel), firms can react by adjusting their sources of financing in equilibrium (the aggregate lending
channel). We formalize a methodology for separately estimating these effects. We estimate the local
and aggregate lending channel effects of the banks' ability to securitize real estate assets on non-real
estate firms in Spain. We show that equilibrium dynamics nullify the strong local lending channel
effect on credit quantity for firms with multiple banking relationships. However, credit terms for these
firms become significantly more favorable due to securitization. Securitization also leads to an expansion
in credit on the extensive margin towards first-time bank clients, and these borrowers are significantly
more likely to end up in default. Finally, the 2008 collapse in securitization leads to a reversal in local
lending channel.


Gabriel Jiménez                                      José-Luis Peydró
Bank of Spain                                        European Central Bank
Alcalde 48                                           29 Kaiserstrasse
28014 Madrid,                                        Frankfurt am Main,
Spain                                                D60311, Germany
gabriel.jimenez@bde.es                               jose-luis.peydro-alcalde@ecb.int

Atif R. Mian                                         Jesús Saurina
University of California, Berkeley                   Alcala 48
545 Student Services                                 28014, Madrid
Berkeley, CA 94720                                   Spain
and NBER                                             jsaurina@bde.es
atif@haas.berkeley.edu
1     Introduction
The banking sector often takes center stage in economic controversies. Banks are accused of
excessive credit creation and asset bubbles on the upside, and of being too stingy with credit
on the downside, both with important consequences for economic activity. The primary
suspect in such scenarios is the credit supply channel, i.e. the fear that credit growth (or
lack thereof) is being dictated by malfunctions in the credit supply process rather than
economic fundamentals. It was such a fear in 2008 that forced central banks around the
world to intervene with hundreds of billions of dollars in the banking industry.
    While shocks to balance sheets of banks may have real e¤ects via changes in bank credit
supply (Bernanke 1983; Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010; Holmstrom and Tirole 1997), how do
we know that observed ‡uctuations in credit are driven by supply shifts, and not demand
fundamentals? Most calls for policy makers to “lean against the wind” in the midst of a
credit boom, or to subsidize banks in a credit crunch, are based on the premise that the
primary failure lies on the supply side.
    Furthermore, it is increasingly recognized that supply side failures at the bank level (the
“local” lending channel e¤ect) only re‡ect partial equilibrium outcomes. The general equi-
librium consequences could be very di¤erent and require a “macroprudential approach” to
analysis (Trichet 2009; Hanson, Kashyap and Stein, forthcoming). For example, a reduction
in credit supply due to an adverse bank balance sheet shock may not have any negative
impact if a¤ected …rms can go elsewhere to compensate for the loss in credit. We refer
to the latter response as the “aggregate” lending channel e¤ect. Indeed proponents of non-
interventionist central banking, such as Mulligan (2008), argue that such general equilibrium
e¤ects are strong enough to let credit markets heal on their own. Unnecessary interventions,
they argue, create more mischief by punctuating the virtuous cycle of creative destruction.
    This paper formalizes a methodology that estimates the supply side e¤ects of both local
and aggregate lending channels. Our approach separates the impact of supply from demand
of credit while taking into account …rm-level equilibrium adjustments. It builds upon earlier
work by Khwaja and Mian 2008 (KM henceforth). KM estimate the supply-induced credit
channel e¤ect by using …rm …xed e¤ects that absorb credit demand shocks experienced by a

                                               2
…rm. We extend this technique by estimating the otherwise unobservable covariance between
bank-speci…c credit supply shocks and …rm-speci…c credit demand shocks. We then use this
covariance term to construct an unbiased estimate of the aggregate impact of bank lending
channel that explicitly takes into account …rm-level equilibrium adjustments.
       We apply our methodology to the case of Spain and test whether the boom in securitiza-
tion enables banks with large real estate assets to expand credit supply. We investigate the
possible lending channel consequences of securitization for credit quantity, credit terms, and
…rm performance. The rapid expansion in global market for securitized products enabled
Spanish banks –especially those with large real estate assets –to access wholesale …nancing
by securitizing their real estate assets.1
       Using ex-ante (year 2000) variation in real estate holdings to proxy for the capacity of
banks to securitize assets during the securitization boom, we test if securitization expanded
credit supply and encouraged riskier lending in the non-real estate sectors of the economy.2
We utilize a comprehensive loan level data set for this purpose from the credit register of
the Bank of Spain. The data include loan level information for all bank loans granted in
Spain at quarterly frequency from 1999Q4 to 2009Q4. This information is then merged with
balance sheet information for borrower (the …rm) and lender (the bank).
       We show that securitization is indeed higher for banks that had more real estate assets
before the boom, and that these banks have stronger credit growth for non-real-estate …rms.
Applying the KM methodology, we use …rm …xed-e¤ects to absorb credit demand shocks
at borrower-level and show that the securitization-induced credit growth is primarily driven
by changes in the banks’credit supply. Thus improved access to wholesale …nancing allows
banks to increase credit supply. The e¤ect is economically large as well, with one standard
deviation increase in exposure to real estate more than doubling the growth in credit supply
to non-real-estate …rms between 2004 and 2007.3
   1
     We use the term “securitization” to include both covered bonds and asset-backed securities in the case
of Spain.
   2
     Allen and Gale (2007) and Adrian and Shin (2010) present possible mechansims through which securi-
tization might impact credit supply.
   3
     As we explain later, these results are based on …rms with multiple banking relationships at the start of
securitzation boom in 2004. Such …rms represent 78 percent of overall bank credit in Spain.




                                                     3
   However, despite a large local lending channel e¤ect at bank-…rm level, the net impact of
securitization, i.e. the aggregate lending channel e¤ect, is signi…cantly lower due to “crowding
out”of existing credit at …rm level. Crowding out may occur for a couple of reasons. First,
some …rms may not be credit constrained and may not want to increase their net borrowing.
If a bank o¤ers to increase its credit supply for such a …rm, the …rm is likely to demand better
terms and likely to cut back its borrowing from other banks. Second, even for …rms that
are credit-constrained, banks may not be willing to go beyond the …rms’total debt capacity.
For example, total borrowing capacity of …rms may be …xed in the short run if they need
to have scarce collateral or equity to credibly commit to banks against future misbehavior.
In such a scenario, greater willingness by some banks to lend is likely to lead to a shift in
borrowing towards banks that want to expand credit rather than an aggregate increase in
lending. A unique advantage of our methodology is that we can incorporate such crowding
out e¤ects.
   We …nd strong support for the crowding out hypothesis. For the set of …rms with multiple
borrowing banking relationships at the time of securitization boom, the aggregate lending
channel e¤ect is close to zero despite a large local lending channel e¤ect! Crowding out thus
dramatically reduces the net impact of securitization-induced credit supply on the quantity
of credit.
   There is, however, a signi…cant impact of aggregate lending channel on the price of
credit. We show that …rms with unused lines of credit start to disproportionately favor banks
with greater access to securitization, suggesting improved credit terms through a revealed
preference argument. Consistent with this interpretation, we …nd that securitization leads to
a reduction in the rate of collateralization and a lengthening of loan maturity. These results
suggest that securitization leads to more favorable credit terms for borrowers as credit supply
expands.
   Despite the zero impact of securitization-induced credit supply channel on the quantity of
credit, there could be some positive real e¤ects through the e¤ect on credit terms. However,
we …nd no evidence of any impact on real …rm outcomes, including …rm sales, employment,
and default rate.


                                               4
      The results above are based on …rms that already have borrowing relationships at the
time of securitization boom. When we look at the e¤ect of securitization on the extensive
margin of lending to new clients, we …nd a large e¤ect on credit quantity. Growth in credit
to new clients between 2004 and 2007 is much stronger for banks with greater exposure to
securitization. A one standard deviation increase in exposure to real estate assets generates
credit to new clients that is equivalent to 10.7 percent of bank assets. Moreover, new credit
granted is riskier, as it is about a third more likely to default.
      On the whole, securitization leads to favorable credit terms for …rms with established
access to credit but has no impact on their total borrowing or real outcomes. However, it
does have a large e¤ect on credit extension to new clients that turn out to be signi…cantly
more risky. The expansion in credit adds fragility to the …nancial system as new loans are
signi…cantly more likely to default during the downturn.
      Finally, we also evaluate the credit supply consequences of the collapse in securitization
market in 2008. There is a sharp reversal in the local lending channel as bank’s with exposure
to real estate securitization cut back their credit line signi…cantly. However, the aggregate
impact is more modest as borrowing …rms are partially able to adjust their borrowing from
other banks.
      Our paper contributes to the large literature on bank transmission mechanisms in four
ways.4 First, our proposed methodology uses loan-level credit register data that are in-
creasingly available in many countries around the world. Our technique is thus practical to
implement and should help policy makers gain a better understanding of the overall strength
of credit supply channel in the economy.
      Second, we are the …rst to formally incorporate the equilibrium feedback e¤ect from bor-
rowers when estimating bank transmission channel. As observers such as Mulligan (2008)
have emphasized, incorporating these e¤ects is critical for proper evaluation of central bank
interventions. The results of some of the previous studies that estimate transmission channel
at the bank level – such as Kashyap and Stein (2000) – may be incomplete without incor-
porating …rm level equilibrium response. Indeed, our own analysis of Spanish banks reveals
  4
   A partial list on the empirical side includes Bernanke (1983), Kashyap and Stein (2000), Peek and
Rosengren (2000), Ashcraft (2005), Paravisini (2008).


                                                 5
that while the bank transmission mechanism is strong, its aggregate impact is reduced due
to the …rm level crowding out e¤ect for large segments of the economy.5
       Third, the role of …nancial innovation in precipitating credit booms and subsequent …nan-
cial crises through the …nancial intermediary system is emphasized by numerous economic
historians (e.g. White (1996), Calorimis (2008), Bordo (2009) and Kindleberger (1978)).
Most recently, Kohn (2009) notes “the tendency for …nancial crises to be preceded by bub-
bles spurred by …nancial liberalization or innovations”. Our paper provides the …rst formal
evidence on the extent to which …nancial innovation - in the form of securitization - induces
banks to extend more credit and at riskier terms.
       Fourth, there is an emerging literature on the e¤ects of securitization on bank lending
and risk-taking. Securitization has been associated with lax lending and excessive credit cre-
ation in mortgage markets during the 2000’s (Keys et al (2010) and Mian and Su… (2009)).
Loutskina and Strahan (2009) show that securitizability of a loan helps disconnect the de-
pendence of loan origination on bank …nancials. We contribute to this literature by analyzing
the e¤ects of securitization on lending standards and credit risk for non-real-estate related
business loans.
       Finally, there is some related work on the Spanish banking system using data similar to
ours. Jiménez et al. (2010a and 2010b) evaluate the credit channel consequences of monetary
policy. They …nd a signi…cant e¤ect of monetary policy on credit supply and risk taking. Our
paper di¤ers in its focus on securitization, as well as in introducing a new methodology that
incorporates equilibrium crowding out e¤ects. We also provide evidence on real outcomes
that earlier studies did not have access to.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the theoretical founda-
tion for our empirical methodology. Section 3 describes the data and institutional details.
Sections 4, 5 and 6 present empirical results and section 7 concludes.
   5
    Another paper that tests the real e¤ects of bank credit supply shocks is Peek and Rosegren (2000). They
show that a negative credit supply shock from Japanesse banks, stemming from the real estate price bust
in Japan, has negative real repercussions in US for real estate construction. However, their analysis on real
e¤ects is only at the US-state level. We, instead, do it at the loan and …rm level.




                                                     6
2      Methodology

2.1        Basic Model

We outline our basic methodology for estimating the net impact of credit supply channel
e¤ect. Consider an economy with banks and …rms indexed by i and j respectively. Firm j
borrows from nj banks at time t and assume that it borrows the same amount from each of
the nj banks.
     The economy experiences two shocks at t : a …rm-speci…c credit demand shock                         j   and
a bank-speci…c credit supply shock       i:   j   re‡ects changes in the …rm’s demand for credit
driven by productivity or customer demand shocks.                   i   re‡ects changes in the bank’s funding
situation, such as a run on short term liabilities (a negative shock), or new opportunities to
access wholesale …nancing (a positive shock.)
     Let yij denote the log change in credit from bank i to …rm j: Then the basic credit channel
equation in the face of credit supply and demand shocks can be written as:


                                    yij =     +         i   +   j       + "ij                                (1)

     Equation (1) assumes that the change in bank credit from bank i to …rm j is determined
by an economy wide secular trend ; credit supply and credit demand shocks, and an idio-
syncratic shock "ij: While equation (1) is reduced form in nature, it can be derived as an
equilibrium condition by explicitly modeling credit supply and demand schedules (see KM).
We keep the analysis deliberately simple here to focus on the core estimation problem.
     In a frictionless world (as in the Modigliani-Miller theorem), bank lending is independent
of credit supply conditions and only depends on “fundamental” credit demand factors. Fi-
nancial intermediaries in such scenarios have no impact on the economy and, hence, there is
no bank transmission channel, i.e.     = 0 in equation (1). The presence of …nancing frictions,
however, may force banks to pass on their credit supply shocks                  i   to borrowing …rms, making
    > 0:
       if often referred to as the “bank lending channel”, and we refer to it as the local lending
                                                                                                    Cov( i ; j )
channel in this paper. It can be estimated from (1) using OLS, giving us bOLS = +                    V ar( i )
                                                                                                                 :

                                                    7
The expression implies that as long as credit supply and demand shocks are signi…cantly
correlated, bOLS in (1) would be a biased estimate of the true                          . For example, if banks
receiving a positive liquidity shock are more likely to lend to …rms that simultaneously
receive a positive credit demand boost, then                 would be biased upwards. KM resolve this
issue by focusing on …rms with nj            2; and absorbing out              j   through …rm …xed-e¤ects. The
estimated coe¢ cient bF E then provides an unbiased estimate of :
      However, bF E does not give us a complete picture of the net e¤ect of bank lending channel
on the economy. In particular, individual …rms a¤ected by the local lending channel due to
a positive       in equation (1) may seek alternative sources of bank …nancing to compensate
for any loss of credit. Alternatively, if …rms bene…t from greater provision of credit via a
positive credit supply shock to an individual bank, their borrowing from elsewhere may be
cut either voluntarily or due to a crowding-out e¤ect. Thus, in order to gain a complete
picture of the credit channel e¤ect, one must compute its consequences at the aggregate …rm
level. We can do so by estimating the …rm-equivalent version of (1):


                                         yj =     +         j   +   j   + "j                                   (2)

      y j denotes the log change in credit for …rm j across all banks.6 It is not a simple average of
yij from (1) since a …rm can start borrowing from new banks as well.    denote the average  j
                                                                                    X
initial exposure to real estate assets of banks lending to …rm j at time t; i.e. j =     i
                                                                                        nj
                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                        i Nj
where Nj represents the set of banks lending to …rm j at time t: "j is an idiosyncratic error
term. The same credit demand shock                j   appears in both equations (1) and (2) under the
assumption that the shock equally a¤ects a …rm’s borrowing from all banks.
      The aggregate impact of credit supply channel is captured by the coe¢ cient ; which we
refer to as the aggregate lending channel. If there is no adjustment at …rm-level in the face
of bank-speci…c credit channel shocks, then                 = : However if there is some adjustment at
…rm-level, for example a crowding-out e¤ect, then                   should be less than :
  6
      Depending on data availability, it could include non-bank sources of credit as well.




                                                        8
      How does one estimate ? An OLS estimate of (2) yields bOLS = +
                                                                                                    Cov( i ;   j)
                                                                                                     V ar( j )
                                                                                                                    :7 While the
variance of     j   can be estimated in data, the covariance term between credit demand and credit
supply shocks is unobservable to the econometrician. However, a unique advantage of the
preceding …xed-e¤ects estimator at loan level is that it allows us to back-out the covariance
term. Since bF E is an unbiased estimate of ; we can write Cov( i ;                            j)    = bOLS             bF E

V ar( i ); where variance of bank credit supply shocks                i   can be estimated directly from data.
Thus the aggregate lending channel e¤ect, ; can be estimated as:


                                   b=b           bOLS         bF E          V ar( i )
                                       OLS                                                                                     (3)
                                                                            V ar( j )
      The second term on the right hand side of (3) is the adjustment term that corrects
for any bias in the OLS estimate of (2). The adjustment term corrects for the otherwise
unobserved covariance between credit supply and demand shocks. The extra variance term
in the denominator corrects for the fact that the variance of bank shocks averaged at the
…rm level may be di¤erent from the variance of bank shocks overall.
      Equation (3) summarizes our methodology for estimating the net impact of bank credit
channel. It is simple and practical to implement as loan level credit register data are now
available in most countries of the world. The procedure can be summarized as follows. For
any given bank shock         i   that is suspected of generating a transmission channel, run OLS and
FE versions of (1) to estimate bOLS and bF E respectively. Then estimate …rm level equation
(2) using OLS to generate bOLS : Finally plug these three coe¢ cients in (3) to estimate the
unbiased impact of credit supply channel at the …rm level.


2.2       Calibration and Robustness

Our model uses simplifying assumptions to keep the analysis tractable. Real world data
may not satisfy some of these assumptions. How robust is our core result, i.e. equation
(3), to such perturbations? Since close-form solutions are not possible with more generic
assumption, we present numerical solutions to our model under alternative scenarios.
                                                                      X
  7
      This follows from the observation that Cov( j ;   j)   = Cov(         nj ; j )
                                                                             i
                                                                                       = Cov( i ;    j ):
                                                                     i Nj



                                                        9
       Table I summarizes the results of our simulation exercise. Panel A takes our baseline
scenario, i.e. the model presented above, and calibrates it using di¤erent assumptions on two
key parameters of interest: the (unobservable) correlation between credit demand and credit
supply shocks ( ), and the extent of …rm-level adjustment to bank transmission shocks ( ).
  = 100% implies there is full adjustment at the …rm-level making                  = 0: The calibration
exercise assumes that true    = 0:5 and shocks are normally distributed with mean zero
and variance equal to 1.0.8 The results show that while OLS estimates bOLS and bOLS can
be signi…cantly biased with high absolute levels of ; our …xed-e¤ects and bias-correction
procedure in (3) successfully backs out the true coe¢ cients of interest. In a way, Panel A
also serves as a “numerical proof”of our baseline methodology.
       The baseline analysis assumes that banks continue to lend to …rms after realization of
shocks. This may not happen in practice. Some loans may be dropped for idiosyncratic
reasons and others due to either credit supply or credit demand shocks. Our OLS and FE
regressions from the preceding section ignores such dropped loans. Does ignoring dropped
loans change the results in Panel A? We test this by simulating dropped loans and then
running our estimation procedure on surviving loans. In particular, add a …rst-stage before
our estimation procedure that drops some loans from our sample depending on the loans’
credit demand shock, the credit supply shock, and an idiosyncratic factor. The probability
of a loan getting dropped is modelled as a probit, with weights on various factors chosen
to match what we …nd in data9 . We then rerun our estimation procedure on the remaining
sample. The results in Panel B show that our estimate of betas remains valid even when
conditioning on loans that do not get dropped10 .
   8
     The variance roughly re‡ects the variance of …rm-level credit changes from 2004Q4 to 2007Q4.
   9
     We set these parameters such that the coe¢ cient on supply shock is -0.25 (as we will see in column (7)
of table 5). The coe¢ cient on demand shock is also assigned the same magnitude. Finally, the level e¤ect is
chosen such that about a third of total loans are dropped, as in our Spanish data.
  10
     Our model also assumes that each …rm borrows the same amount initially from its set of lenders. We
also tested for robustness of our results to this assumption by similating borrowing across banks by a …rm
that matches our data. Our methodology continues to perform very well with these changes.




                                                    10
3     Data and Institutional Background

3.1    Data

Our data come from loan level credit register of the central bank of Spain (Banco de España),
which also the banking supervisor in Spain. It covers all loans to all non-…nancial …rms. For
computational purposes, we restrict to loans with an average borrowing of at least e60,000.
We further restrict the data to non-real-estate loans in order to avoid the concern that our
results may be spuriously driven by the boom in real estate sector during our sample period.
    The data come at quarterly frequency and cover the period from the fourth quarter of
1999 to the fourth quarter of 2009. The 10 year coverage has the advantage of covering
the full lending cycle in Spain. There are 487,090 …rms borrowing from any of a possible
of 215 banks during this time period. In order to avoid data management issues due to
large size, we randomly sample 10% of the …rms based on the random, penultimate digit of
the …rm …scal identity number. Once a …rm is selected we keep all of its loans over the 10
year period in our sample. Our 10% random sample consists of 48,709 …rms. While a …rm
may have multiple loans from the same bank at a point in time, we aggregate loans at the
…rm-bank-quarter level which forms our unit of analysis. Thus a “loan”in this paper refers
to a …rm-bank pair.
    Firms can enter and exit the sample during our sample period. The average tenure of a
…rm in our sample is 25.7 quarters (out of a possible of 41 quarters), with a median tenure of
26 quarters and 25th and 75th percentile of 14 and 41 quarters respectively. The distribution
of bank credit across …rms is highly skewed with top 10% of …rms borrow 75.3% of total
credit in the economy (Figure 1, top-left panel). The skewed nature of …rm-size distribution
is typical around the world. The dotted line in the top-left panel of Figure 1 shows that the
cumulative distribution function of credit across banks is very similar to the CDF picture
for …rms. As with …rms, the top 10% of banks dominate the credit market.
    There is a tendency for banks to merge over our sample period as well. There are 246
banks at the beginning of sample period and 214 banks by our sample’s end. However, major
bank mergers (in terms of size) happen before 2001Q4. Therefore, in order to keep a more


                                             11
consistent panel, we focus on the period 2001Q4 till 2009Q4 in our analysis.11 Since our core
variation of interest occurs in mid-2000’s, starting in 2001Q4 does not constrain our analysis.
       The top-right panel in Figure 1 plots the total cumulative bank credit over time. There
is a sharp increase in the growth of bank credit in 2004 followed by sudden stagnation in
2008 when the global …nancial crisis hits. One of our aims in this paper is to test the
extent to which the boom in credit between 2004 and 2007 can be attributed to the rise in
securitization. As such many of our tests focus on loans outstanding in 2004Q4, and follow
them forward.12
       Table II presents summary statistics for this set of …rms. There are 29,848 …rms taking
out 67,838 loans in the fourth quarter of 2004. Since our methodology relies on …rms with at
least two banking relationships, Table II also presents summary statistics for this subset of
…rms. There are 15,697 such …rms taking out 51,397 loans. While about half the total …rms
have multiple banking relationships, they represent 78% of total …rm credit in the economy.
       The average loan size is e288,000 and the average …rm borrows a total of e662,000 from
the banking sector. 1.9% of loans are in default as of 2004Q4. However, there is a sharp
increase in defaults in 2008 and, by the end of 2009, almost 8% of loans are in default (Figure
1 bottom-left panel).
       One of our key variables at bank level is a bank’s exposure to real estate assets at the
beginning of our sample period. This variable is constructed as the share of total bank
loans that go to the real estate sector as of 2001 (residential mortgages as well as loans to
construction and real estate …rms). The average exposure to real estate sector is 44% with a
standard deviation of 15.7%. The idea is to take into account the original stock of …nancial
assets that directly or indirectly can be easily securitized13 .
       Finally, we also have information at the loan level on total loan commitments, whether
the loan is collateralized by an asset and the maturity of the loan. For a large subset of
…rms we also have information on total assets, sales and number of employees. Summary
  11
     If a bank is acquired by another bank, its loan portfolio shows up in the portfolio of the acquiring bank
in our sample.
  12
     There are 192 banks in 2004Q4.
  13
     There was almost no securitization of loan to real estate developers in Spain. However, these loans turn
into mortgages - often from the same bank - after sale of houses and then may be securitized.



                                                     12
statistics of all these variables are presented in Table II.


3.2    The Spanish Financial System

Since securitization is largely limited to real estate loans, we discuss some key features of
the Spanish mortgage industry. There is no counterpart to Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae in
Spain. Consequently all mortgage loans are held by banks on their books in the beginning
of our sample period when there is negligible securitization. This helps to explain the high
share of real estate loans on banks’books in Spain. Another di¤erence from the U.S. is that
mortgage loans in Spain have full recourse to the borrower.
   Banks in Spain can be classi…ed in two broad categories: commercial banks and savings
banks (or Cajas). Out of the 192 banks in 2004Q4 for which we have …nancial information,
there are 46 savings banks representing 41.9% of total bank assets. Commercial banks
are traditional banks (including foreign banks) that have shareholders as owners of the
bank. Cajas on the other hand rely on a general assembly for governance, consisting of
representatives of regional and municipal government, depositors representatives, and non-
governmental organizations (NGO) such as the catholic church, for instance. The general
assembly elects a board of directors who look for a professional manager to run the banking
business. Commercial banks pro…ts can either be retained as reserves or pay out as dividends.
For the Cajas, the pro…ts are either retained or paid out as social dividend (i.e. to build
and run educational facilities, libraries, sport facilities, pensioners clubs and so on where the
Cajas operate). However, despite their di¤erences in governance structures, both commercial
banks and Cajas operate under the same regulatory framework and compete against each
other in common markets.
   Historically, Cajas have focused on households and engaged in providing mortgage and
deposit facilities. Commercial banks, on the other hand, have been more dominant in lending
to the corporate sector. However there has been considerable convergence in the scope of
the two types of banks since liberalization began around mid-seventies. Nonetheless, there
remain di¤erences between Cajas and commercial banks today with Cajas being more reliant
on lending to real estate and household sectors.


                                               13
3.3      The Securitization Boom

The global boom in market-mediated securitization is well known. Adrian and Shin (2010)
and Ashcraft, Goldsmith-Pinkham and Vickery (2010) show that the issuance of non-GSE
ABS and subprime MBS in the U.S. rose dramatically during 2004 to 2007. Securitization was
driven by a series of global factors, such as trade imbalances and accommodative monetary
policy in the U.S. Furthermore, the rise in securitization was not limited to the U.S. Countries
with characteristics similar to the U.S., such as large current account de…cits and a housing
boom, also saw a rise in the issuance of mortgage-backed securities. One such country was
Spain.
   The lower-right panel in Figure 1 plots Spanish house prices over time. There is a sharp
increase in the growth of house prices beginning in 2001 that runs until 2007 when the global
recession kicks in. As with the U.S., the increase in house price appreciation is also associated
with a rapid increase in the issuance of securitized real estate assets in Spain.
   We use the term “securitization” for issuance of both covered bonds and asset-backed
securities by banks in Spain. While the two securities di¤er in some aspects, they share the
basic characteristic of allowing banks to access liquidity by pledging their real estate assets.
We explain these two securities in more detail below.
   Covered bonds are backed by a portfolio of mortgages with a loan-to-value ratio of at
most 80%. Moreover, banks can only issue covered bonds up to 80% of the total value of
underlying mortgages. Finally, covered bonds also provide recourse to the issuing bank if
needed. Thus covered bonds are heavily collateralized, and their sole purpose is the provision
of liquidity. There is no capital advantage for issuing covered bonds and these bonds remain
on a bank’s balance sheet.
   Asset backed securities (ABS) are issued by selling a portfolio of loans (usually mort-
gages). In Spain the originating bank is usually the servicer of loans as well. Thus one
important di¤erence between covered bonds and ABS is that ABS enable banks to transfer
some credit risk out of their balance sheet.
   However, even this distinction is not black and white. In certain cases, banks provide
“credit enhancement”to an ABS, thus promising to absorb a certain percentage of the …rst


                                               14
losses in case of default. The accounting rules in Spain instructed banks to keep ABS on
their balance sheets if they retain some component of credit risk. Since we do not know
exactly whether a given ABS issuance is kept on the books or not, we cannot back out ABS
issuance at the bank level from bank balance sheets alone. This is one of the reasons we use
banks’holding of real estate assets as our main proxy for exposure to securitization.
    Figure 2 plots the aggregate issuance of asset-backed securities and covered bonds in
Spain over time. The top panel plots the annual ‡ow, while the bottom panel shows the
stock of securities issued. The issuance of securitized assets (whether ABS or covered) was
close to negligible in the early 2000s. However, by 2004 issuances become substantial with
over 50 billion Euros of securities issued every year. By 2008, the stock of securitized assets
represents 29.9% of total bank credit.



4     Securitization and the Lending Channel
What does the securitization shock imply for Spanish banks? As highlighted earlier, 44%
of bank loans are granted to the real estate sector in Spain. Therefore, securitization (i.e.
issuance of ABS and covered bonds) provides a novel opportunity for banks to use their
real estate assets as collateral for wholesale …nancing. Securitization thus enhances a bank’s
access to liquidity, especially for banks with large loan portfolios backed by real estate assets.
    Does greater access to liquidity encourage banks to make more loans to non-…nancial,
non-real-estate …rms? Relatedly, does enhanced liquidity lead banks to alter the terms at
which they lend? We test such credit supply channel consequences of securitization.


4.1    Bank Level Evidence

The e¤ect of securitization is not uniform across all banks. Since securitization depends on
real estate assets, banks with greater exposure to real estate assets are impacted more. This
is con…rmed in the top panel of Figure 3 that plots the change in securitized assets between
2004 and 2007 for a bank against its exposure to real estate assets in 2000. One can see that
banks with greater exposure to real estate assets are able to securitize more assets.


                                               15
   This result is con…rmed by columns (1) through (3) of Table III. Columns (1) and (2)
present the bivariate relationship in un-weighted and weighted (by bank assets) regressions.
The correlation between real estate exposure and securitization at the bank level is strong
and highly signi…cant. Since there is negligible securitization in the beginning of 2000s, an
equivalent test for new securities issued is to regress the stock of securities issued by 2007
against initial real estate assets. This is done in column (3) and the correlation becomes
even stronger.
   Does increased access to liquidity due to securitization also lead banks to extend more
credit? The bottom panel of Figure 3 presents preliminary evidence in this regard. It plots
the change over 2004-07 in bank credit to non-real-estate sector against a bank’s initial
exposure to real estate. There is a strong and signi…cant relationship between the two. This
is further con…rmed by column (4) of Table III. Column (5) shows that the same result holds
if we replace real estate exposure with issuance of new asset-backed securities between 2004
and 2007.
   Figure 3 and Table III provide preliminary evidence in favor of the presence of a credit
channel at bank level. However, such evidence cannot be considered conclusive since banks
with higher real estate exposure (our ex-ante proxy, instrument, for securitization) might be
systematically di¤erent. For example, banks with higher exposure to real estate loans may
be lending to …rms that experience faster credit demand growth during the housing boom.
If this were true, our bank level results would be spuriously driven by credit demand shocks,
and could not be attributed to credit supply consequences of securitization.


4.2    Are Banks with Real-Estate Exposure Di¤erent?

Table IV tests whether banks with high real estate exposure are systematically di¤erent.
The top panel regresses various bank characteristics against banks’exposure to real estate
assets and reports the coe¢ cient on real estate exposure.
   Banks with more real estate exposure as of 2000 are similar to other banks in terms of
pro…tability (return on assets), risk (non-performing loans) and capital ratio. However for
reasons already highlighted, banks with real estate exposure are more likely to be Cajas, or


                                             16
saving banks.
    The middle panel tests whether …rms borrowing from banks with high real estate ex-
posure are systematically di¤erent. Since a …rm may borrow from multiple banks, we take
the average of initial real estate exposure for banks lending to a given …rm. We …nd that
…rms borrowing from banks with greater real estate exposure are smaller in size along all
dimensions –total assets, bank credit and sales. These …rms also have higher tangible assets
to total assets ratio, and are less likely to borrow short term.
    The bottom panel tests if loan level outcomes as of 2000 di¤er for banks with greater
real estate exposure. While there is no di¤erence in default rates, loans from banks with
more real estate exposure are smaller on average, more likely to be collateralized and more
likely to have longer maturities. The right-lower panel repeats these loan level tests, but
includes …rm …xed e¤ects to focus only on within-…rm variation. The loan size result goes
away, showing that conditional on lending to the same …rm, loan amount does not di¤er
across banks with di¤erential real estate exposure.
    The picture painted by Table IV reveals that banks with more real estate loans as a
fraction of their total loan portfolio do not di¤er by pro…tability, risk, or capital, but are
more likely to be Cajas. In terms of their portfolio, real-estate exposed banks lend to smaller
…rms that have more tangible assets and rely on longer term …nancing. Consequently, loans
of real-estate dependent banks are more likely to be collateralized and have longer maturity.



5     Estimating the Aggregate Lending Channel
Since …rms borrowing from real estate exposed banks are quite di¤erent, there is a legitimate
concern that the increase in credit by these banks between 2004 and 2007 is not driven by
securitization, but by stronger credit demand from the type of …rms borrowing from these
banks. Even if the …rms borrowing from real estate exposed banks were not di¤erent on
observables, one could worry about di¤erences along unobservable dimensions. However, as
Section II explained, we can address such concern by using …rms …xed e¤ects to fully absorb
changes in credit demand at …rm level.


                                              17
5.1       Local Lending Channel Estimates

We regress change in credit from 2004Q4 to 2007Q4 against a lender’s initial exposure to real
estate assets. We use real estate loan share as of 2000 as our main proxy for banks’exposure
to securitization –rather than a direct measure of securitized assets –for three reasons.
       First, data on securitized assets is not available for some banks whereas real estate expo-
sure is available for all banks. Second, as we mentioned in the previous section, securitized
assets are not always kept on banks’ books. Therefore, it is di¢ cult to keep an accurate
count of securitized assets. However, we have already seen in Table II, banks with more real
estate loans issue more covered bonds and ABS (to the extent observed). Third, and per-
haps most importantly, what matters most for credit channel is the ability and expectation
of access to liquidity. Even for a bank that has not yet securitized many of its assets, the
knowledge that it has securitizable assets and hence access to liquidity could make it extend
new credit14 .
       Column (1) of Table V estimates equation (1) without …rm …xed e¤ects. In line with the
bank-level results of Figure 3 and Table II, there is a strong correlation between business loan
growth and a bank’s initial exposure to real estate assets. Can we attribute this correlation
to a credit supply e¤ect? Since we need …rm-…xed e¤ects to answer this question, we limit
ourselves to …rms with multiple banking relationships as of 2004Q4. Column (2) restricts
sample to such …rms with results similar to column(1).
       Column (3) adds …rm …xed e¤ects. The coe¢ cient on bank real estate exposure (0.386)
implies that a one standard deviation increase in real estate exposure generates a 6.1 per-
centage points higher growth in credit supply. This is more than a doubling of the average
loan-level credit growth rate of 5.7% between 2004Q4 and 2007Q4.15
       Since real estate exposed banks tend to grant longer term and more collateralized loans,
there may be a residual concern that our results are driven by di¤erences in the types of
loans extended by real estate exposed banks. For example, perhaps credit boom was driven
  14
    Nonetheless our results are robust to using securitized assets by 2007 as our main right hand side variable.
  15
    This should not be confused with the overall growth in credit at the …rm level, which is 21.4%. Loan-
level credit growth is smaller as a …rm can stop borrowing from a bank between 2004 and 2007, and start
borrowing from a di¤erent bank.



                                                      18
by greater demand for longer term loans which happen to be the specialization of real estate
exposed banks. Column (4) therefore controls for a loan’s collateralization rate and maturity
as of 2004Q4 as well as changes in these variables between 2004Q4 and 2007Q4. There is no
appreciable change in the coe¢ cient of interest.
   Finally, we know that savings banks or Cajas are more likely to have high real estate
exposure. Could our results thus far be described as a Cajas phenomenon? We address this
issue in column(5) by including bank-type interacted with …rm …xed e¤ects, where bank-type
is either “commercial”or “Cajas”. The regression thus forces comparison across loans of the
same …rm and from the same bank-type. As results show,our coe¢ cient of interest is even
stronger than before.
   Columns (2) through (5) go through a strong battery of tests to isolate the supply side
transmission channel driven by a bank’s exposure to real estate. Firm …xed e¤ects, loan
level controls, and bank-type interacted with …rms …xed e¤ects control for credit demand
shocks in a nonparametric way. The strong power of controls can be gauged from the fact
that R-sq goes to 0.003 in column (2) to 0.7 in Column(5) without any decrease in the
coe¢ cients’magnitude. As Altonji et al. (2005) point out, the persistence of a coe¢ cient
despite a substantial increase in regression R-sq due to controls provides strong support for
exogeneity of the right hand side variable of interest.
   Finally, there may be a remaining concern that our results are driven by some pre-existing
trends in data. Column (6) tests for this by repeating our core speci…cation over the period
2001Q4 to 2004Q4. The estimated coe¢ cient turns out to be negative and is statistically
indi¤erent from zero.
   A downside of the dependent variable we have used thus far is that we cannot compute
change in loan amount for loans that are dropped before 2007Q4. In order to take such
“dropped loans”into account, we construct an indicator variable that is 1 if a loan exists in
2004Q4 but not in 2007Q4, and 0 if it exists in both quarters.
   Column (7) repeats our core speci…cation using “loan dropped” as dependent variable.
The number of loans increases in column (7) from 32,647 to 51,397 because of the inclusion
of all outstanding loans in 2004Q4 regardless of their status in 2007Q4. Consistent with our


                                              19
earlier results, banks with higher real estate exposure are less likely to drop a loan. Column
(8) uses a Tobit speci…cation to combine the “intensive margin”e¤ect of column (3) and the
“extensive margin” result of column (7).16 The combined e¤ect of the two margins makes
the overall impact in the credit channel even stronger.


5.2       Aggregate Lending Channel Estimates

The results thus far highlight a strong credit channel e¤ect driven by exposure to real estate
assets. However, as we emphasized in the Introduction and Section 2, these results are
incomplete as they do not incorporate …rm-level adjustments in response to credit supply
shocks from banks. This section addresses this limitation by implementing the empirical
strategy highlighted in Section 2.
       Column (9) presents the OLS (and potentially biased) estimate of …rm-level credit channel
coe¢ cient. The coe¢ cient is close to zero and precisely estimated. The unbiased estimate of
…rm level credit channel is given by equation (3), which adjusts the coe¢ cient in column (9)
to take into account endogenous matching of …rms with banks. Since the adjustment term
depends on the di¤erences between loan level OLS and …xed e¤ect estimate, it is going to
have a small e¤ect in our case.17 The adjustment term is equal to (0.404-0.386)*0.025/0.0123,
i.e. 0.043. The unbiased …rm level credit channel e¤ect is thus equal to 0.23-0.043=-0.020.
It turns out that despite a very strong bank channel e¤ect at the bank level, the net impact
is close to zero!18
       Our result thus highlights the importance of incorporating …rm level adjustments in credit
channel estimates. A simple correlation –or even causation –between bank credit extension
and bank liquidity shocks can be highly misleading. The speed at which …rm-level borrowing
adjusts also points towards a dynamic banking system where borrowing relationships are
created and destroyed at regular frequency. Consistent with this view, we …nd that about 45
percent of …rms during our sample period break away an existing banking relationship and
  16
     A downside of tobit is that it does not permit us to use …rm …xed e¤ects.
  17
     Our simulation exercise in section 1 shows that in general these adjustments can have a signi…cant
impact.
  18
     Non-bank sources are unlikely to play a signi…cant role in our analysis since the net impact is close to
zero with only bank sources alone.


                                                     20
start a new banking relationship with a di¤erent bank afterwards. Similarly, 75 percent of
all …rms borrow from at least two banks during our sample period.


5.3       Quarter by Quarter Estimates

The regressions in Table V focused on the 2004Q4 to 2007Q4 period, which is the heart of
credit boom in Spain. Since the underlying data are quarterly and span a much longer time
horizon, we can replicate our estimates at a quarterly frequency over the entire period.
      We anchor 2004Q4 as our reference quarter, and use              log(credit) between quarter t and
2004Q4 as dependent variable for each quarter t from 2001Q4 to 2009Q4. We estimate the
OLS and FE regressions corresponding to columns (2) and (3) of table V respectively and
plot the corresponding coe¢ cients on bank exposure to real estate in the top panel of Figure
4. These coe¢ cients capture the evolution of loan-level credit channel in Spain.
      Both OLS and FE estimates are close to zero until 2004Q4 and statistically not di¤erent
from zero.19 Thus the credit channel documented in Table V is not driven by any pre-existing
trend. There is no di¤erential growth in credit prior to 2004Q4 for loans granted by banks
with greater real estate exposure.
      This …nding also suggests that our earlier results are not driven by a boom in house
prices alone. As Figure 1 shows, the growth in house prices was as strong during the 2001-04
period as the 2004-07 period. If the credit channel e¤ect in Table V was driven by real estate
exposed banks’loan assets appreciating in value, we should see a similar e¤ect over 2001 to
2004. The fact that we do not suggests that the credit channel e¤ect is driven by the boom
in securitization that kicks into high gear between 2004 and 2007.
      Our results indicate that once securitization market is strong enough in terms of volume
and is sustained over a long enough period, banks begin to rely on the newly found source
of liquidity and start lending against it. The credit channel e¤ect of securitization builds
gradually over time until 2008, when the private market for securitization shuts down. Once
the global …nancial crisis begins in fall of 2008, the credit channel in Spain turns negative:
Banks with greater exposure to real estate assets start contracting credit at a faster pace.
 19
      Standard errors are not reported for brevity, but are similar to those shown in corresponding tables.


                                                      21
      The top panel uses log change in loan amount outstanding as dependent variable. The
lower panel replicates the analysis but uses log change in commitment amount as dependent
variable. The coe¢ cient estimates are similar to the top panel with one important di¤erence.
The post-2008 reversal in credit channel is stronger with loan commitment than loan out-
standing. This di¤erence re‡ects a stronger contraction in the supply of credit by real-estate
exposed banks through loan commitments. The di¤erential impact for outstanding loans is
smaller because the drawn to commitment ratio rises faster for banks with more real estate
exposure.20
      The post-2008 reversal in bank lending channel at the loan level takes place despite
massive European Central Bank (ECB) intervention in the securitization market. As Figure 2
makes clear, the ‡ow of asset-backed securities issued by Spanish banks in 2008 and beyond is
almost entirely driven by the interest of the banks to build up a portfolio of securities that can
be used as collateral for liquidity through the ECB. The private market for securitized assets
had pretty much evaporated by then21 . Our result thus illustrates that banks with greater
dependence on securitization start to cut back credit drastically when private securitization
market dries up. However, the net impact of this cut is not as strong. As Figure 5 shows,
…rm level adjustment mutes the overall impact of bank-speci…c cuts in credit during 2008-09.
      The OLS and FE estimates track each other quite closely in Figure 4. Since the FE
estimate absorbs credit demand shocks at the …rm-level, the compliance between OLS and FE
estimates show that credit demand shocks during our sample period are largely orthogonal
to credit supply shocks driven by exposure to real estate assets.
      Figure 5 replicates …rm-level OLS estimate of column (9) in Table V, but replaces the
dependent variable with log change in …rm credit between quarter t and 2004Q4. As in
Figure 4, we plot the OLS coe¢ cient separately for each t from 2001Q4 to 2004Q4. The
top panel uses log change in …rm credit outstanding as dependent variable, while the lower
panel uses log change in loan commitment for a …rm as dependent variable.
      The dotted line in Figure 5 plots …rm-level OLS coe¢ cients, while the solid line re‡ects
corresponding bias-corrected coe¢ cients implied by equation (3). Since loan-level OLS and
 20
      This is similar to the …nding in U.S. by Ivashina and Sharfstein (2009).
 21
      Source: Dealogic, ECB and Bank of Spain.


                                                      22
FE estimates in Figure 4 are close to each other, OLS and bias-corrected coe¢ cients do not
di¤er signi…cantly in Figure 5 either. The bias-corrected coe¢ cients in Figure 5 re‡ect the
net impact of credit channel over time. As in the case of 2004Q4-2007Q7 period, net impact
is close to zero throughout our sample period.



6     Credit Terms, Real Outcomes And Extensive Mar-
      gin Lending

6.1       Local Lending Channel and Credit Terms

The local lending channel, i.e. loan-level impact of credit supply channel on credit quantity,
is undone by …rm level adjustments for …rms with multiple borrowing relationships. But
what about credit terms? Greater willingness by banks to extend credit supply could lead
to greater competition, hence putting downward pressure on credit terms.
    While we do not observe interest rates, we know the fraction of loan commitment that
is drawn down by a borrower as well as loan maturity and collateralization rate. Changes
in loan draw-down rate during the credit boom gives us useful information on the otherwise
unobserved terms of credit (such as covenants and interest rates). This idea is based on a
revealed preference argument. As banks compete more aggressively for a …rm’s business, the
…rm should prefer to draw down more aggressively from the bank with better loan terms.
    Columns (1) through (3) in Table VI test if the draw-down ratio goes up faster during
2004Q4 to 2007Q4 for banks with greater exposure to real estate. Column (1) runs our core
speci…cation on data restricted to multiple relationship …rms as of 2004Q4. There is a strong
e¤ect of bank real estate exposure on growth in drawn-down rate. A one standard deviation
increase in bank’s real estate exposure increases the drawn-down ratio by 1.33 percentage
points.
    The increase in drawn-down ratio could have resulted from declining loan commitments.
However, as we have already seen in Figure 4, banks with greater real estate exposure are
increasing their loan commitments at a faster pace during 2004-07 period. The increase in


                                             23
draw-down ratio despite faster growth in loan commitments from real-estate-exposed banks
hence points towards better loan terms o¤ered by these banks.
   Column (2) shows that the increase in drawn to commitment ratio is not driven by real
estate exposed banks making di¤erent types of loans. For example, if real estate exposed
banks granted more shorter maturity loans during the time period, such loans are naturally
going to have higher drawn to commitment ratio. Column (2) adds loan maturity and
collateralization rate as of 2004Q4, as well as change in these variables between 2004Q4 and
2007Q4 as controls. There is no change in our coe¢ cient of interest. Column (3) further adds
…rm …xed e¤ects, thus absorbing shocks at the …rm level and isolating credit-supply-driven
changes in loan terms. Our coe¢ cient of interest increases slightly.
   A direct measure of credit terms in our data is the fraction of loan that is collateralized.
If credit terms are relaxed over 2004-2007 by banks with more real estate exposure, then
we would expect rates of collateralization to go down more for these banks. Columns (4) to
(6) show that this is the case, although statistical signi…cance depends on the speci…cation
chosen. However, once we control for loan maturity in 2004Q4 and change in loan maturity
between 2004Q4 and 2007Q4, the drop in collateralization rate is stronger and signi…cant
for banks with more real estate exposure. This is consistent with our earlier interpretation
that securitization leads to more favorable credit terms for borrowers.
   The inclusion of controls for loan maturity is necessary when testing for di¤erences in
collateralization change for two reasons. First, as we saw in Table IV, real estate exposed
banks are more likely to have longer maturity loans which naturally have higher rates of
collateralization. Second, and more importantly, the change in propensity to make longer
term loans is also stronger for banks with real estate exposure. This is shown in columns
(7) though (9) of Table VI. Hence, as done in column (5), it is important to control for loan
maturity and changes in loan maturity when comparing di¤erences in collateralization rates.
   Figure 6 plot the quarter-by-quarter OLS and FE coe¢ cients for drawn-to-commitment
and collateralization rate. The sharp increase in drawn to commitment ratio for real estate
exposed banks kicks in around 2005. Before 2005 there is no di¤erential e¤ect. Similar,
though a bit weaker, results hold for collateralization rate as well.


                                              24
6.2    Aggregate Lending Channel, Credit Terms And Real Out-
       comes

Our methodology for estimating the net impact of credit channel at …rm level (i.e. the
aggregate lending channel) can be applied to any outcome where we can estimate OLS and
FE regressions separately at loan level. Since we have done so for changes in drawn-to-
commitment ratio,maturity and collateralization, we can estimate their bias-corrected …rm
level impact as well. Columns (1) though (3) in Table VII show that changes in all three of
these outcomes are signi…cant at …rm level.
   Thus while loan level impact in credit quantity is undone by …rm-level adjustments, the
same is not true for credit terms! As banks with real estate exposure become more willing
to extend credit, there is greater competition for a given …rm’s overall debt capacity. The
competition results in borrowing …rms receiving more favorable credit terms.
   Despite the zero impact of securitization-induced credit supply channel on the quantity
of credit, there could be positive …rm real e¤ects through the induced lower price of credit.
Columns (4) through (6) of Table VII show that …rms borrowing from banks with greater
real estate exposure do not experience any di¤erential change in propensity to default, sales
or number of employees. There is thus no evidence of any appreciable impact on real …rm
outcomes over the period 2004 to 2007 due to securitization. Hence, despite of large e¤ects
at the bank-…rm level, the crowding-out completely mitigates these e¤ects for …rm real
outcomes.


6.3    Extending Credit to New Clients

So far our core analysis was based on loans outstanding in 2004Q4, which were followed for-
ward in time. Banks with greater exposure to real estate assets increased their credit supply
for existing loans as securitization kicked in. While this credit channel is counter-balanced
by crowding out adjustments at …rm level, the question remains whether securitization led
to a net increase in credit for new borrowers. A shift in the supply of bank credit should
make banks more willing to lend to riskier …rms on the extensive margin. These …rms may


                                              25
have been denied credit in the past, but with securitization expanding the supply of credit,
they have a better chance of getting a loan.
       Table VIII tests whether banks with greater real estate exposure lend more to new clients
on the extensive margin. We de…ne “new credit”as credit given to …rst-time clients between
2004Q4 and 2007Q4 and regress the log of total new credit against a bank’s initial exposure
to real estate assets. We …nd that banks more exposed to real estate are signi…cantly more
likely to make loans to new clients on the extensive margin. A one standard deviation
increase in real estate exposure is associated with 3.09 percentage points more credit given
to new clients. Column (2) replaces new credit drawn with new credit commitments and
gets similar results.
       Column (3) normalizes new credit outstanding by total assets of the bank. The estimated
coe¢ cient implies that a one standard deviation increase in real estate exposure is associated
with the bank lending out 10.4 percent more of its assets as credit to new clients. New bank
clients can be of two types: …rms that never borrowed from any bank in the past, and …rms
that start borrowing from the given bank for the …rst time after 2004Q4. Column (4) splits
these two types by only focusing on lending to …rms that never borrowed from any bank
in the past. The coe¢ cient drop to 0.38 from 0.665, showing that more than half of our
extensive margin result is driven by lending to …rms that did not borrow from any bank in
the past.
       Column (5) shows that new credit driven by exposure to real estate assets is signi…cantly
more likely to default by the end of 2009. We regress the 2009Q4 default rate of new
credit against initial bank exposure to real estate. The estimated coe¢ cient is statistically
signi…cant and economically large in magnitude. A one standard deviation increase in bank
exposure to real estate is associated with 1.03 percentage point increase in default rate for
new credit22 .
       Figure 7 plots the quarter-by-quarter estimates of columns (3) and (4). The dependent
variable is new credit granted between 2004Q4 and quarter t, with t going from 2005Q1 to
  22
    The power gets weak if we try to split defaults by borrowers that did not borrow from any bank in the
past, and borrowers that are …rst-time borrowers with the said bank. However, the coe¢ cient on bank RE
exposure is positive for both these groups.



                                                   26
2009Q4. The di¤erential growth in new credit continues until 2008, before collapsing as the
…nancial crisis kicks in.
    The extensive margin regressions are run at bank level and hence su¤er from the usual
criticism that unobserved credit demand shocks might contaminate our coe¢ cients. We
cannot use our …rm …xed e¤ects approach to tease out the supply-driven e¤ect anymore.
However, our earlier results are useful for interpreting causality of our extensive margin
results.
    The estimated covariance between credit demand and credit supply shocks for …rms
borrowing from multiple banks in 2004Q4 was close to zero. It is reasonable to assume that
similar correlation holds on the extensive margin as well. For instance, given the estimated
covariance term for existing borrowers, it is unlikely that credit demand from future potential
clients will go up disproportionately more for …rms that tend to apply for loans with real-
estate-exposed banks. We thus feel con…dent in interpreting the coe¢ cients in Table VIII as
being driven by supply-side shocks as well.



7     Concluding Remarks
As liquidity threatened to dry up and banks su¤ered major losses, governments all over the
world fretted about the possibility of banks transmitting their adverse shocks to the rest
of the economy. Many governments, including the U.S., intervened in the banking sector
with large sums of money to try to prevent any ampli…cation of the downturn through the
banking system. Such fears are common in almost all instances of …nancial downturns. In
fact, even in normal times, policy makers set monetary and credit policies with one eye open
towards possible rami…cations for the bank transmission channel.
    However, despite the importance attached to bank transmission channels in real life, we
lack a basic set of tools that policy makers can use in real time for understanding the impact
of transmission mechanisms. The goal of this paper was to introduce a formal procedure
that takes macro approach towards transmission mechanisms by taking into account equi-
librium e¤ects at the …rm level. We illustrated the use of our methodology by estimating


                                              27
the transmission consequences of mortgage securitization in Spain.
   It would be imprudent to suggest that bank transmission channel is always important,
or that it is never relevant. The nature and magnitude of transmission channel is likely
to depend on the particular environment and episode in question. Since each situation is
di¤erent, we need a set of tools - rather than a pre-determined answer - to guide us in the
real world.
   The methodology introduced in this paper can serve as one of the tools used by the
regulatory agency incharge of monitoring systematic risk. There are three main advantages
that our methodology provides in this regard. First, it can be applied to a range of di¤erent
situations where the shock a¤ecting the banking sector may not be securitization necessarily.
As long as one can identify cross-bank heterogeneity in exposure to possible banking sector
shocks (e.g. some form of …nancial innovation, bank runs, speci…c industry or country
exposure), our methodology can be utilized to separate supply-side e¤ects from demand and
to estimate local as well as aggregate lending channels.
   Second, our methodology can be used to identify both the quantity and price e¤ects of
shifts in the supply of bank credit. Credit booms are often associated with more favorable
credit terms for borrowers, such as lower collateral requirement, decline in credit spreads,
or more “covenant light” loans. Our methodology provides a formal mechanism for under-
standing the extent to which such changes in the price of credit are driven by expansion on
the supply side.
   The methodology introduced in this paper goes beyond estimating whether banks per se
transmit the liquidity shocks they face. It takes into account equilibrium adjustments that
…rms may undertake in response to any shocks from the banking system. As our results from
Spain illustrate, this latter step is critical: without it one could have incorrectly concluded
that securitization had a big impact on credit quantity for all …rms. Instead we …nd that the
aggregate impact of securitization in terms of credit quantity was limited to new borrowers,
while credit terms were relaxed for all borrowers.
   Our results on the impact of securitization on bank credit should be of independent inter-
est to …nancial economists. The possible role of …nancial innovation in promoting excessive


                                              28
credit creation and risk taking has been emphasized by a number of economic historians in
the past. More recently, securitization has been associated with lax lending and excessive
credit creation in mortgage markets during the 2000’s (Keys et al (2010) and Mian and Su…
(2009)).
   Did these problems also spill over to non-…nancial corporate sector through bank trans-
mission channel? Our analysis provides some mixed results in this regard. For …rms that
already had strong access to the banking sector, securitization did not lead to an increase in
quantity of credit. There is no evidence that securitization had an appreciable e¤ect on real
…rm outcomes either.
   However securitization did lead to more relaxed credit terms for all …rms. There is also
a strong e¤ect of securitization on credit to new borrowers. Securitization enabled banks
with real estate assets to expand credit supply on the extensive margin. The new loans are
riskier with greater propensity to default during the crisis, suggesting that bank’s relaxed
their screening rules in order to expand credit supply.




                                             29
References
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (2007). Understanding Financial Crises, Clarendon Lecture
Series in Finance. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Altonji, Joseph G; Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection on Observed
and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the E¤ectiveness of Catholic Schools”, Journal of Po-
litical Economy. Volume 113, Issue 1, Page 151–184, Feb.

Ashcraft, Adam. 2005. “Are Banks Really Special? New Evidence from the FDIC-Induced
Failure of Healthy Banks.”American Economic Review, 95(5).

Ashcraft, Adam; Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham and James Vickery. 2010. “MBS Ratings and the
Mortgage Credit Boom”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤ Report No. 449.

Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin. 2010. “Money, Liquidity and Monetary Policy”, Amer-
ican Economic Review, papers and proceedings.

Bernanke, Ben. 1983. “Non monetary E¤ects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of
the Great Depression.”The American Economic Review, 73(3): 257-276.

Bordo, Michael, 2009. “An Historical Perspective On The Crisis Of 2007-2008”, NBER
Working Paper 14569.

Calomiris, Charles W. 2008. “The Subprime Turmoil: What’s Old, What’s New and What’s
Next,”Jackson Hole Conference, Wyoming, October 2nd, 2008.

Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2010. “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
Business Cycle Analysis.”Handbook of Monetary Economics.

Hanson, Samuel; Anil Kashyap and Jeremy Stein, forthcoming. “A Macroprudential Ap-
proach To Financial Regulation”, Journal of Economic Perspectives.

Ivashina, Victoria and David Scharfstein, 2009, “Bank Lending during the Financial Crisis
of 2008,”Working Paper.

Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina, 2010a, Credit Sup-
ply: Identifying Balance-Sheet Channels with Loan Applications and Granted Loans, Dis-
cussion Paper 7655, CEPR.

Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina,2010b , “Hazardous
Times for Monetary Policy: What do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the
E¤ects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk?," ECB WP 2010.

Kashyap, Anil K. and Jeremy Stein. 2000. "What do a Million Observations on Banks Say
About the Transmission of Monetary Policy." American Economic Review, 90(3): 407-428.




                                           30
Keys, Ben; Tanmoy Mukherjee; Amit Seru and Vikrant Vig. 2010. “Did Securitization Lead
to Lax Screening: Evidence from Subprime Loans 2001-2006”, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 125(1).

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1978. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises,
New York: Basic Books.

Khwaja, Asim I. and Atif Mian, 2008. “Tracing The Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks”,
American Economic Review, September 2008.

Kohn, Donald. 2009. “Monetary Policy Research and the Financial Crisis:
Strengths and Shortcomings”, Speech at the Federal Reserve Conference on
Key Developments in Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C., October 9, 2009.
(http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20091009a.htm)

Loutskina, Elena and Philip Strahan, 2009. “Securitization and the declining impact of
bank …nancial condition on loan supply: Evidence from mortgage originations”, Journal of
Finance, 64(2), 861-922.

Mian, Atif R. and Su…, Amir, 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion:
Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124:

Mulligan, Casey B. 2008. “An Economy You Can Bank On”, The New York Times, Op-ed,
October 9.

Paravisini, Daniel. 2008. “Local Bank Financial Constraints and Firm Access to External
Finance.”The Journal of Finance.

Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren. 2000. "Collateral Damage: E¤ects of the Japanese Bank
Crisis on Real Activity in the United States." American Economic Review, 90(1): 30-45.

Trichet, Jean-Claude. 2009. “Systemic Risk”, Speech in Cambridge University.
(http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2009/html/sp091210_1.en.html)

White, Eugene N., Editor 1996. Stock Market Crashes and Speculative Manias, Cheltenham,
UK: Edward Elgar.




                                           31
                                                                                                          Figure 1
                                                                                             Credit and Housing Market in Spain




                                                                                                                                                                        2500
   CDF of bank lending and firm borrowing
                                        1




                                                                                                                                           Total Commitments (in Bil. Euro)
                                .8




                                                                                                                                                            2000
                        .6




                                                                                                                                                    1500
                 .4




                                                                                                                                           1000
          .2




                                                                                                                                                                                        2000q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                      2001q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2002q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2003q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2004q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2005q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2006q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009q4
    0

                                            0

                                                .1

                                                         .2

                                                                  .3

                                                                           .4

                                                                                    .5

                                                                                              .6

                                                                                                       .7

                                                                                                                .8

                                                                                                                         .9

                                                                                                                                  1
                       8




                                                                                                                                           6.6 6.8 7 7.2 7.4 7.6
                                                                                                                                              Log House Price Index
   Default Rate
    4         6        2



                                                2000q4

                                                         2001q4

                                                                  2002q4

                                                                           2003q4

                                                                                    2004q4

                                                                                              2005q4

                                                                                                       2006q4

                                                                                                                2007q4

                                                                                                                         2008q4

                                                                                                                                  2009q4




                                                                                                                                                                               1995q4
                                                                                                                                                                                           1996q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1997q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1998q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1999q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2000q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2001q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2002q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2004q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2005q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009q4
The top-left panel plots the cumulative distribution function for firm-level bank debt (solid line), and bank-level total lending
(dashed line). The top-right panel plots total bank loan commitments to the non-real estate and non-financial sector in Spain.
The bottom-left panel plots default rate for Spanish firms over time (limited to non-real estate and non-financial sector). The
bottom-right panel plots the log of residential house price index in Spain.
                                                    Figure 2
                                      ABS And Covered Bond Issuance In Spain



                 100
 Annualized Flow (in Bil. Euro)




                                                          Covered Bonds
                                                                +
                                                              ABS
          50




                                                             ABS only
                                                                                                    Flows due to
                                                                                                    ECB support
                 0




                             2000q4    2001q4   2002q4   2003q4   2004q4      2005q4   2006q4   2007q4   2008q4
                 600  400
   (in billions of Euros)




                                                           stock of covered
                                                           bonds and ABS
 200




                                                                                                    Flows due to
                                                                                                    ECB support
                 0




                             2000q4    2001q4   2002q4   2003q4   2004q4      2005q4   2006q4   2007q4   2008q4



The top panel plots the annual flow of asset-backed securities issued in Spain. The
solid line includes both ABS and covered bond issuance, while the dotted line only
includes ABS issuance. The shaded area post 2007 represents ABS issuance that
was put as collateral with the ECB for liquidity support. The bottom panel plots
the stock of ABS and covered bonds over time in Spain.
                            Figure 3
Securitization, Bank Credit and Banks’ Exposure to Real Estate



   Change in securitized assets (04 to 07) over 2004 total assets
                                                                    .8
                                                                    .6
                                                                    .4
                                                                    .2
                                                                    0
                                                                    -.2




                                                                          0   .2          .4               .6            .8   1
                                                                                   Initial Exposure To Mortgage Assets
                                                                    2
   Change in log credit drawn (04 to 07)
                                                                    1
                                                                    0
                                                                    -1
                                                                    -2




                                                                          0   .2          .4               .6            .8   1
                                                                                   Initial Exposure To Mortgage Assets


                                                                                                                                  
  The top panel plots change in securitized assets (covered bonds and ABS) at the
  bank-level between 2004 and 2007 (normalized by bank total assets in 2004) against
  initial exposure to mortgage assets in 2000. Exposure to mortgage assets is defined
  as the share of total bank loans that go to the real estate sector. The size of each
  bank-level observation in the plot is proportional to bank size. The bottom panel
  plots the 2004 to 2007 change in log bank credit to non-real estate and non-financial
  sector against banks initial exposure to mortgage assets.
                                            Figure 4
                        Loan-Level Credit Channel Coefficients By Quarter




                       .5      .4
   Using Outstanding Loan Amount
       Loan Level Coefficients

 -.1    0     .1    .2 -.2 .3

                                    2001q4



                                             2002q4



                                                      2003q4



                                                               2004q4



                                                                        2005q4



                                                                                 2006q4



                                                                                              2007q4



                                                                                                       2008q4



                                                                                                                2009q4
                                                      FE coefficients                     OLS coefficients
                       .4    .3
     Using Loan Commitment
     Loan Level Coefficients

 -.1     0     .1      .2
                       -.2

                                    2001q4



                                             2002q4



                                                      2003q4



                                                               2004q4



                                                                        2005q4



                                                                                 2006q4



                                                                                              2007q4



                                                                                                       2008q4



                                                                                                                2009q4




                                                      FE coefficients                     OLS coefficients


                                                                                                                         
The top panel plots the coefficient estimates for β t for the following specification
for each quarter t:
y ijt − y ij,04q4 = αt + β t ∗ REexposurei,2000 + η jt + εijt
where y is the natural logarithm of loan amount outstanding for firm j from bank
i. REexposurei,2000 is the share of loan portfolio exposed to real estate for bank
i in 2000. The OLS coefficient estimates do not include the firm fixed effects term,
η jt . The bottom panel repeats the same exercise after replacing y with the natural
logarithm of loan commitment for firm j from bank i.
                                               Figure 5
                           Firm-Level Credit Channel Coefficients By Quarter




             .5
             .4
 Firm Level Coefficients
  0     .1    .2
             -.1
             -.2     .3

                            2001q4



                                     2002q4



                                              2003q4



                                                         2004q4



                                                                  2005q4



                                                                           2006q4



                                                                                    2007q4



                                                                                             2008q4



                                                                                                      2009q4
                                                       Bias-corrected                 OLS
             .4
             .3
 Firm Level Coefficients
    0      .1-.1
             -.2   .2

                            2001q4



                                     2002q4



                                              2003q4



                                                         2004q4



                                                                  2005q4



                                                                           2006q4



                                                                                    2007q4



                                                                                             2008q4



                                                                                                      2009q4




                                                       Bias-corrected                 OLS


                                                                                                               
The top panel plots the coefficient estimates for β t for the following specification
for each quarter t:
                        t
y jt − y j,04q4 = αt + β ∗ REexposurej,2000 + εjt
where y is the natural logarithm of total credit outstanding for firm j.
REexposurej,2000 is the average real estate exposure in 2000 of banks lending to
firm j at time t. The solid line in top panel “bias corrects” the coefficient estimate
according to equation (3) in the paper. The bottom panel repeats the same exercise
after replacing y with the natural logarithm of total commitment for firm j.
                                                                                Figure 6
                                                            Loan Terms Credit Channel Coefficients By Quarter
                                                                                    



                            15




                                                                                                                                                15
  Drawn-to-Commitment Ratio




                                                                                                                      Drawn-to-Commitment Ratio
                    10




                                                                                                                                         10
      OLS Coefficients




                                                                                                                           FE Coefficients
             5




                                                                                                                                 5
      0




                                                                                                                          0
                     -5




                                                                                                                   -5
                                 2001q4


                                          2002q4


                                                   2003q4


                                                             2004q4


                                                                      2005q4


                                                                               2006q4


                                                                                        2007q4


                                                                                                 2008q4


                                                                                                          2009q4




                                                                                                                                                     2001q4


                                                                                                                                                              2002q4


                                                                                                                                                                       2003q4


                                                                                                                                                                                2004q4


                                                                                                                                                                                         2005q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2006q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                           2007q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2009q4
                     .04




                                                                                                                                        .03
                                                                                                                                      .01 .02
  Collateralization Rate




                                                                                                                        Collateralization Rate
                    .02
     OLS Coefficients




                                                                                                                           FE Coefficients
             0




                                                                                                                                0
   -.02




                                                                                                                   -.02 -.01
                     -.04

                                 2001q4


                                          2002q4


                                                   2003q4


                                                             2004q4


                                                                      2005q4


                                                                               2006q4


                                                                                        2007q4


                                                                                                 2008q4


                                                                                                          2009q4




                                                                                                                                                     2001q4


                                                                                                                                                              2002q4


                                                                                                                                                                       2003q4


                                                                                                                                                                                2004q4


                                                                                                                                                                                         2005q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2006q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                           2007q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2009q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                 
The top panel plots the coefficient estimates for β t for the following specification for each quarter t:
y ijt − y ij,04q4 = αt + β t ∗ REexposurei,2000 + η jt + εijt 
where y is the drawn to commitment ratio for firm j from bank i. REexposurei,2000 is the share of loan portfolio exposed
to real estate for bank i in 2000. The OLS coefficient estimates do not include the firm fixed effects term, η jt . The bottom
panel repeats the same exercise after replacing y with collateralization rate of loan for firm j from bank i.
                                                                Figure 7
                                            Extensive Margin Bank Credit Channel Coefficients
                                                                                 



                      .4
New Lending (%age of assets) Coefficients
        .1          .20         .3

                                             2001q4



                                                      2002q4



                                                               2003q4



                                                                        2004q4



                                                                                     2005q4



                                                                                              2006q4



                                                                                                       2007q4



                                                                                                                2008q4



                                                                                                                         2009q4
                      6
New Lending Default Rate Coefficients
   0           2      -2   4

                                             2001q4



                                                      2002q4



                                                               2003q4



                                                                        2004q4



                                                                                     2005q4



                                                                                              2006q4



                                                                                                       2007q4



                                                                                                                2008q4



                                                                                                                         2009q4




                                                                                                                                  
The top panel plots the coefficient estimates for β t for the following specification
for each quarter t:
y it = αt + β t ∗ REexposurei,2000 + εijt
where y is the ratio of credit given to new clients since 2004q4 and total outstand-
ing loans of bank i. REexposurei,2000 is the share of loan portfolio exposed to
real estate for bank i in 2000. The bottom panel repeats the same exercise after
replacing y with the default rate for new credit.
                                         Table I
                       Simulation Of The Lending Channel – β= 0.5

                                                  Panel A
                     Λ = 0%                              Λ = 50%                             Λ = 100%
ρ            -0.50      0.00       0.50         -0.50       0.00      0.50          -0.50       0.00        0.50

βbOLS       0.0619     0.5036    0.9514        0.0522      0.4966    0.9425        0.0627      0.5016     0.9395


βbF E       0.5000     0.4998    0.4999        0.4994      0.4997    0.4997        0.4995      0.5009     0.4999

β
b
  OLS      -0.2497     0.5025    1.2709        -0.5057     0.2432    1.0109        -0.7446     0.0009     0.7536

β           0.4941     0.4942    0.5008        0.2510      0.2496    0.2599        -0.0058    -0.0009     0.0098

                                                   Panel B
                     Λ = 0%                              Λ = 50%                             Λ = 100%
ρ            -0.50      0.00       0.50         -0.50       0.00      0.50          -0.50       0.00       0.50

βbOLS       0.0551     0.4904    0.9195        0.0567      0.4915    0.9130        0.0625      0.4951     0.9260

βbF E       0.4999     0.5003    0.4996        0.4988      0.5002    0.4991        0.5007      0.5006     0.4999

β
b
  OLS      -0.1005     0.4921    1.0854        -0.3265     0.2537    0.8365        -0.5917    -0.0050     0.5903

β           0.4854     0.5066    0.5295        0.2555      0.2667    0.2894        -0.0098     0.0030     0.0250

dropped     0.3811     0.3725    0.3685        0.3790      0.3743    0.3671        0.3799      0.3743     0.3702
This table reports the mean of 100 OLS and FE parameter estimates of the lending channel at the loan level
(β
 b
   OLS and β F E ), OLS estimates at the firm level (β OLS ), as well as “bias corrected” estimates (β). We report
            b                                        b
parameter estimates for different correlation values between the firm- and bank-speficic shocks at the loan level
ranging from ρ = −0.50 to ρ = 0.50 for different substitution levels Λ assuming normally distributed shocks with
a mean 0 of and a standard deviation of 1. In Panel B we allow for the possibility that loans are dropped.
                                                   Table II
                                               Summary Statistics

                                                            All Firms              Multiple Relationsship Firms
                                                     N       Mean       Std Dev      N       Mean     Std Dev
Loan Level Variables
Banks initial exposure to real estate assets       67,838      0.466       0.156   51,397     0.460       0.158
Loan amount outstanding (2004Q4)                   67,838      288.1      3191.9   51,397   295.899      1637.3
Log loan amount within firm (2004Q4)               63,941      0.000       0.852   49,787     0.000       0.966
Loan amount committed (2004Q4)                     67,838        367      3608.2   51,397     376.4      2169.2
Default Rate (2004Q4)                              63,941      0.019       0.134   49,787     0.017       0.129
Loan drawn to commitment ratio (2004Q4)            67,838     81.066      30.752   51,397      83.2        27.9
Collateralization rate (2004Q4)                    67,838      0.195       0.371   51,397     0.148       0.330
Maturity greater than 5 years (2004Q4)             67,838      0.230       0.390   51,397     0.185       0.356
∆ log loan amount, 01Q4 to 04Q4                    33,274     -0.004       1.146   26,262     0.013       1.145
∆ default rate, 01Q4 to 04Q4                       33,274      0.020       0.151   26,262     0.019       0.146
∆ log loan amount, 04Q4 to 07Q4                    42,609      0.057       1.223   32,647     0.059       1.217
∆ log loan amount, 04Q4 to 07Q4 (within firm)      42,609      0.000       0.754   32,647     0.000       0.861
∆ default rate, 04Q4 to 07Q4                       42,609      0.019       0.140   32,647     0.021       0.147
∆ log loan amount, 07Q4 to 09Q4                    31,298     -0.250       1.016   23,322    -0.252       1.034
∆ default rate, 07Q4 to 09Q4                       31,298      0.061       0.241   23,322     0.074       0.263

Firm Level Variables
Banks initial exposure to real estate assets       29,848      0.471       0.131   15,697     0.463      0.111
Number of banking relationships (2004Q4)           29,848      2.250       1.848   15,697     3.302      2.017
Loan amount outstanding (2004Q4)                   29,848        662      6720.6   15,697   982.507     7101.2
Commitment amount (2004Q4)                         29,848      836.5      7833.6   15,697    1249.2     8681.9
Default Rate (2004Q4)                              29,848      0.021       0.135   15,697     0.017      0.119
Total Assets (2004Q4)                              14,984     4547.1       52221    9,093    6238.4    66362.5
Total Sales (2004Q4)                               14,984     5155.4       67860    9,093      7028    86285.2
Total Employees                                    12,672     28.951       278.7    7,850    37.263      351.6
∆ log loan amount, 01Q4 to 04Q4                    20,998      0.146       1.193   12,627     0.384      1.019
∆ default rate, 01Q4 to 04Q4                       20,998      0.017       0.142   12,627     0.015      0.125
∆ log sales, 01Q4 to 04Q4                           8,606      0.213       0.627    5,837      0.23      0.587
∆ log loan amount, 04Q4 to 07Q4                    25,154      0.214       1.263   14,074     0.048      1.098
∆ default rate, 04Q4 to 07Q4                       25,154      0.018       0.137   14,074     0.023      0.154
∆ log sales, 04Q4 to 07Q4                          11,088      0.232        0.68    7,019     0.221      0.626
∆ log loan amount, 07Q4 to 09Q4                    22,120     -0.204       0.942   12,681    -0.232      0.923
∆ default rate, 07Q4 to 09Q4                       22,120      0.050       0.209   12,681     0.063      0.230
∆ log sales, 07Q4 to 09Q4                          11,191      0.058       0.392    6,932     0.049      0.363

Bank Level Variables
Total Assets (2004Q4)                                192    7.8E+06     2.5E+07
Initial exposure to real estate assets               191       0.440       0.157
Capital ratio (2004Q4)                               191       6.686       3.922
Return on assets (2004Q4)                            191       0.945       0.483

 This table presents summary statistics for loans outstanding as of 2004Q4. The underlying data represents
 a 10% random sample of all loans in Spain, with sampling done at firm level. A loan is defined as a
 firm-bank pair, i.e. separate loans from a bank to the same firm are aggregated at the firm level. Multiple
 Relationship firms have at least two banking relationships as of the fourth quarter of 2004.
                                                Table III
                             Securitization and Initial Real Estate Exposure

                                                                      Securitized
                                                                      Assets Over
                                   ∆ Securitized Assets Over          Total Assets
                                    Total Assets (‘04 to ‘07)           (2007)          ∆ Log Bank Credit (‘04 to ‘07)
                                       (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)                 (5)

                                     0.197∗∗∗         0.274∗∗∗           0.349∗∗∗        1.01 ∗ ∗∗
Bank RE Exposure
                                    (0.064)          (0.075)            (0.084)         (0.32)

Securitized Assets Over                                                                                       1.12 ∗ ∗∗
Total Assets (2004 to 2007)                                                                                  (0.415)

                                     0.036            0.073∗             0.15 ∗ ∗∗     −0.014                 0.24 ∗ ∗
Constant
                                    (0.029)          (0.039)            (0.041)        (0.18)                (0.12)


                                      OLS               WLS                WLS             WLS                  WLS
N                                      179              179                179             178                  178
R2                                    0.063             0.14               0.14            0.18                 0.12
This table presents bank-level regressions relating the change in securitized assets and change in bank credit between 2004Q4
and 2007Q4 to a banks initial exposure to real estate assets. Banks initial exposure to real estate is defined as the fraction
of total loans that is given out to the real estate sector (residential, commercial, and construction) as of 2000Q1. All
specifications report robust standard errors. ***,**,* imply that coefficient estimates are significant at 1%, 5% and 10%
level, respectively.
                                Table IV
Correlation Between Banks Exposure To Real Estate And Initial Characteristics

                                                   Coeff            s.e.              Coeff           s.e.
  Bank Level Variables (2000Q1)
  Return on assets                               1.896              (1.569)
  Total Default Rate                             0.0009            (0.0046)
  Capital Ratio                                 −0.705              (2.642)
  Cajas?                                         0.935∗∗∗           (0.120)

  Firm Level Variables (2005Q4)
  Default rate                        0.0104                      (0.0114)
  Total assets                    −7549.001∗∗∗                   (1739.05)
  Log total assets                   −0.846∗∗∗                     (0.147)
  Total credit                     −469.860 ∗ ∗                  (253.369)
  Log total credit                   −0.802 ∗ ∗                    (0.379)
  Total sales                     −8349.19 ∗ ∗∗                 (1836.714)
  Log total sales                    −1.225∗∗∗                     (0.173)
  Number of banking relationships    −0.004                        (0.343)
  Tangible assets ratio              19.109∗∗∗                     (2.912)
  Short term debt ratio             −27.557∗∗∗                     (3.213)

  Loan Level Variables (2005Q4)                                                   With firm fixed effects
  Default Rate                                  0.013              (0.008)         0.007       (0.004)
  Loan amount                                −300.276∗∗∗         (126.888)       −68.16      (83.267)
  Log loan amount                             −0.123               (0.312)         0.147       (0.285)
  Collateralization rate                        0.266∗∗∗           (0.048)         0.150∗∗∗ (0.034)
  Maturity greater than 5 years                 0.204∗∗∗           (0.092)         0.106       (0.069)
 This table regresses various bank, firm and loan characteristics on banks exposure to real estate assets in
 2000, and reports the coefficient and standard error on bank exposure variable. Banks initial exposure to
 real estate is defined as the fraction of total loans that is given out to the real estate sector (residential,
 commercial, and construction) as of 2000Q1. ***,**,* imply that coefficient estimates are significant at
 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                         Table V
                                                         Securitization And The Credit Channel

                                                                                                                                                              ∆ Firm-
                                                                                                                  ∆ Log                                       Level Log
                                                                                                                  Drawn                                        Drawn
                                                                                                                 (01Q4 to         Loan                        (04Q4 to
                                                       ∆ Log Drawn (04Q4 to 07Q4)                                 04Q4)         Dropped?         Tobit         07Q4)
                                          (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)

                                       0.366∗∗∗       0.404∗∗∗       0.386∗∗∗       0.382∗∗∗       0.419∗       −0.135         −0.245∗∗∗        0.882∗∗∗       0.023
Bank RE Exposure
                                      (0.099)        (0.104)        (0.113)        (0.111)        (0.225)       (0.145)        (0.070)         (0.285)        (0.100)


Firm-Bank Type fixed effects              No             No             No             No             Yes            No             No             No              -
Loan controls                             No             No             No             Yes            No             No             No             No              -
Firm fixed effects                        No             No             Yes            Yes             -             Yes            Yes            No             No
Data restricted to firms with
                                          No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
multiple relationships
N                                       42,609         32,647         32,647         32,647         32,647         26,262         51,397         51,397         14,074
R2                                      0.002          0.003           0.50           0.51           0.70           0.53           0.46                          0.00
This table presents coefficient estimates from specifications at the loan (firm-bank) level relating the growth in bank credit from 2004Q4 to 2007Q4 to lending banks
initial exposure to real estate. Column (8) runs a tobit specification, taking into account that change in lending is censored for firms dropped by banks (or log loan
amount dropping by more than -1.82, i.e. the bottom 5th percentile). Banks initial exposure to real estate is the fraction of total loans that is given to mortgages and
construction/ real estate as of 2000:Q1. Loan controls include collateral and maturity. A firm is defined to have multiple relationships if it borrows from at least two
banks of 2004:Q4. All specifications include a constant (not reported) and errors are cluster at the bank level. ***,**,* Coefficient estimate statistically distinct from
0 at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
                                                                         Table VI
                                                             Securitization And Loan Terms

                                                            Change in Loan conditions from 2004Q4 to 2007Q4
                                       Drawn to Committed Ratio          Collateralization Rate             Long-term maturity
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)

                                    8.28 ∗ ∗∗      8.33 ∗ ∗∗       8.51 ∗ ∗∗ −0.016            −0.065 ∗ ∗ −0.048               0.134          0.16 ∗ ∗       0.13 ∗ ∗
Bank RE Exposure
                                   (2.69)         (2.65)          (3.34)     (0.0114)          (0.033)    (0.03)              (0.084)        (0.067)        (0.062)


Loan Controls                                         Yes            Yes                           Yes            Yes                            Yes            Yes
Firm fixed effects                                                   Yes                                          Yes                                           Yes
Data restricted to firms
                                       Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
with multiple relationships
N                                    32,647         32,647         32,647         32,647          32,647         32,647         32,647         32,647         32,647
R2                                   0.0027         0.0410          0.50          0.0001           0.25           0.62          0.0052          0.15           0.46
This table presents coefficient estimates from specifications at the loan (firm-bank) level relating the change in loan conditions from 2004Q4 to 2007Q4 to lending
banks exposure to real estate. We use three different loan conditions: change in drawn to committed credit in column 1 to 3, change in collateralization rate in
column 4 to 6 and change in long term maturity (over 5 years) in column 7 to 9. Loan controls in (2) and (3) include maturity and collateralization rate as of
2004Q4 as well as changes in these two variables during 2004-07. Loan controls in (5) and (6) have maturity as of 2004Q4 as well as change in this variable
during 2004-07. Loan controls in (8) and (9) have collateralization rate as of 2004Q4 as well as change in this variable during 2004-07. All specifications include
a constant (not reported) and errors are cluster at the bank level. Banks initial exposure to real estate is defined as the fraction of total loans that is given out to
the real estate sector (residential, commercial, and construction) as of 2000Q1. ***,**,* imply that coefficient estimates are significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively.
                                                                               Table VII
                                                                            Firm Outcomes

                                      ∆(drawn to commit)            ∆(%long-term)          ∆(collateral rate)        ∆(default rate)        ∆(log sales)      ∆(employees)
                                                  (1)                       (2)                      (3)                     (4)                 (5)                 (6)
                                               6.86 ∗ ∗∗                 0.054 ∗ ∗             −0.10 ∗ ∗∗                 0.0008            −0.0025               0.045
Firm Banks’ RE Exposure
                                              (1.26)                    (0.026)                (0.019)                   (0.022)             (0.059)             (0.081)

Bias-Corrected Coefficient                     7.38                      0.066                 −0.074


Data restricted to firms with
                                                  Yes                       Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  Yes                 Yes
multiple relationships
N                                               14,277                    14,277                  14,277                   14,277               7,019               5,964
R2                                              0.0012                    0.0005                  0.0019                     0                    0                0.0001
This table presents coefficient estimates from specifications at the firm level relating the growth in firm level outcomes to a firms banks initial exposure to real estate
assets. Banks initial exposure to real estate is defined as the fraction of total loans that is given out to the real estate sector (residential, commercial, and construction)
as of 2000Q1. Firm banks real estate exposure is the weighted average of a firms lending banks exposure to real estate as of 2000Q1. Bias-corrected coefficients are
calculated using the methodology outline in equation (3) of the paper. The calculations are as follows: Column (1), 7.38 = 6.86 + (8.54 − 8.28) ∗ (0.1572 /0.1112 ).
Column (2), 0.066 = 0.054 + (0.14 − 0.134)) ∗ (0.1572 /0.1112 ). Column (3), −0.074 = −0.10 + (−0.0030 + 0.016) ∗ (0.1572 /0.1112 ). All specifications include a
constant (not reported) and errors are cluster at the lead-bank level. ***,**,* imply that coefficient estimates are significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                                    Table VIII
               Extensive Margin – Extension of Credit to New Clients

                                                                                New Firms
                                Log            Log               Drawn            Drawn
                               Drawn        Commitment         Normalized       Normalized        Defaults
                                 (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)
                              1.97 ∗ ∗         1.69 ∗ ∗          0.665∗∗∗         0.382∗∗∗        0.0657∗∗
Bank RE Exposure
                             (0.79)           (0.73)            (0.22)           (0.153)         (0.0287)
                              7.99 ∗ ∗∗        8.37 ∗ ∗∗         0.193∗           0.115∗          0.0061
Constant
                             (0.39)           (0.37)            (0.11)           (0.060)         (0.012)
N                                175              177               179             179              163
R2                              0.025            0.019             0.064            0.08            0.068
This table presents coefficient estimates from specifications at the bank level relating lending given out to
new clients by banks between 2004Q4 and 2007Q4 to a banks initial real estate exposure. Banks initial
exposure to real estate is defined as the fraction of total loans that is given out to the real estate sector
(residential, commercial, and construction) as of 2000Q1. ***,**,* imply that coefficient estimates are
significant at 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. All specifications report robust standard errors.
