NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BABY BUSTS AND BABY BOOMS:
THE FERTILITY RESPONSE TO SHOCKS IN DYNASTIC MODELS
Larry E. Jones
Alice Schoonbroodt
Working Paper 16596
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16596

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

The authors thank the National Science Foundation, Grant SES-0962432, and the ESRC Centre for
Population Change for financial support. We also thank Michele Boldrin, V.V. Chari, Simona Cociuba,
Martin Gervais, David Hacker, John Knowles, Ellen McGrattan, Thomas Sargent, Henry Siu, Michele
Tertilt for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Larry E. Jones and Alice Schoonbroodt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Baby Busts and Baby Booms: The Fertility Response to Shocks in Dynastic Models
Larry E. Jones and Alice Schoonbroodt
NBER Working Paper No. 16596
December 2010
JEL No. E13,J11,J13,O11
ABSTRACT
Economic demographers have long analyzed fertility cycles. This paper builds a foundation for these
cycles in a model of fertility choice with dynastic altruism and aggregate shocks. It is shown that under
reasonable parameter values, fertility is pro-cyclical and that, following a shock, fertility continues
to cycle endogenously as subsequent cohorts enter retirement. Quantitatively, in the model, the Great
Depression generates a large baby bust -- between 38% and 63% of that seen in the U.S. in the 1930s
-- which is subsequently followed by a baby boom -- between 53% and 92% of that seen in the U.S.
in the 1950s.

Larry E. Jones
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
lej@umn.edu
Alice Schoonbroodt
University of Southampton
School of Social Sciences
Economics Division (58 Murray, Room 3013)
Highfield, Southampton SO17 1BJ
United Kingdom
alicesch@soton.ac.uk

1

Introduction

Fertility rates in the U.S. varied dramatically over the 20th century. During the first part
of the century, they continued a drop, begun in the mid 19th century, that demographers
associate with the Demographic Transition. Total Fertility Rates (TFR) fell from 5.7 children
per woman to 3.0 over the period from 1850 to 1925. In the years that followed there was an
even more abrupt drop during the years of the Great Depression, from 3.0 to 2.1. Indeed,
women in their prime fertility years during the Great Depression had, on average, only 2.2
children in their entire lifetime. These women, born between 1905 and 1915, had fewer
children than any previous cohort (in fact, fertility did not go back down to those levels
until the 1970s). Following this, fertility rebounded significantly during the 1950s and early
1960s, the Baby Boom. At its peak, TFR reached 3.6 while Cohort Total Fertility (CTFR)
showed a similar, but smaller, increase up to 3.2.
One of the key hypotheses put forward by economic demographers for these large and
opposite swings is known as the ‘Easterlin hypothesis’, see Easterlin (1961, 1968, 1978, 1987).
In a nutshell, the idea behind this hypothesis is that fertility was exceptionally low during the
Great Depression because of the large negative shock to incomes. Then, in substantial part,
due to the fact that fertility had been so low during the 1930s, the Baby Boom occurred. The
mechanism through which low fertility in the past leads to high fertility one generation later
has usually been attributed to the feedback effects of the resulting unbalanced age-structure
on relative wages of young fertile workers to older workers in combination with differences
between expected lifetime income relative to ’material aspirations formed in childhood.’1
In this paper, we build a model of fertility choice combining features of a stochastic growth
model with a model of fertility choice with dynastic altruism à la Barro-Becker (Becker
and Barro, 1988, and Barro and Becker, 1989).2 In addition to the stochastic component,
the model extends existing Barro-Becker type models to include multiple periods in the
working life. For simplicity, we assume that labor is the only factor of production (except in
Section 5.3) and that different age-groups are perfect substitutes in production (up to agespecific productivity levels). Thus, we abstract from feedback effects of relative cohort sizes
1

The so called ‘Easterlin hypothesis’ has developed over Easterlin’s own work and has been interpreted
in more than one way by other authors along the way. For an excellent overview until 1998, see Macunovich
(1998). She ‘focuses just on the fertility aspects of the Easterlin hypothesis’, which is our focus as well. For
a more general overview, see Macunovich and Easterlin (2008).
2
Some have put forth the idea that the baby boom was a consequence of low fertility during the Great
Depression – i.e., the baby boom was ‘catching up.’ However, completed fertility (CTFR) was low for both
the women immediately preceding and immediately following the baby boom and hence, this cannot be true
at the level of the individual mother. It can, in principle, hold across cohorts in a dynastic model. This
distinction is relevant in our analysis and is one of our motivations for studying a dynastic model.

1

on relative wages. In this model, we study, both qualitatively and quantitatively, fluctuations
in fertility, triggered by (large) income shocks using preference parameter configurations in
line with the standard growth and business-cycle literatures.
We show that both of the effects originally discussed by Easterlin, the large reactions
of fertility to large income shocks, and the oscillations thereafter, are present in the model
(despite the absence of feedback effects through wages). In particular, we find that fertility
is procyclical as long as most of the costs of children are in terms of goods, or as long as
there is sufficient curvature in the period utility function. On top of this, the policy function
for current fertility as a function of past fertility that comes out of our model is negatively
sloped around the steady state. We find that that the dynamics of adjustment following a
movement off a balanced growth path is one of dampened oscillations. Putting these two
effects together, in the model, a large negative income shock is met with a contemporaneous
reduction in fertility followed by a baby boom a generation later. Thus, in the model the
Great Depression would trigger a baby bust, followed by a baby boom a generation later.
In our model, children are partly a consumption good (Barro-Becker preferences) and
partly an investment good (future labor force) for the dynasty. Comparing our results with
those standard in growth models gives substantial intuition. The role of the capital stock(s),
is played by the age distribution of the population, while the number of births plays the role
of investment. Then, as is standard in growth models (for standard consumption smoothing
reasons), periods when productivity is particularly high are times when investment is high.
Here this translates to: fertility is high during periods of high productivity – an income
boom generates a baby boom. Correspondingly, an income bust generates a baby bust. In
addition, the larger is the desire to smooth consumption, the larger the elasticity of fertility
to income shocks. There is one subtlety that needs to be added with this interpretation.
This is that, when the cost of a new child is primarily in terms of time, good times are both
good times to save for the future (invest) and times when that investment is most expensive.
As a result, in this case, fertility is only procyclical when there is sufficient desire to smooth
consumption (i.e., more curvature than log utility).3
A similar intuition gives us insight as to why the model exhibits dampened oscillations.
This has to do with the specification of the implicit depreciation rates of the age-specific
populations. When the stock is the number of people, the counterpart of depreciation is
movement out of the work force. Thus, fertility (i.e., investment) will be higher in periods
3

Notice that one important feature here is that income is temporarily high or low, relative to trend. As
shown by Jones and Schoonbroodt (2010), a permanent increase in productivity growth has a permanent
negative effect on fertility under the parameter values that generate pro-cyclical fertility here. Thus, the
important distinction between temporary and permanent changes in productivity shocks is just as important
here as it is in standard growth and business cycle models.

2

when a relatively large share of workers are nearing retirement age. Because of this effect, a
baby bust now means that the next generation’s workforce is primarily older workers – more
workers will be retiring. Consequently, investment will be higher in response – a baby boom
will occur.
On the quantitative side, we use a calibrated version of the model to simulate the size of
the response of fertility to productivity shocks, both contemporaneous and delayed. After
calibrating to U.S. averages, we find that the contemporaneous response to a 1 percent
deviation in productivity lies in the range of 1 to 1.7 percent depending on the nature of the
costs of children (generally, responses are smaller when the costs of children are primarily in
terms of parental time) while the elasticity one period later lies between 0.94 and 1.5. This
implies that the response of (completed) fertility to a ‘standard recession’ (say, productivity
is 5 percent below trend for 2 years) is relatively small – of the order of 0.02 to 0.04 children
per woman with a subsequent baby boom of similar size. However, we find that the reduction
in fertility implied by the model as a response to the 12 percent decrease in productivity
during the Great Depression is between 38 and 63 percent of the observed pre-WWII baby
bust in Total Fertility Rates (TFR). Moreover, the subsequent endogenous fluctuations in
fertility triggered by this bust, in conjunction with the productivity boom in the 1950s and
1960s, captures between 53 and 92 percent of the post-WWII baby boom in TFR.4
Since both the Depression and the Baby Boom are phenomena that occurred in many
different countries, we go on to study one obvious implication of our model. If the mechanisms
that we study are important, it should be true that countries that had deeper depressions in
the 1930s should also have larger baby busts in the 1930s, and that those with larger baby
busts should experience larger baby booms in the 1950s. In Section 6, we show that this
is indeed true, conditional on the economic circumstances in the 1950s. These observations
further support our theory.
Many other demographers and economists have studied fluctuations in fertility but they
have focused on different channels. First, operationally, the mechanisms that are the driving
forces behind our results are considerably different than those emphasized by Easterlin in his
work. For example, he emphasizes differences between expected lifetime income relative to
’material aspirations formed in childhood.’ Here, the basic mechanisms are best understood
as variants of standard effects of growth models – the desire to smooth consumption, etc.5
Second, following Easterlin many authors have analyzed the dynamics of age-structured
4

Realistically, it seems unlikely that fertility decisions are affected by quarter to quarter fluctuations in
productivity (as addressed in the business cycle literature). This is consistent with our quantitative findings.
Rather, a prolonged boom or bust is required for the fertility effect to be large.
5
Feichtinger and Dockner (1990) assume a positive relationship between births and the difference between
actual and expected consumption, which is more in line with Easterlin’s original argument.

3

populations that results when it is assumed that the relationship between fertility today and
past fertility has a negative slope, see Lee (1974) and Samuelson (1976) for early analysis
of dynamic population systems of this kind.6 In contrast, we provide a choice-theoretic
foundation for these cycles.
Third, we assume that different ages of workers are perfect substitutes in production.
Nevertheless, fertility cycles are generated through the curvature of preferences. This shows
that feedback effects from the age-structure on wages are not necessary to generate population cycles. This is an alternative to Easterlin’s feedback effect which, as suggested by Lee
(2008), can be generated by using a CES production specification, where different age-groups
are not perfect substitutes.
Further, the mechanisms that we highlight here are also complementary to those explored
in other papers that have used choice-theoretic dynamic macroeconomic models to study
the Baby Boom. Three key examples are Greenwood et al. (2005), Doepke et al. (2007) and
Albanesi and Olivetti (2010). In Greenwood et al. (2005), the channel that is highlighted is
the effects of the drastic improvement in technologies of home production that took place in
the post WWII period. In essence, these improvements temporarily made having children
cheaper generating the boom. In Doepke et al. (2007), they emphasize the relatively high
female participation rate that took place during WWII. This, because of learning on the job,
made that specific cohort of women relatively high productivity. Because of this, the cohort
of women entering their 20s in the 1950s faced a relatively tough job market causing them
to delay entering the workforce and have larger than normal families. Albanesi and Olivetti
(2010) emphasize the decrease in maternal mortality as a cause of the baby boom. This
decrease in mortality also increased the incentive to invest in human capital, triggering the
return to low fertility in the 1970s. Thus, the primary channels emphasized in those papers
differ from ours. One advantage of our approach is that it is also able to capture the sizeable
downward movement, relative to trend, in fertility in the 1930s.
Finally, our findings can rationalize the observations in Butz and Ward (1979) as follows.
In brief, they find that fertility, while procyclical, has become less responsive to business
cycle frequency fluctuations over time. In our model, this can happen for two reasons. The
first comes from the fact that the size of the effects that we find are smaller when the
costs of children are in terms of time. Since there has been a large increase in labor force
participation among married women, this causes the time cost of children to be increasingly
important. Second, due to continuing fluctuations triggered by the Great Depression, the
fertility response to productivity shocks is mitigated. In our data analysis, we show that,
6

Feichtinger and Sorger (1989) extend Samuelson’s initial model to continuous time.

4

controlling for productivity shocks in the past is crucial to find a positive correlation of
fertility with contemporary shocks. It is yet to be seen how large the fertility response to
the most recent recession will be, though it does go in the direction predicted by the theory
(see, for example, Sobotka et al., 2010).
In Section 2 we review the data for the U.S. since 1900. The model is laid out in Section 3
and the analytic results are presented. In Section 4, we explore the quantitative implications
of a calibrated version of the model compared to U.S. data. In Section 5 we study the
sensitivity of our results to some basic changes in our assumptions. Finally, we present
international evidence in Section 6 while Section 7 concludes.

2

U.S. data

In this section, we lay out the basic facts about the time paths of productivity and fertility in
the U.S. over the 20th century. We begin with the facts pertaining to the growth in productivity using a consistent measure for total factor productivity (TFP) and labor productivity
(LP) from Chari et al. (2007). As most economists know, this period is one of more or less
continued growth in productivity with a few interruptions. The most significant of these is
the Great Depression. Figure 1 shows the natural logarithms of TFP and LP over the period
from 1901 to 2000.
The facts about productivity over this period can be described as follows:
1. the continual upward trend;
2. the marked decline below trend that took place in the 1930s and early 1940s;
3. the return to trend in the early 1950s;
4. the significant increase above trend that took place in the 1950s and 1960s;
5. the productivity slowdown since the 1970s.
This timing of the movements of productivity around trend fits well with the movements
in fertility seen in the data. Figure 2 shows the time path of the Total Fertility Rate (TFR)
and Cohort Total Fertility Rates (CTFR) (by birthyear of mother +23 years) over the period
from 1850 to 2000. We have two time series for TFR, which calculates how many children a
woman would have over her lifetime if current age-specific fertility rates were to prevail in the
future. The first series is the one prepared by Haines (1994) using Census data and hence is
available only every 10 years. The second comes from the Natality Statistics Analysis from
National Center for Health Statistics. It is available at annual frequencies, but only since
1917. The CTFR series comes from Jones and Tertilt (2008) and counts how many children
5

Figure 1: Total Factor Productivity and Labor Productivity, 1901-2000 (1929=100)
6.5
Log TFP
Log LP

Productivity

6

5.5

5

4.5

4
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year

were born to a particular cohort of women at the end of their fertile period. Implicitly, it
is equivalent to adding age-specific fertility rates pertaining to a particular cohort of women
over time. Its frequency is five-year birth cohorts.
At the beginning of the period, fertility is still in the midst of what is known to demographers as the demographic transition, the marked fall in fertility (and mortality) that has
occurred in all developed countries. This fall accelerates from the late 1920s to the mid
1930s. Fertility then increases to reach its peak in the baby boom of the 1950s and 1960s.
It appears that a good description would be:
1. high, and fairly constantly decreasing fertility from 1850 until 1925, when it reaches a
TFR of about 3.0 children per woman;
2. an acceleration of the rate at which fertility is falling between 1925 and 1933 (from
TFR=3.0 to TFR=2.1);
3. constant, but low, fertility over the period from 1933 to 1940, with the level at about
TFR=2.2;
4. rapidly rising fertility from 1940 to 1957, with TFR going from 2.2 up to 3.7;
5. high, stable fertility from 1957 to 1961 at about TFR=3.6;
6. a rapid decrease from 1961 to 1976, with TFR going from 3.6 down to 1.7;
7. a slight increase and then stable low fertility over the remainder of the period, with
the level at about TFR=2.

6

Figure 2: (Cohort) Total Fertility Rate, 1850-2000
6
TFR
CTFR (+23)

5.5
5

Fertility

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1850

1900

1950

2000

Year

We will refer to 2 and 3 as the pre-WWII baby bust, 4 and 5 as the post-WWII baby
boom and 6 as the baby bust of the 1970s. The exact sizes of these features of the data
depend on how one treats the trend growth in productivity and trend decrease in fertility over
the period. For example, was there a common, exogenous growth rate in productivity over
the entire period with higher frequency (albeit highly autocorrelated) fluctuations around
this trend? Or, were there several regimes of growth? For fertility, one can see that while
TFR decreases smoothly over time, the early CTFR data shows that the largest decrease
happens for cohorts of women born between 1858 (4.9 children per women) and 1878 (3.25
children per woman). The fluctuations thereafter, however, look very similar in both series,
though somewhat larger in TFR than CTFR.
For fluctuations, we fit a linear trend to the (ln) TFP and LP series from 1901 to 2000
(ln Pt = α0 + α1 t + t , where P = {T F P, LP }), and detrend TFR using an HP filter
(smoothing parameter, w = 20, 000). We obtain annual percent deviations over this period
plotted in Figure 3. Several alternative detrending methods were studied with very similar
results.
Although it is not perfect, there is an impressive coincidence in timing. The coefficient
of correlation between annual TFP and TFR deviations for the years 1901 to 2000 is 0.4,
with a coefficient of 0.71 from 1901 to 1940 and a correlation of 0.2 from 1941 to 2000. This
suggests that the U.S. TFR is procyclical during the early time period but the correlation is
much weaker thereafter (see also Butz and Ward, 1979). As suggested by the model below,
one reason for the decrease in the correlation may be the increase in female labor supply

7

Figure 3: TFR, TFP and LP Percent Deviations From Trend, 1901-2000
0.4
TFP
LP
TFR

0.3

Percent Deviations

0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4

1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Year

which made the opportunity cost of children, women’s wages, procyclical.
What our model simulation is also going to capture is the large downward deviation in the
1930s due to the large negative shock during the Great Depression and a baby boom following
endogenously as a response to the baby bust itself, one generation later. We therefore also
bt denote the percent deviation from trend in variable X
run the following regression. Let X
in period t.
T[
F Rt = λ0 + λ1 Pbt + λ2 Pbt−l + εt

where P = {T F P, LP } and l ∈ {20, ..., 25}. The results for l = 20 are given in Table 1.
Similar results go through for larger values of l.

Table 1: U.S. TFR and Productivity: Regression results
Indep. Var. Coefficient

Indep. Var. Coefficient

Constant
T[
FPt
T[
F P t−20

Constant
ct
LP
c t−20
LP

-0.0051
0.8363**
-0.8401**

-0.0058
0.6004*
-0.6218*

*, **: Significantly different from zero at 5% and 1%, respectively.

These regressions show that the coefficients on contemporaneous productivity (λ1 ) are
all positive and significantly different from zero, while the coefficients on productivity a
generation ago (λ2 ) are all negative and significantly different from zero. Also, λ1 and λ2 are
of similar magnitude in absolute value, while the constant (λ0 ) is likely to be zero.
8

3

The model

In this section, we lay out a model of the response of fertility to period by period stochastic
movements in productivity. To do this, we use a model of fertility based on that developed
in Becker and Barro (1988) and Barro and Becker (1989) (Barro-Becker henceforth). The
simplification that we make is to assume that there is no physical (or human) capital in the
model. Thus, the flow of income is solely due to wage income.7 On the other hand, we add
a stochastic component as well as an explicit age-structure to the basic Barro-Becker model.

3.1

Model setup

A period is 20 years. Every person lives for four periods, one as a child and T = 3 periods as
an adult. There is an initial age distribution of the population given by (N03 , N02 , N01 ) where
N03 is the number of initial old (i.e., their age in period t = 0 is a = 3). We will normalize
by assuming that N03 = 1.
Children (age a = 0) do nothing. At age a = 1, young workers consume, have children
and supply one unit of labor (net of time spent to raise children) to earn a wage, wt1 . At age
a = 2, old workers consume and supply one unit of labor inelastically to earn a wage, wt2 ,
but are no longer fertile. In the last period of their lives, age a = 3, agents are retired and
only consume.
Adults care about consumption, the number of children and their children’s future utility.
Following the original Barro-Becker formulation, we assume that the utility of a person who
was born in period t − 1 and whose first period as an adult is in period t is given by:
(1)

1
Ut1 = Vt1 + φβg(nt )Ut+1

where Ut1 represents the full value of utility of an age a = 1 adult in period t looking from
that point forward, Vt1 is the utility this person gets from his own path of consumption, nt is
1
the number of children that he has and Ut+1
is the utility that his typical child will receive.
Let cas be the amount of consumption for the typical person in period s that is age a. We
assume that utility from the time path of own consumption ((c1t , c2t+1 , c3t+2 ) – young worker,

old worker, retirement) is of the form:
(2)

Vt1

=

3
X

β a−1 u(cat+a−1 ).

a=1

We distinguish between time preference as measured by the discount factor, β and the
7

We relax this assumption in Section 5.3.

9

degree of altruism between generations within a period, φ. That is, φ = 1 means that
a person cares as much about the utility of his children as he cares about his own (see
Manuelli and Seshadri, 2009).
Similarly to equation (1), we can define the continuation utility for a person who was a
young adult in period t (i.e., he was born in period t − 1) looking forward from the point
when he reaches age a > 1. Of particular interest is the continuation utility of an adult of age
T in period 0 – i.e., the initial old. These are the only agents in the model who care about
all agents of all ages in all periods. Sequentially substituting V and U for later generations
and grouping terms by period instead of generations, utility for the initial old, U0T , is given
by:
U0T =

(3)

∞
X

(βφ)

t=0

" T
X
t
a=1



a
φ1−a Πt−1−a
k=0 g(nk ) u(ct )

#

Assuming g(n) = nη , simplification occurs in equation (3) because g(nt )g(nt+1 ) = g(nt nt+1 ).
To see this, let Nta be the number of descendants of the initial age T agent, that are of age
a in period t. Then the laws of motion for population are given by:
1
Nt1 = nt−1 Nt−1
is the number of births in period t − 1;

(4)

a−1
Nta = Nt−1
for a = 2, ..., T ;

Nta = 0 for a > T ;
N0T = 1.
Using the functional form assumption for g and the laws of motion for population, U0T can
be written as:
U0T =

(5)

∞
X
t=0

(βφ)

t

" T
X
a=1

φ1−a g(Nta )u(cat )

#

Hence, as is standard in dynastic models à la Barro-Becker, the utility of the initial old
can be written in terms of the number of descendants of age a in period t, Nta . Assuming
1−σ
u(c) = c1−σ , following Jones and Schoonbroodt (2010), there are two sets of parameter
restrictions that satisfy the natural monotonicity and concavity restrictions of U0T :
AI.
AII.
8

0 < 1 − σ ≤ η < 1;
0 > 1 − σ ≥ η.8

The knife-edge case where σ → 1 and η = δ(1 − σ) can also be analyzed. See Jones and Schoonbroodt

10

Under AI., g is increasing and utility is positive, while under AII. g is decreasing but
utility is negative, so that, in both cases, ancestor’s utility is increasing in the number
of descendants. Also, under AI. the desire to smooth consumption over time and across
generations is low, while under AII., it is high. These distinctions are relevant for the results
below.
We assume that the cost of children born in period t is in terms of period t consumption
but allow this cost to depend on the wage of young workers – θt (wt1 ). Thus, this allows for
the two most common ways of modeling child costs: goods costs – θ t (wt1 ) = θt – and time
costs – θt (wt1) = bwt1 . Thus, feasibility for the dynasty in period t is given by:
(6)

3
X

Nta cat

+

θt (wt1 )Ntb

≤

2
X

wta Nta ≡ Wt

a=1

a=1

1
where Ntb = nt Nt1 = Nt+1
is the total number of births in period t. If the costs are in terms
1
of time, θ t = bwt , there is an additional constraint, namely that 0 ≤ bNtb ≤ Nt1 .

We assume that wages grow at a constant rate, γ, on average. Moreover, there is an
aggregate shock so that the entire age-specific wage profile shifts up and down by st in
period t. Thus, in period t, wages are given by:
(wt1 , wt2 ) = (γ t st w 1 , γ t st w 2 ).
We assume that st is a first-order Markov Process.
To ensure the existence of a balanced growth path, we also assume that the costs of
children grow at rate γ. That is, we assume that, θ(wt1 ) = γ t θ in the goods cost case and
θ(wt1 ) = γ t bw 1 in the time cost case.
To complete the specification of the model we need to make a decision about which agents
get to choose what and when. There are many different ways to do this. A useful benchmark
is a Planner’s problem approach. Accordingly we analyze the problem that maximizes the
overall utility of the initial old. This has two advantages as a benchmark. First, this is the
only group that cares, either directly or indirectly about all agents in the model. Second,
it has the feature that the resulting allocation can also be supported dynamically as the
equilibrium of a game in which in each period, the oldest individuals make choices for all
variables for all of their descendants.

1
Given this, the Planner’s Problem, P (γ, β; {N0a } , s0 ), is to choose {cat (st )}3a=1 , Nt+1
(st )

∞
t=0

to maximize utility in (5) subject to feasibility in (6) and laws of motion of population in (4)
where st = (s0 , s1 , ...., st ) is the history of shocks up to and including period t.

(2010) or Schoonbroodt and Tertilt (2010) for details.

11

As is usually true in models with exogenous, trend growth, solutions can be obtained by
solving a related model with no growth and a different discount factor. Thus, the solution
to P (γ, β; {N0a } , s0 ) can be obtained directly from the solution to P (1, β̂; {N0a } , s0 ) – i.e.,
γ = 1 (no growth) and the discount factor, β̂, depends on γ, β, σ, and η. Because of this
result, we abstract from trend growth through most of the remainder of the paper. In those
cases where the solution to the model depends on the discount factor, we will use this result
to calibrate to the appropriate discount factor in the detrended model.
Nb

Let us introduce one additional piece of notation. Let nbt ≡ 0.5Nt 1 be the number of births
t
per woman. This is the model quantity that we will identify with the Cohort Total Fertility
Rate (CTFR) in the data, while TFR will be a weighted average over several cohort’s fertility.

3.2

Consumption across the age distribution

First, we analyze how consumption within a given period, t, is distributed across the different
ages of agents alive at the time. The relevant term in a typical period, t, is:
3
X
a=1

1−a

φ

g(Nta )u(cat )

=

3
X

φ

1−a

g(Nta )u

a=1



Nta cat
Nta



=

3
X
a=1

φ

1−a

g(Nta )u



Cta
Nta



,

where Cta = Nta cat is the total consumption of the age a cohort in period t.
Given any level of aggregate consumption in a period, Ct , the planner will choose a
P
distribution across ages to maximize the above subject to 3a=1 Cta = Ct . It follows that
this is done by equating the marginal utility of a unit of aggregate consumption across the
different ages.
To gain more intuition, consider the Planner’s objective within a period:
3
X

φ

1−a

a 1−σ
a η+σ−1 (Ct )
(Nt )

1−σ

a=1

As can be seen, the marginal utility of Cta is affected by three things. First, is g increasing
(AI) or decreasing (AII) in N? Second, is N growing over time? Third,what
 is φ?
Cta
a
For example, suppose φ = 1. In this case, the age a term is g(Nt )u N a . If population
t
is growing (the case typically of empirical interest), then Nta is decreasing in a – there are less
people in older generations. Thus, if g is increasing (decreasing) in N, g(Nta ) is decreasing
(increasing) in a. Thus, other things equal, the marginal value of an increase in per capita
consumption within a period is decreasing (increasing) in age. On the other hand, in this
case a given level of aggregate consumption in a cohort is split across fewer people in older
groups increasing per capita consumption. This leads to a lower value of u0 .
12

Thus if g is increasing in N, whether the Planner will want consumption to be increasing
or decreasing in age within a particular period will depend on which of these two effects
is larger. If g is decreasing in N, then if population is growing, per capita consumption
is increasing in a for sure. For example, specializing further to the case where η = 1 − σ
(allowed under both configurations), and φ = 1, period t utility becomes:
3
X
C a1−σ
t

a=1

1−σ

.
0

Thus, aggregate consumption of all age groups within a period will be equalized, C a = C a

for all a, a0 , and hence, larger age groups (younger cohorts if N is increasing) will have smaller
0
per capita consumption – cat < cat for a < a0 .

3.3

Procyclical fertility and endogenous oscillations

In this section we study the properties of the solution to the Planner’s Problem outlined
above. In particular, we characterize how the policy functions from this problem depend on
both the current shock and the initial state.
To gain some intuition about the working of the model, notice that if η = 1 − σ, then
N does not enter the period utility function except in aggregate consumption, and hence, if
people are productive for only one period (w a = 0, a 6= 1), N plays exactly the same role in
this model as k does in a stochastic Ak model.9 Similar to Ak models, without exogenous
growth (i.e., γ = 1), aggregate consumption, C, grows at the same rate as N. However, in
the absence of shocks, per capita consumption is constant. There is one important twist to
the Ak-analogy. This is that, at least in the case where child-rearing is modeled as a time
cost, the cost of the investment good is also stochastic. In that case, since θt = bwt1 , periods
when productivity is high are also periods when children – the analog of the investment good
in the Ak model – are expensive. Other than that, the analogy is very close.
We now derive comparative statics of current fertility with respect to productivity shocks
and last period’s fertility. To do this, we first simplify the problem to one with only one
state variable. We then take first-order conditions and analyze comparative statics across
steady states/balanced growth paths therein.
b {N a } , s0 )
Denote by V (N 1 , N 2 , N 3 ; s) the maximized value obtained in the problem P (1, β;
0

when the initial conditions are

(N01 , N02 , N03 )

1

2

3

= (N , N , N ) and s0 = s. Because of our as-

sumptions on the functional forms for the utility function, it is straightforward to show that
the value function is homogeneous of degree η in (N 1 , N 2 , N 3 ), i.e., V (λN 1 , λN 2 , λN 3 ; s) =
b {N a } , s0 ) is therefore a standard, stationary dyλη V (N 1 , N 2 , N 3 ; s). The problem P (1, β;
0
9

See Jones and Manuelli (1990) and Rebelo (1991), seminal papers on this model.

13

namic program as long as s is first-order Markov. Because of this result, we can characterize
the solution through Bellman’s Equation.
Under the additional assumptions that η = 1 − σ, and φ = 1, as discussed in Section 3.2,
C = C a0 and V satisfies:




C 1−σ
1
2
3
10
20
30 0
(7) V (N , N , N ; s) ≡ max
T
+ βφE V (N , N , N ; s )|s
1−σ
N a0 ,C,N b
a

subject to:

P
T C + θN b ≤ s 2a=1 w a N a ;
N a0 = N a−1 , for a = 2, 3;
N 10 = N b .
As can be seen from this, since w 3 = 0 by assumption, we have that V (N 1 , N 2 , N 3 ; s) =
V (N 1 , N 2 , N 3∗ ; s) for any N 3 , N 3∗ . Assuming further that shocks are i.i.d. and using the
homogeneity property of V , the Bellman Equation in (7) is equivalent to one where fertility
per young person, n0 = N b /N 1 , is the choice variable and last period’s fertility per person,
1
the current stock of young to old workers n = N
is the state variable. That is, let Vb (n; s) =
N2
V (N 1 /N 2 , 1; s)/T , then (7) becomes:
"
#
1−σ
h
i
1
2
0
s
[w
n
+
w
]
−
θ(s)n
n
/(1 − σ) + βn1−σ E Vb (n0 ; s0 ) .
(8)
Vb (n; s) ≡ max
n0
T

Taking the first-order condition with respect to n0 and rearranging gives:
i
 h
σ
w2
1
0
s
w
+
−
θ(s)n
n
θ(s)
 β ≡ RHS(n0 ).
(9)
LHS(n0 ) ≡
=
T
T E V̂1 (n0 , s0 )

LHS(n0 ) is increasing in n0 , with LHS(0) = 0 if E V̂1 (0, s) = ∞. Also, RHS(n0 ) is decreasing
in n0 with a positive intercept at n0 = 0. Thus, there is a unique solution.
To see the behavior of n0 as a function of the shock, we consider the two extreme cases,
θ(s) = θ, a goods cost, and a time cost, θ(s) = bsw 1 . In the first case, θ(s) = θ, RHS
shifts up when s goes up while LHS is unchanged. Thus, n0 is increasing in s – fertility is
procyclical. This is a pure income effect which is larger, the larger σ, i.e. the desire to smooth
consumption. Also, it follows that n0 is linear in s. On the other hand, when θ(s) = bsw 1 ,
both LHS and RHS shift up when s increases. The effect on RHS is still the pure income
effect, which tends to increase fertility and is increasing in σ, sσ . The effect on LHS is
the substitution effect because when s is high, fertility is temporarily more expensive which
tends to decrease fertility. This effect is linear in s. If σ > 1, the income effect dominates, i.e.
RHS shifts up by more than LHS. Thus, again n0 is increasing in s – fertility is procyclical.
14

If, σ < 1 the substitution effect dominates – fertility is countercyclical.
To see how current fertility (per young adult), n0 , depends on past fertility, n, notice that
RHS shifts down when the current state, n, increases while LHS is independent of n. Thus
n0 decreases when n increases, generating cycles. This crucially depends on w 2 > 0. If there
is only one period of working life (as in standard Barro-Becker models), this effect is zero.10
We summarize these results in the following proposition:
Proposition 1. Current fertility, n0 (n, s), is
1. a. procyclical if θ(w 1 ) = θ, or if θ(w 1) = bsw 1 and σ > 1;
b. countercyclical if θ(w 1) = bsw 1 and σ < 1;
2. a. independent of last period’s fertility, n, if w 2 = 0;
b. decreasing in last period’s fertility, n, if w 2 > 0.
Thus, if w 2 > 0 the model generates endogenous cycles, triggered by productivity shocks.
The intuition for why fertility is procyclical in this model is similar to that in many growth
models. Here, fertility plays the role of an investment good and the usual consumption
smoothing logic implies that when the shock is high, investment should be high so as to
offset the effects of future shocks on consumption. This argument is direct when the cost of
children is a goods cost. It is tempered when the cost is a time cost by a second effect. This
is that the cost of the investment good is also higher than average when the shock is high.
Thus, whether or not it is a good idea to invest in those periods depends on how strong the
desire is to smooth consumption. When this force is strong – σ is large – the consumption
smoothing effect is large relative to the cost effect and fertility is procyclical. Thus, the more
important the time cost in raising children, the more procyclical is the cost of children itself.
That is, whenever productivity is high, the cost of children is also high and vice versa. This
dampens the procyclicality of fertility and, indeed, when the desire to smooth consumption
is very low, fertility actually is countercyclical.
Some intuition for the fertility cycles in point 2 of the proposition can also be obtained
by analogy with growth models. Here, what we find is a source of endogenous cycles. The
relevant analogy from capital theory here is to consider a model in which depreciation is not
constant. Here, we have an extreme version. Capital (i.e., people) that is built in period t−1
has full productive capacity in period t and period t + 1 – there is no depreciation between
periods t and t + 1 – but has zero productive capacity in period t + 2. Thus, age-specific
depreciation rates here would be δ 1 = 0 and δ 2 = 1 – no depreciation after one period,
Note that since the number of births per woman (CTFR) is nb = n/0.5, all these comparative statics go
through without change.
10

15

full depreciation after two. In a situation like this, when n = N 1 /N 2 is higher than usual,
the planner expects next periods depreciation rate to be lower than usual (because N 2 is
relatively low). Because of this, to smooth consumption, current investment – n0 = N b /N 1
– will be relatively low. Thus, n0 is low when n is high. When there is only one period of
working life, the depreciation rate is always 100 percent and hence this effect is not present.
Because of this, fertility is independent of last period’s fertility. The example with one
period working life, wt2 = 0, is interesting because it corresponds most closely to that of the
original Barro-Becker model while the model with more than one period productive life is
more realistic.11
Thus, according to our theory, while the baby bust in the 1930s may be explained by
the Great Depression, the baby boom in the 1950s is first and foremost a response to low
fertility in the past.

4

Quantitative results

In this section, we use the facts about the time paths of productivity and fertility in the
U.S. over the 20th century laid out in Section 2 to perform quantitative experiments on
the model. To do this, we calibrate parameters to selected moments of our data. We then
use this model to explore two kinds of questions. First, what does the calibrated model
say about the size of responses to shocks to productivity – e.g., what is the elasticity of
fertility with respect to a productivity shock? In keeping with the theoretical results of the
previous section we study both the current response to a shock and also the lagged response
one generation later due to the misalignment of the age structure of the workforce. Second,
based on the estimated policy functions from the calibrated model we study the predicted
response to a productivity shock like those seen in US history – e.g., the Great Depression.
We find that the answers to these quantitative questions also depends on the nature of
the costs of children. Because of this, we give results for two alternative specifications. These
are: (1) all costs are time costs (θ(s) = bw 1 s); (2) all costs of raising children are goods costs
(θ(s) = θ). As noted above, these two specifications are qualitatively different in that with
a time cost, the costs of children are higher in productivity booms than in busts. Reality
probably lies somewhere inbetween these two extreme cases.12
We find that the quantitative responses in the model are economically significant in all
11

In Section 5.4 we add a third period of working life to show that results, though qualitatively more
complicated, are very similar quantitatively.
12
Indeed, the time cost may have become more relevant over time as women entered the labor force. Since
women tend to be the parent taking care of children, the relevant opportunity cost is only procyclical if the
latter are actually working whenever they are not busy raising children.

16

cases. For example, the elasticity of fertility to a contemporaneous productivity shocks lies
between 1 and 1.7,13 while the elasticity one period later lies between 0.94 and 1.5. Standard
recessions will have rather modest effects on fertility, however. Large recessions, such as the
Great Depression, on the other hand, have important and long lasting effects.
We therefore turn to the historical record of the United States and study the predicted
response of fertility to the productivity booms and busts over the 20th century. To do this,
we must first construct a series of shocks to feed into the model. It is not obvious how to do
this realistically. On the one hand, in the model, it is assumed that the shock for the current
period is realized at the beginning of the period. Effectively, this means that individuals
know, at the beginning of the period, what the sequence of annual shocks will be over the
next 20 years. Even with highly correlated shocks at annual frequency, this assumption
seems extreme at best. Another alternative is to decrease the length of a period. This
necessarily increases the size of the state space. For example, even decreasing the period
length to 10 years and maintaining the i.i.d. assumption increases the size of the state space
from 2 dimensional to 5.14 Relaxing the i.i.d. assumption which might be required for 10as opposed to 20-year periods, adds another state variable. In addition, one would have
to address timing of births (between age 20-30 versus 30-40) more seriously. This is not
an easy problem (see Caucutt et al. (2002), Doepke et al. (2007) and Sommer (2010) for
examples). Thus, there are technical difficulties with following the strategy of decreasing the
period length.
Because of this, we present results for several alternative methods for constructing the
relevant series of productivity shocks for TFP and LP. First, since the data shows that over
the period 1940 to 1980 at least 60 percent of all births are to women age 20 to 30,15 we assume
that women have all their children between age 21 and 30. As our baseline experiment, we
therefore assume that the relevant productivity shock for them is the average one in the data
for that 10 year period. We conduct sensitivity analysis on this specification in Section 5.1.
We also have to choose which productivity measure to use, total factor productivity (TFP)
or labor productivity (LP). We use TFP in our baseline case and discuss LP in Section 5.2.
In our baseline experiment, a shock to productivity (or labor income) the size of the Great
Depression gives rise to a contemporary baby bust that accounts for 64 to 103 percent of the
13

As will be seen below, the model response to a shock is smaller when the cost is in terms of time than
when it is in terms of goods. Thus, ’between 1 and 1.7’ corresponds to 1 with a time cost and 1.7 with a
goods cost.
14
The state space is three-dimensional in our problem: N 1 , N 2 and s. Using the homogeneity results,
this can be reduced to two state variables, N = N 1 /N 2 and s. With 10-year periods (and age-groups) the
problem becomes six-dimensional: Nb2 , N 1,1 , N 1,2 , N 2,1 , N 2,2 and s, which using the same methods can be
reduced to a five-dimensional problem.
15
See Vital Statistics of the United States, Table 1-7.

17

reduction in CTFR and 39 to 63 percent of the reduction in TFR seen in the data. Further,
the model prediction of the lagged response to such a shock is a baby boom. Combined
with the productivity boom in the 1950s and 1960s, the predicted size of the baby boom lies
between 84 and 150 percent of the actual size of the baby boom observed in the CTFR data
and 53 to 92 percent of the one observed in the TFR data.

4.1

Parameterization

Preference Parameters: Throughout, we assume that η = 1 − σ and set σ = 3 following
Jones and Schoonbroodt (2010) among others.16 The discount factor is set to β = 0.9620 to
match an annual interest rate of about 4 percent.
Wage and Productivity Parameters: From the model, wages are given by wta = st γ t w a ,
where w a is the base wage (in period 0) for workers of age a = 1, 2 , γ is the trend productivity
growth rate for a 20-year period and st is the productivity shock which we assume to be
i.i.d. over time.17 Further, for computational reasons, it is convenient to assume a functional
form for the distribution of productivity shocks, st . We assume that ln ŝt ∼ N(0, σ 2s ) where
2

ŝt = st eσs /2 so E(st ) = 1. Thus, the parameter values to be determined are w 1, w 2 , γ and σ s .
We normalize w 1 = 1 and choose w 2 = 1.25. This is in line with life-cycle earnings
profiles from Hansen (1993) and Huggett (1996). The growth rate of productivity, γ, and
the standard deviation of productivity shocks, σ s , are calculated from the TFP series plotted
in Figure 1. First, we compute the linear trend in productivity by running the following
ordinary least-squares regression on annual data:
(10)

ln T F Pt = α0 + α1 t + t .

We find that α1 = 0.0159 and therefore set γ = (eα1 )20 = 1.016120 . That is, productivity
grows at an average of 1.61 percent per year over the 20th century.18
To pin down the value of σ s several steps are required. First, in our baseline experiment,
we use the 10 most fertile years of each cohort within a dynasty, namely age 20 to 30, to
determine the productivity shock this cohort’s fertility choice is affected by. Thus, the shock
P10 t 
P
t
we are interested in is ln ŝt = ln
− µ where µ = E(ln( 10
t=1 e
t=1 e )). To approximate
16

e.g., Mateos-Planas (2002) and Scholz and Seshadri (2009) also use a value of σ = 3.
This is a reasonable approximation for long movements in labor productivity across generations, which
within a dynasty are 20 years apart.
18
An alternative detrending method would be to use a Hodrick-Prescott filter, instead. However, it is
not clear what value to use for the smoothing parameter since we are interested in long fluctuations, rather
than quarter-to-quarter or annual deviations from trend. In any case, for low enough smoothing parameter
resulting productivity shocks would typically be smaller. Assuming that the growth rate of productivity is
constant in the model but using HP productivity shocks would result in smaller fertility responses in the
experiments at the end of this and the next section.
17

18

its standard deviation, σ s , we assume that t follows an AR1 process and estimate
(11)

t = ρ0 + ρ1 t−1 + ν t ,

where ν t ∼ N(0, σ ν ), simulate a long series of {t }, compute a series {ln st } and calculate
its standard deviation to get σ s = 0.07. Of course, the series, ln st , so constructed is not
exactly normally distributed. However, for all simulations, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
produces a p-value of about 0.4. This means that, at any reasonable significance level, the
test would accept the null hypothesis that the distribution of ln st is normal and hence this
should provide a good approximation.
Costs of Children: Given preference and productivity parameters, we then calibrate child
costs, θ(·), to match an annual population growth rate of 0.645 percent per year (see Haines,
Nb +N 1 +N 2
1994, Table 1). In the model, population growth corresponds to N
1 +N 2 +N 3 . In a steady
state with no uncertainty, this is given by the level of fertility choice (per person), nss ,
satisfying n0 (nss , 1) = nss . Thus, the target is nss = 1.0064520 . This corresponds to a steady
state CTFR level of nss /0.5 = 2.27 children per woman. In the goods cost case, we find
θ = 0.1932, while with time costs we find b = 0.1927. Since the wage for young workers is
normalized to 1, these costs imply that it takes about 20 percent of a young worker’s income
or time to produce a child. This means that a two person household can at most have ten
children.
Summary: These parameters are summarized in Table 2.19
Table 2: Parameter Values, Baseline
Parameter
Value

4.2

σ

β

3.00 0.9620

w1

w2

γ

1.00 1.25 1.016120

σs

θ
(goods cost)

b
(time cost)

0.07

0.1932

0.1927

Model impulse responses

Given the parameter values from the previous section we calculate the decision rules from the
model. These can then be used to estimate the model responses to different size productivity
shocks. The results are summarized in Table 3. The rows of the table correspond to the two
alternative types of cost structures for children, goods and time. The first two columns report
19

We provide sensitivity to the parameter values in the Appendix, Table A.9.

19

the elasticities (at the steady state) of (a) current and (b) lagged fertility to productivity
shocks. The next two columns give the (c) contemporaneous and (d) lagged change in
fertility levels that the model predicts will result from a one percent increase in productivity.
Column (e) recalls the steady state level of completed fertility (CTFR).
Table 3: Impulse Response (in percent and levels), Baseline
Cost
Type

Goods
Time

% Deviations

CTFR Levels

Initial
(a)

Lagged Initial
(b)
(c)

1.741
1.039

-1.561
-0.940

2.314
2.298

Lagged
(d)

Steady St.
(e)

2.239
2.253

2.274
2.274

As can be seen from this table, in the goods cost case the fertility response to a 1-percent
productivity shock generates a 1.74 percent contemporaneous increase in fertility (column
(a)) with a lagged decrease of 1.56 percent one period later (column (b)). In the time cost
case, the corresponding percentage changes are a 1.04 percent contemporaneous increase and
a 0.94 decrease one period later.
These magnitudes can be compared to the regression results shown in Table 1. In particular, column (a) is to be compared with λ1 and column (b) with λ2 . Thus, if the model
fit the data perfectly we should see 0.83 in column (a), and -0.84 in column (b). Although
the model quantities are higher, they are remarkably similar in the time cost case.
Comparing the two cases, the initial effect is 70 percent larger in the goods cost case
than it is in the time cost case. The reason for this difference is that when child costs are
primarily in terms of time there are two offsetting effects. First, when times are good there
is a natural tendency to save for the future to equalize marginal utilities. Here, the only way
to do this is by increasing family size. On the other hand, since the cost of raising children is
positively related to the wage, when times are good, children are relatively more expensive
– a force in the opposite direction. When the costs of children are in terms of goods, this
second effect is not at work and hence, the overall effect is larger in this case. As can be seen
in the table, as the theory predicts, the first effect dominates if the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution is low enough (σ > 1, see Proposition 1).
Further, since in both cases, the ratio of the initial response to the lagged response is
about -90 percent, the half-life (in absolute value) of the effect is 7 periods (or generations)
20

in both cases. In particular, the effect 7 periods later is a decrease in fertility of 0.8 percent
in the goods cost case and 0.5 percent in the time cost case (i.e., half of the initial responses).
To get a sense about the size of these effects note that a one-percent decrease in productivity for a 10-year period roughly corresponds to a recession where GDP is 5 percent below
trend for two years. This would decrease fertility by about 0.02 to 0.04 children per woman
with a subsequent baby boom of similar size. Thus, the quantitative effects on (completed)
fertility of a normal sized recession would be quite modest. As we shall see below, the model
predicts that a recession the size of the Great Depression gives a much larger response.

4.3

A historical episode: the U.S. Great Depression

In this section we use the historical record of the actual series of productivity shocks in the
U.S. to study the predicted response of fertility to the productivity busts and booms that
have occurred over the last 100 years.
We first focus on the dynasty most affected by the Great Depression, i.e., the cohort
making fertility decisions in the 1930s (followed by the 1950s cohort, the 1970s cohort and
the 1990s cohort).
Second, we consider other dynasties also affected by the Great Depression but less so.
That is, those making fertility choices either in the late 1920s and early 1930s (i.e., between
1926 and 1935, etc.) or in the late 1930s and early 1940s (between 1936 and 1945, etc.).
Finally, we consider the dynasty making fertility choices in the 1920s (between 1921 and
1930, etc). By construction, the Great Depression has no effect on the fertility choices of
this last dynasty. Thus, we simplify by assuming that there is no connection or opportunity
for trade between the four dynasties. Cohorts within these dynasties make overlapping
fertility decisions.
Finally, the measure of fertility constructed in this way – using different shocks for different cohorts – corresponds to CTFR since it represents completed fertility for each cohort.
We also construct an analog for TFR, i.e., period fertility, by averaging over the two cohorts
making their fertility decisions in any five-year period. In doing this, we solve the model
separately for the different dynasties and then aggregate.
4.3.1

CTFR: Most Affected Dynasty (M.A.D.)

First, to focus on the effects of the Great Depression, we start with the dynasty making
fertility decisions in the 1910s, 1930s, 1950s, 1970s and 1990s. This dynasty is the most
affected by the Great Depression. As a benchmark, we assume that the initial state of the
dynasty is at its steady state age-distribution. In other words, the dynasty has been facing
average shocks (s = 1) for a long time so that its current age-distribution is stationary.

21

For this dynasty, the relevant series of productivity shocks, st , is shown in Table 4.
The results are shown in Figure 4. With a goods cost, the model predicts that fertility is
19.1 percent below trend during the 1930s; with a time cost the prediction is 11.8 percent
below trend. In the data, CTFR actually fell by 18.5 percent. Thus, the model captures
a significant fraction of this movement in either case. This is primarily due to the large,
negative shock of 12.4 percent during the Great Depression of the 1930s – the dynasty’s
young-to-old worker ratio is initially almost at its steady state value and hence effects from
this are minimal.
Table 4: Productivity shocks (in percent), Baseline (M.A.D.)
Decade
1910s 1930s 1950s 1970s 1990s
Productivity Shock
-1.8 -12.43
6.89
3.90 -8.97

Figure 4: Percent Deviations in CTFR, Baseline (M.A.D.)
0.4

Percent Deviations CTFR

0.3
0.2

Model: Goods cost
Model: Time cost
CTFR: Data
Cohort TFP Shock

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
1900

1920
1940
1960
1980
Birth Year of Mother + 23 years

2000

As noted above, there is also a lagged effect in the model from the Great Depression due
to the misalignment of the age structure that results from low fertility during the 1930s.
This implies, a baby boom for the next cohort in this dynasty which takes place in the
1950s. With a goods cost, the model prediction is an increase in fertility above trend of 34.9
percent, while with a time cost, the corresponding model prediction is 19.7 percent above
trend. These model predictions result from a combination of the fertility response to the
low young-to-old worker ratio due to the baby bust and the 8.4 percent productivity boom
22

in the 1950s. For the purposes of comparison, the peak of the baby boom in the CTFR data
is 23 percent above trend.
In the model, the Great Depression has continuing impacts on the fertility choices in this
dynasty – there are continued fluctuations with a decrease of 11 to 18 percent below trend
in the 1970s (due to the lagged response to the baby boom but dampened by the 3.9 percent
upward fluctuation in TFP in the 1970s); this is followed by an increase of 2.7 to 4.2 percent
above trend in the 1990s – again a response to the low young-to-old worker ratio dampened
by the negative productivity shock of 8 percent during the 1990s.
This is an extreme version of the baby bust and boom in the model because it is constructed so that the cohort’s entire fertile period falls during the Great Depression. For other
cohorts or dynasties, the effects are mitigated because at least part of their fertile period
is unaffected by the Great Depression. This is also true for the baby boom: the dynasty
considered here is most affected by the low young-to-old worker ratio and has a large positive
productivity shock in the post-war period.
4.3.2

CTFR: All dynasties and cohorts

Table 5 shows how we construct our four dynasties. It illustrates the state variables and
shocks for each cohort. For each dynasty, we assume that the initial value of the state
variable is n = nss , the balanced growth level of fertility. The first dynasty (d1 ) starts with
women born between 1876-1880 (labeled 1880), cohort 1 (c1 ). They face a productivity
shock, s1 , averaging over the period 1901-1910 when they are roughly age 20 to 30. Their
fertility choice is nc1 = n0 (nss , s1 ). The second dynasty (d2 ) starts with women born five
years later, between 1881-1885 (labeled 1885), cohort 2 (c2 ). Their first productivity shock,
s2 , is obtained by averaging over 1906-15. Their fertility choice is nc2 = n0 (nss , s2 ). The
third dynasty (d3 ) starts with women born between 1886-1890 (labeled 1890), cohort 3 (c3 ).
This is the most affected dynasty described above. The fourth dynasty (d4 ) starts with
women born between 1891-1895 (labeled 1895), cohort 4 (c4 ). Their first productivity shock
s4 , comes from averaging over the period 1916-1925. Cohort 5, born between 1896-1900
(labeled 1900) are the next generation in d1 . Their initial productivity shock s5 , comes from
averaging over the period 1921-30. Thus, their fertility choice is given by nc5 = n0 (nc1 , s5 ).
Proceeding further in this fashion leads to Cohort 9, born between 1916-1920 (labeled 1920),
the third generation in dynasty 1 making fertility decisions between 1941 and 1950. The
shock that this cohort faces is not affected by the Great Depression at all. We expand this
series to Cohort 20, born between 1971-1975 (labeled 1975), the third generation in dynasty
1 making fertility decisions between 1996 and 2005.
The percent deviations in fertility choice in the last two column of Table 5 is what we
23

Table 5: Dynasties and Cohorts, Baseline
Cohort
Label

Birthyear
Label

Fertile
Period

Productivity
Shock

State var., n
Dynasty

Fertility
Choice

Label

Value
(%)

d1

d2

d∗3

d4

Label

...

...
...
...
nss

nc1
nc2
nc3
nc4

...
...
...
nc4

nc5
nc6
nc7
nc8

...
...
...
nc8

nc9
nc10
nc11
nc12

...
...
...
nc12

nc13
nc14
nc15
nc16

13.61
7.93
1.68
0.75
-17.76 -11.34
-19.82 -12.48

...
...
...
nc16

nc17
nc18
nc19
nc20

-18.31 -11.31
-11.58 -6.83
4.25
2.67
5.10
2.90

c1
c2
c3
c4

1880
1885
1890
1895

1901-10
1906-15
1911-20
1916-25

s1
s2
s3
s4

-0.90
-3.85
-1.84
3.02

nss
...
...
...

...
nss

c5
c6
c7
c8

1900
1905
1910
1915

1921-30
1926-35
1931-40
1936-45

s5
s6
s7
s8

1.58
-7.06
-12.43
-1.68

nc1
...
...
...

...
nc2

c9
c10
c11
c12

1920
1925
1930
1935

1941-50
1946-55
1951-60
1956-65

s9
s10
s11
s12

5.72
5.65
6.89
8.92

nc5
...
...
...

...
nc6

c13
c14
c15
c16

1940
1945
1950
1955

1961-70
1966-75
1971-80
1976-85

s13
s14
s15
s16

11.14
8.91
3.90
-1.56

nc9
...
...
...

...
nc10

c17
c18
c19
c20

1960
1965
1970
1975

1981-90
1986-95
1991-00
1996-00

s17
s18
s19
s20

-4.49 nc13
-5.82 ...
-7.97 ...
-8.86 ...

...
nc14

24

...

...

...

...

...

nss
...
...
nc3
...
...
nc7
...
...
nc11
...
...
nc15
...

Goods
(%)

Time
(%)

-1.57
-6.71
-3.20
5.25

-0.94
-4.06
-1.93
3.12

4.23
2.52
-6.20 -3.79
-19.05 -11.79
-7.41 -4.50
6.04
16.17
34.88
23.43

3.55
9.50
19.68
13.56

Figure 5: Percent Deviations in CTFR, Baseline (All Cohorts)
0.4

Percent Deviations CTFR

0.3
0.2

Model: Goods cost
Model: Time cost
CTFR: Data
Cohort TFP Shock

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
1900

1920
1940
1960
1980
Birth Year of Mother + 23 years

2000

plot in Figure 5. Again, we show the results of the model for goods and time costs cases
separately. Also plotted is CTFR data from Jones and Tertilt (2008). As expected, we see
that dynasties other than the M.A.D. are less affected by the Great Depression. Still, there
is some effect – there are smaller deviations from trend both down and up, 20 years later.
4.3.3

TFR

Next, we compute an analog of TFR, i.e., period fertility, by averaging over the two cohorts
making their fertility decisions in any five-year period. That is, we compute TFR in any
five-year period by computing the average of fertility of the two cohorts who are making
half their fertility decision in that five-year period, weighted by their size (i.e., their parent’s
n n +n n
fertility choice). For example, T F R1931−35 = c6 ncc2 +ncc7 c3 . Note that, if all dynasties are in
2

3

a steady state CT F R = T F R = nss /0.5. One advantage of this fertility measure is that we
have data until 2000, while for completed fertility the last cohort in Jones and Tertilt (2008)
makes fertility decisions in the 1980s.
The results are shown in Figure 6. Since deviations in TFR in the data are larger than
deviations in CTFR and since we are averaging over less affected cohorts, the model accounts
for a smaller fraction of these deviations.
With a goods cost, the model predicts that TFR would be 12.7 percent below trend in
the early and late 1930s; with a time cost, the analog is 7.8 percent. In the data, TFR is
20 percent below trend in the early 1930s and 22 percent below trend in the late 1930s. As
with CTFR, this result is mainly due to the negative shock of 12.4 percent during the Great
Depression but here the results are mitigated because some women don’t make their entire
25

Figure 6: Percent Deviations in TFR, Baseline
0.4

Percent Deviations TFR

0.3
0.2

Model: Goods cost
Model: Time cost
TFR: Data
TFP Shock

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year

fertility decision during this period. In the data, the peak of the baby boom occurs in the
late 1950s when fertility is 31 percent above trend. With a goods cost, the model predicts
TFR will be 28.5 percent above trend while with a time cost, the prediction is 16.4 percent.
Again, this result is a combination of the fertility response to the low young-to-old worker
ratio due to the baby bust and the productivity boom in the 1950s and early 1960s. Hence,
the model accounts for 38.5 to 62.6 percent of the baby bust and for 53 to 92 percent of the
baby boom in TFR.
In subsequent periods, TFR in the model keeps fluctuating – 11.9 to 18.9 percent below
trend in the late 1970s (due to the prior baby boom but dampened by the 3.9 percent increase
in TFP). The corresponding movements in the data on TFR is 20.7 percent below trend.
The increase in fertility in the 1990s of 7.1 percent above trend in the data is also partly
captured by the model which predicts a 2.8 to 4.7 percent increase.

5

Sensitivity

In this section, we discuss the sensitivity of our results two types of changes. The first
type take the parameters in Table 2 as given but change the way productivity shocks in
Section 4.3 are computed. Here, we explore (1) changes in the age range used to assign TFP
shocks to different cohorts, and (2) the effects of using labor productivity (LP) instead of
TFP. Given the nature of these experiments, elasticities and impulse responses remain the
same but the size of shocks differs. Results are reported in Figure 7. Increasing the age
range tends to decrease the effect of the Great Depression on fertility because it is diluted
26

across more cohorts. Therefore, the predicted size of the baby boom is also smaller. It
also affects the timing of the baby bust and boom. The results using labor productivity
are very similar to the baseline, except for the cohort making fertility decisions in the 1910s
who experience a productivity boom and those making fertility decisions in the 1920s who
experience a significant negative shock. Due to endogenous fluctuations, these changes work
themselves through the fertility fluctuations later on in the century.
The second type of change that we explore involves altering some of the basic features of
the model. Here we study the robustness of our results both to including capital and having
more (i.e., shorter) time periods and hence, more active generations. We find that our basic
results are robust to these two qualitative changes to the model.

5.1

Age range of productivity shocks

One problem with the assumption that the only relevant shock for the dynasty is when their
youngest cohort is age 20 to 30 is that it implicitly assumes that the shock lasts for the entire
period of 20 years. In this section, we describe model results when the shock is set to the
average productivity shock over the period where the cohort is age 20 to 40.
Figure 7(a), shows cohort productivity shocks for this experiment compared to the baseline. Overall shocks are smoother and smaller because some busts and booms are smoothed
out due to the longer time period. Also, Cohort c5 making part of their fertility decisions in
the 1920s faces a relatively large negative shock due to the Great Depression in the 1930s
when c5 is age 30 to 40. Therefore, the baby bust starts earlier and is smaller than in the
baseline model as can be seen in Figure 7(b). Because of the smaller baby bust in the 1930s
and smaller shocks, the baby boom is also smaller and so are subsequent fluctuations.
The problem with this alternative is that it implicitly assumes that fertility is uniform
between age 20 and 40. Hence, the fertility decision of women born at the beginning of the
century is heavily affected by the Great Depression in this experiment when in reality most
of them had completed their fertility in the 1920s.
Since this alternative is at the opposite extreme of the baseline, the two experiments
together should give us reasonable bounds on how much of the fluctuations in fertility over
the 20th century in the U.S. the model can account for.20

5.2

Labor productivity versus total factor productivity

Since there is no capital in our model, it is not clear wether we should use labor productivity
(LP) or total factor productivity (TFP) to infer productivity shocks. The argument for using
20

In Appendix A.2 we perform an experiment where TFP shocks are weighted by average age-specific
fertility rates. This is an intermediate case between the baseline and the present experiment.

27

Figure 7: Percent Deviations in TFR, Age Range and Labor Productivity
(a)

(c)
Percent Deviations LP and TFP

Percent Deviations TFP

0.2
TFP Shock, 20−40
TFP Shock, 20−30
0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2
1900

1920
1940
1960
1980
Birth Year of Mother + 23 years

2000

0.2
LP Shock
TFP Shock
0.1

0

−0.1

−0.2
1900

1920
1940
1960
1980
Birth Year of Mother + 23 years

(b)

(d)
0.4

Experiment: 20−40
Baseline
TFR: Data

Percent Deviations TFR

Percent Deviations TFR

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2

−0.4
1900

2000

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year

0.2

Experiment: LP
Baseline
TFR: Data

0

−0.2

−0.4
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year

Note: Tables A.1 to A.3 in Appendix A.1 show the exact numbers of shocks, CTFR and TFR responses for the two experiments
compared to the baseline.

TFP is that if capital were included in the model, fertility would respond to TFP alongside
investment. The argument for using LP is that most people don’t own much capital (besides
durable goods and houses) so that their fertility response is to changes in LP.
Here we perform the same experiment as in the main text but use deviations from trend
in LP instead of TFP. Again, we fit a linear trend through the LP data. The resulting
productivity shocks for each cohort are compared to the baseline in Figure 7(c). As can be
seen in the figure, there are two main differences between the LP compared to the TFP series
of shocks. The very first cohort making fertility decisions in the early 1900s experience a
productivity boom and those making fertility decisions in the 1910s and 1920s experience a
significant negative shock. Therefore, as shown in Figure 7(d), the baby bust is already well
underway at this time. Despite the similar size of the shock in the 1930s, fertility decreases
28

less in the LP case than in the TFP case. This is because of the mitigating effect of the low
young-to-old worker ration due to low fertility in the 1910s. Subsequently, the baby boom
starts earlier but is of similar size as the baseline due to the larger LP shock in the 1950s
and 1960s compared to TFP. Overall, however, the results are quite similar.
Note that the growth rate of LP in the data is 2.23 percent per year on average, while
it is only 1.61 percent per year for TFP. Also, the estimated standard deviation of shocks
is 0.08 in most simulations while it is only 0.07 for TFP. In the experiment above, we held
these two parameters constant so that we perform only one change at a time and this may
have some effect on the outcomes.

5.3

The effects of including physical capital

In this section we show that including physical capital as an alternative investment into the
model does not change the contemporaneous elasticity to productivity shocks for reasonable
calibrations. To do this while keeping the size of the parameter space small, we consider
the special case where w 2 = 0 and θ(st ) = θ (i.e. the goods cost case) and compare two
specifications of the production function for the dynasty:
1. F (K, N 1 ) = w 1 N 1 , the simplified version of the baseline case without capital;
2. F (K, N 1 ) = K α (N 1 )1−α , the case including capital.
Case 1 is a special case of the model laid out in Section 3 where w 2 = 0, and, as such, the
results of that section apply automatically. The important equation describing the elasticity
of fertility with respect to current productivity shocks is:
n0 (s) − E(n0 (s))
ψs − ψ
=
=s−1
0
E(n (s))
ψ
where ψ =



w
θ+

θ
β(1−σ)E [V (s0 )]



is independent on s.

When capital is included (case 2), the problem
hP the dynasty
h solves is given by:
i i
∞
t PT
1−a
a
T
a t−a
a t
P (γ, β; {N0 } , K0 , s0 )
max
U0 = E
(βφ)
φ
g(N
(s
))u(c
(s
))
|s0
t
t
t=0
a=1
subject to:
P3

1−α
a t−a a t
)ct (s ) + θNtb (st ) + Kt+1 (st ) ≤ st (Kt (st−1 ))α (γ t Nt1 (st−1 ))
a=1 Nt (s
b
Nt1 (st−1 ) = Nt−1
(st−1 ) is the number of births in period t − 1;
a−1 t−1−(a−1)
Nta (st−a ) = Nt−1
(s
) for a = 2, ..., T ;
a t−a
Nt (s ) = 0 for a > T ;

29

;

N0a given, a = 1, ..., T .
where st = (s0 , s1 , ...., st ) is the history of shocks up to and including period t.
Under the assumptions that φ = 1, η + σ = 1, that costs are in terms of goods, θt = γ t θ,
and shocks are i.i.d. the solution for fertility is given by:
1

(12)

0

(βγ 1−σ (1 − σ)Ev(k 0 , s0 )) σ

 [sf (k) + (1 − δ)k]
n (s) = 
1
1
(γk 0 + θ) σ + (γk 0 + θ) (βγ 1−σ (1 − σ)Ev(k 0 , s0 )) σ

where f (k) = F (K/N, 1).
Some useful intuition can be gained by examining the case where capital fully depreciates
after one 20-year period, δ = 1. In this case, since s0 and k 0 are independent of s, we can
write n0 (s) = Ψs, where Ψ independent of s, and hence:
Ψs − Ψ
n0 (s) − E(n0 (s))
=
=s−1
0
E(n (s))
Ψ
as above. Thus, the elasticity of fertility with respect to a productivity shocks is the same
in the two models.
If δ < 1, this is not the case, but under realistic assumptions about the annual rate of
depreciation the effects are quantitatively similar. To see this, we use the same parameters
as in the baseline, except w 2 = 0. Further, we follow Jones and Schoonbroodt (2010) and
set α = 0.33 and δ = 1 − (1 − 0.088)20 . Finally, we calibrate θ = 0.0214 to get an annual
population growth rate of 0.65. The wage, w 1 , is not fixed in this model but moves with the
marginal product of labor. Therefore, the relevant magnitude to be compared to θ = 0.19 in
the baseline model, where w 1 was normalized to w 1 = 1, is the cost of children as a fraction
of one person’s income, θ/w 1 = 0.1609.
We find that, with these parameters, the fertility response to a 1 percent deviation in
productivity decreases from 1.0 to 0.9938. Hence, introducing capital into the model with
one period working life tends to dampen the effects of productivity shocks ever so slightly.21

5.4

Three Period Working Life (3PWL)

While the initial fertility response to productivity shocks is very similar whether w 2 > 0 or
w 2 = 0, dampened oscillations only occur when w 2 > 0. Since this property of the model
21

One can show show that in a model with stochastic ageing (useful to obtain reasonable working life
lengths while keeping the state space small), the elasticity is larger (smaller) than 1 if the adult survival
rate is larger (smaller) than (1 − δ). Since in the present model, survival in the workforce is zero, this
is an extreme special case. Thus, introducing capital in general does not change the fertility response to
productivity shocks very much.

30

is important both qualitatively and quantitatively, in this subsection we study whether this
feature is robust to more realistic decision periods. To do this, we add one more period
of working life and show that similar dampened oscillations occur in this case. Thus, we
assume that w 3 > 0. Since this increases the number of state variables by one, we abstract
from productivity shocks thereby reducing the size of the state-space back to two. In the
experiments, we take the initial fertility deviation in and around the 1930s as given and
evaluate the oscillations that follow.
Under the assumptions that η = 1 − σ, and φ = 1, as discussed in Section 3.2, C a = C a0 ,
and the BE in (7) becomes:
V (N 1 , N 2 , N 3 ) ≡ max T

(13)

C,N b

C 1−σ
+ βV (N 10 , N 20 , N 30 )
1−σ

subject to:
T C + θN b0 ≤

P3

a=1

waN a ;

N a0 = N a−1 , for a = 2, 3;
N 10 = N b .
The relevant first-order condition here is:
(F OC)
0

LHS(n0 ) =

where n = N b /N 1 , n =

N1
N2

θ
T Vb1 (n0 , 1, n1 )

and n− =

=β

w1 +

w2
n

3

w
0
+ nn
− − θn
T

!σ

= RHS(n0 ),

N2
.
N3

Then, LHS(n0 ) is increasing in n0 , with LHS(0) = 0 if E V̂1 (0, s) = ∞. Also, RHS(n0 )
is decreasing in n0 with a positive intercept at n0 = 0. Thus, there is a unique solution.
As before, RHS shifts down when last period’s fertility per capita, n, or fertility two
periods ago, n− , increase. Since LHS is independent of n− , it follows that n0 decreases
when n− increases and hence, there will necessarily be some oscillatory behavior. This is
complicated however since LHS depends on n. Which way LHS shifts following an increase
in n depends on the cross-partial derivative with respect to N 1 and N 3 , V13 . In particular,
if V13 > 0 then LHS shifts up when n increases and, hence, n0 unambiguously decreases.
However, if V13 < 0, then LHS shifts down when n increases and, hence, the overall effect
on n0 is ambiguous.
In what follows, we compare simulations of this model to simulations in the baseline
as well as a non-stochastic version of the baseline model (i.e., a special case of the model
presented in this section where w 3 = 0). This intermediate simulation allows us to disentangle
how much of the difference comes from having a third period of working life and how much
comes from ignoring productivity shocks.
31

Figure 8: Percent Deviations in CTFR, 3PWL, Goods Cost
0.4

Percent Deviations CTFR

0.3
0.2

Deterministic 3
Deterministic 2
Baseline
CTFR: Data

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
1900

1920
1940
1960
1980
Birth Year of Mother + 23 years

2000

We assume the model period is 15 years. Thus, people work from age 15 to age 60. Hence,
we will have three, instead of four dynasties, five years apart from each other. We keep all
the parameters the same as in the baseline, except for w 3 and the cost of children, θ. We
set w 3 = 1.125. That is, 45-60 year old workers earn 25 percent less than workers age 30-45.
Calibrated costs don’t change much from the baseline (θ = 0.1932 or b = 0.1927). Here, we
find θ = 0.1946 to match the steady state population growth rate of 0.65 percent per year as
before. In the intermediate deterministic version with w 3 = 0, θ = 0.1901. Incidentally, note
that in all these simulations V13 < 0 so that the effects of last period’s fertility on current
fertility are ambiguous.
The simulation consists of off balanced growth path dynamics taking the fertility deviation in and around the 1930s from the baseline as given. That is, everything plotted until
1940 is exogenous here and we are interested in the baby boom and the potential for dampened oscillations thereafter. Note that in the deterministic version of the model, whether
costs are in terms of time or goods is irrelevant – the only reason why the two cases would
differ here is that we use different baby busts from the baseline results as initial conditions.
Figure 8 shows CT F R for all cohorts for goods costs. As can be seen, magnitudes don’t
differ much between the deterministic model with two versus three periods of working life.
Hence, most of the difference to the baseline results are due to the lack of additional productivity shocks, reinforcing the baby boom (and hence subsequent fluctuations). However,
the baby boom happens slightly earlier. This is less of an issue of length of the period as
it is one of length of generations. In the three period model, parents and children are 15,

32

instead of 20 years apart. The analogous results for CT F R with a time cost and T F R with
both goods and time costs are similar and hence are not included.
In sum, the dampened oscillations we find in the baseline model are not just an artifact
of having two periods working life.

6

International Evidence

In this section, we show that countries with a smaller Depression in the 1930s also tend
to have smaller baby busts and that those with smaller baby busts tend to have smaller
baby booms in the 1950s, conditional on the economic circumstances in the 1950s. Before
we start, several data related issues should be addressed. These relate to data availability,
detrending methods and dealing with war periods.
Ideally, we would like to use the same measures of fertility and productivity as we do for
the U.S.. However, for the 20th century complete TFR series and consistent TFP measures
are only available for few countries (see e.g., Chesnais (1992) for TFR and Cette et al. (2009)
for TFP). We therefore use Crude Birth Rates (CBR) mostly from Mitchell (1998) and GDP
per capita from Barro and Ursua (2008), instead.22 This gives us 17 countries for which we
have data from 1900 until 1993.23
As to detrending, for CBR, we use the same detrending method as we did for TFR in the
U.S., namely a Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter. While for the U.S. a linear detrending method
for log-TFP poses few problems, this is not true for all countries we consider. In particular,
if one uses linear detrending, countries such as Portugal or Japan show a permanent negative
deviation in GDP early in the century and a permanent positive one later on. Besides the
linear detrending method, we therefore also use an HP filter in comparison.
Furthermore, the two world wars affected fertility levels in several ways that are unrelated
to our mechanism. For example, men being away to fight prevents some women from having
children. Typically, there is rapid catching up as soon as the men return, if they do (e.g.,
see the period 1943-1946 in U.S. data shown in Figure 3). The longer the war involvement
and the larger the death rate of soldiers, the more unpredictable this effect on fertility rates
becomes. Similar issues emerge for GDP data during war periods. For example, a large
22

CBR data form 1900 to 1993 are obtained from Mitchell (1998) for all countries, except Germany.
German data was combined using Chesnais (1992, Appendix A1) for the 1900 to 1943 period and Statistisches
Bundesamt (2007) for 1946 to 1993, linearly interpolating 1944 and 1945. All GDP per capita data comes
from Barro and Ursua (2008) and is in millions 1990 International Geary-Khamis dollars.
23
The main issues are. CBR as opposed to TFR is sensitive to mortality in certain groups of the population
such as wars which affect total population but not the number of fertile women. GDP per capita as opposed
to TFP or LP is only an indirect measure of the productivity of the labor force and therefore corresponds
less well to our model.

33

part of the increase in output in Germany during the war was not for private consumption
but rather war related. We therefore also use dummies for war and immediately after war
periods to adjust our measures of deviations in CBR and GDP in comparison to deviations
resulting from a simple linear trend and the HP filter.24
Given these provisos, we are now ready to analyze sizes of depressions, baby busts and
baby booms. First, we aim to determine the correlation between the size of the Depression
in the 1930s and the size of the baby bust at the time across countries. Since the timing of
the Depression was different across countries, we divide the 1930s into two periods: 1930 to
1934 and 1935 to 1939. We then run eight cross-country OLS regressions, one for each time
b i denote the percent deviation
period combined with one of four detrending methods. Let X
t
from trend in variable X in country i in five-year period t.
i

i

[ t = λ1,t + λ2,t GDP
\ t + εi
CBR
where t = {30 − 34, 35 − 39}. The results for each detrending method are given in Table 6.25
As can be seen, the coefficient, λ2,t , is positive for all detrending methods and both time
periods. It is larger (with a lower p-value) whenever an HP filter is used rather than linear
detrending and whenever the effects of wars are taken into account in detrending. Also, for
most detrending methods, λ2,t is larger in the early 1930s than in the late 1930s.26
Second, we aim to determine whether a larger baby bust in the 1930s implies a larger
baby boom in the 1950s, controlling for the GDP deviation in the 1950s. To do this, we
run eight cross-country OLS regressions, one for each time period combined with one of four
detrending methods.
i

i

i

[ t = λ3,t + λ4,t CBR
[ t−20 + λ5,t GDP
\ t + εi
CBR
where t = {50 − 54, 55 − 59}. The results for each detrending method are given in Table 7.27
As can be seen, the coefficient, λ4,t , is negative for all detrending methods and both
time periods. It is larger in absolute value (with a lower p-value) whenever an HP filter
is used rather than linear detrending and, for the late 1950s, whenever the effects of wars
are taken into account in detrending. Also, λ4,t is larger in the early 1930s than in the late
24

For details on detrending procedures, see Appendix A.3.
Tables A.5 to A.6 Appendix A.3 show the inputs into these regressions, namely percent deviations from
trend in CBR and GDP in the 1930s for each country and each detrending method.
26
Observations relating to depressions and busts across countries leading to these regression results are
given in Appendix A.3.1.
27
Tables A.7 to A.8 Appendix A.3 (NOT for publication) show the inputs into these regressions, namely
percent deviations from trend in CBR in the 1930s and 1950s and in GDP in the 1950s for each country
and each detrending method.
25

34

Table 6: Cross-Country: Depressions and Busts, 1930s
Dependent

Independent

Variable

Variable

i

[ 30−34
CBR

i

[ 35−39
CBR

Detrending Method
Linear

HP

Linear
No war

HP
No war

Constant (λ1,30−34 ) -0.0522 -0.0839
i
\30−34 (λ2,30−34 ) 0.3512 0.4253
GDP
(p-value)
(0.059) (0.008)

-0.0365

-0.0446

0.3933
(0.084)

0.6480
(0.008)

Constant (λ1,35−39 ) -0.0856 -0.1211
i
\35−39 (λ2,35−39 ) 0.2118 0.5743
GDP
(p-value)
(0.441) (0.005)

-0.0716

-0.0806

0.2482
(0.335)

0.5554
(0.004)

Table 7: Cross-Country: Busts and Booms, 1950s vs. 1930s
Dependent

Independent

Variable

Variable

i

[ 50−54
CBR

i

[ 55−59
CBR

Detrending Method
Linear

HP

Constant (λ3,50−54 )
0.0477 0.0203
i
[ 30−34 (λ4,50−54 ) -0.2795 -0.3680
CBR
(p-value)
(0.229) (0.058)
i
\50−54 (λ5,50−54 ) 0.2181 0.3316
GDP
(p-value)
(0.171) (0.092)
Constant (λ3,55−59 )
0.0960 0.0296
i
[ 35−39 (λ4,55−59 ) -0.0973 -0.2854
CBR
(p-value)
(0.714) (0.181)
i
\55−59 (λ5,55−59 ) 0.6052 1.0424
GDP
(p-value)
(0.012) (0.004)

35

Linear
No war

HP
No war

0.0853

0.0506

-0.1527
(0.634)

-0.2792
(0.372)

0.2571
(0.208)

0.2034
(0.428)

0.0680

0.0296

-0.4048
(0.143)

-0.5748
(0.020)

0.4029
(0.045)

0.4887
(0.046)

1930s when the effects of wars are not taken into account in detrending, smaller when they
are. Similar to λ2,t , the coefficient λ5,t is positive for all detrending methods and both time
periods. However, p-values are larger, especially in the early 1950s.28
In sum then, international evidence on the sizes of depressions and baby busts in the
1930s strongly supports our theory while the evidence for the size of the subsequent baby
boom, though rightly signed, is somewhat weaker.

7

Concluding remarks

In this paper, we have studied the properties of models of fertility choice with dynastic altruism in which both aggregate shocks and multiple generations are present. We have shown
that in simple versions of this class of models, fertility is procyclical and has dampened
oscillations when perturbed away from the steady state. Moreover, these effects are quantitatively significant. In calibrated simulations of the model, we find that in response to a
negative shock to income like the Great Depression, the decline in fertility in the model is
between 40 and 70 percent of the decline actually seen in the data. Moreover, because of a
(mild) productivity boom in the 1950s and early 1960s in conjunction with the oscillatory
effects discussed above, the model accounts for between 60 and 90 percent of the Baby Boom.
The key parameter determining the quantitative findings is the nature of the cost of children
– goods versus time.

28

Observations relating to busts and booms across countries leading to these regression results are given
in Appendix A.3.1.

36

References
Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti, “Maternal Health and the Baby Boom,” Working Paper 16146, National Bureau of Economic Research 2010.
Barro, Robert J. and Gary S. Becker, “Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic
Growth,” Econometrica, 1989, 57 (2), 481–501.
and Jose F. Ursua, “Macroeconomic Crises since 1870,” Working Paper 13940, National Bureau of Economic Research 2008.
Data available at
http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/barro/data sets barro.
Becker, Gary S. and Robert J. Barro, “A Reformulation of the Theory of Fertility,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1988, 103 (1), 1–25.
Butz, William P. and Michael P. Ward, “The Emergence of Countercyclical U.S. Fertility,” The American Economic Review, 1979, 69 (3), 318–328.
Caucutt, Elizabeth M., Nezih Guner, and John Knowles, “Why do Women Wait?
Matching, Wage Inequality, and The Incentives for Fertility Delay,” The Review of Economic Dynamics, 2002, 5 (4), 815–855.
Cette, Gilbert, Yusuf Kocoglu, and Jacques Mairesse, “Productivity Growth and
Levels in France, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States in the Twentieth
Century,” Working Paper 15577, National Bureau of Economic Research 2009.
Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Business Cycle Accounting,” Econometrica, 2007, 75 (3), 781–836.
Chesnais, Jean Claude, The Demographic Transition: Stages, Patterns, and Economic
Implications: A Longitudinal Study of Sixty-seven Countries Covering the Period 1720–
1984, Oxford University Press, 1992.
Doepke, Matthias, Moshe Hazan, and Yishay Maoz, “The Baby Boom and World
War II: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Working Paper 13707, National Bureau of Economic
Research December 2007.
Easterlin, Richard A., “The American Baby Boom in Historical Perspective,” The American Economic Review, 1961, 51 (5), 869–911.
, Population, Labor Force, and Long Swings in Economic Growth, National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1968.
37

, “What Will 1984 Be Like? Socioeconomic Implications of Recent Twists in Age Structure,” Demography, 1978, 15 (4), 397–432.
, Birth and Fortune, 2nd ed., University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1987.
Feichtinger, Gustav and Engelbert J. Dockner, “Capital Accumulation, Endogenous
Population Growth, and Easterlin Cycles,” Journal of Population Economics, 1990, 3,
73–87.
and Gerhard Sorger, “Self-Generated Fertility Waves in a Non-Linear Continuous
Overlapping Generations Model,” Journal of Population Economics, 1989, 2, 267–280.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke, “The Baby
Boom and Baby Bust,” The American Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 183–207.
Haines, Michael R., “The Population of the United States, 1790-1920,” Historical Working
Paper 56, National Bureau of Economic Research 1994.
Hansen, Gary D., “The Cyclical and Secular Behaviour of the Labour Input: Comparing
Efficiency Units and Hours Worked,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 1993, 8 (1), 71–80.
Huggett, Mark, “Wealth distribution in life-cycle economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1996, 38 (3), 469–494.
Jones, Larry E. and Alice Schoonbroodt, “Complements versus Substitutes and Trends
in Fertility Choice in Dynastic Models,” International Economic Review, 2010, 51 (3),
671–699.
and Michèle Tertilt, “An Economic History of Fertility in the U.S.: 1826-1960,” in
Peter Rupert, ed., Frontiers of Family Economics, Vol. 1, Emerald Press, 2008.
and Rodolfo E. Manuelli, “A Convex Model of Equilibrium Growth: Theory and
Policy Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990, 98 (5), 1008–1038.
Lee, Ronald, “The Formal Dynamics of Controlled Populations and the Echo, the Boom
and the Bust,” Demography, 1974, 11 (4), 563–585.
Lee, Ronald D., “Population Dynamics,” in S.N. Durlauf and L.E. Blume, eds., The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.
Macunovich, Diane J., “Fertility and the Easterlin Hypothesis: An Assessment of the
Literature,” Journal of Population Economics, 1998, 11, 53–111.
38

and Richard A. Easterlin, “Easterlin Hypothesis,” in S.N. Durlauf and L.E. Blume,
eds., The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.
Manuelli, Rodolfo E. and Ananth Seshadri, “Explaining International Fertility Differences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (2), 771–807.
Mateos-Planas, Xavier, “The Demographic Transition in Europe: A Neoclassical Dynastic Approach,” Review of Economic Dynamics, July 2002, 5 (3), 646–680.
Mitchell, Brian R., International Historical Statistics: Europe, 1750-1993, New York,
N.Y.: Stockton Press, 1998.
Rebelo, Sergio, “Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy, 1991, 99 (3), 500–521.
Samuelson, Paul A., “An Economist’s Non-Linear Model of Self-Generated Fertility
Waves,” Population Studies, 1976, 30 (2), 243–247.
Scholz, John Karl and Ananth Seshadri, “Children and Household Wealth,” Working
Paper, University of Wisconsin 2009.
Schoonbroodt, Alice and Michèle Tertilt, “Property Rights and Efficiency in OLG
Models with Endogenous Fertility,” Working Paper, University of Southampton 2010.
Sobotka, Tomas, Vegard Skirbekk, and Dimiter Philipov, “Economic Recession and
Fertility in the Developed World. A Literature Review,” Working Paper, Vienna Institute
of Demography, Vienna, Austria 2010.
Sommer, Kamila, “Fertility Choice in a Life Cycle Model with Idiosyncratic Uninsurable
Earnings Risk,” Working Paper, Georgetown University 2010.
Statistisches Bundesamt, Wiesbaden, “Zusammenfassende Übersichten, 1 Eheschlieungen, Geborene und Gestorbene, 1.4 Deutschland, Verhltniszahlen,” 2007.
http://www.destatis.de/jetspeed/portal/cms/Sites/destatis/Internet/DE/Content/
Statistiken/Bevoelkerung/EheschliessungenScheidungen/Tabellen/Content100/
EheschliessungenGeboreneGestorbene,templateId=renderPrint.psml.

39

A
A.1

Appendix
Tables of shocks and fertility responses in Sections 5.1 and 5.2
Table A.1: Productivity Shocks (in percent) for Experiments
Cohort

TFP

LP

Label
Baseline

Age 20-40 Age 20-30

c1
c2
c3
c4

-0.90
-3.85
-1.84
3.02

-1.10
-0.14
0.14
-1.75

5.30
-0.63
-6.04
-4.55

c5
c6
c7
c8

1.58
-7.06
-12.43
-1.68

-5.17
-4.11
-3.09
2.26

-2.00
-6.41
-10.84
-4.79

c9
c10
c11
c12

5.72
5.65
6.89
8.92

6.59
7.57
9.31
9.21

1.65
4.80
8.86
11.60

c13
c14
c15
c16

11.14
8.91
3.90
-1.56

7.81
3.95
-0.03
-3.43

13.17
11.59
7.73
2.39

c17
c18
c19
c20

-4.49
-5.82
-7.97
-8.86

-5.97
-6.58
-7.71
-8.62

-2.25
-6.44
-10.69
-12.48

i

Table A.2: CTFR response (in percent) from Experiments
Cohort

Baseline

TFP, age 20-40

LP, age 20-30

Label
Goods

Time

Goods

Time

Goods Time

-1.57
-6.71
-3.20
5.25

-0.94
-4.06
-1.93
3.12

-1.92
-0.25
0.25
-3.05

-1.15
-0.15
0.15
-1.83

9.22
-1.09
-10.54
-7.94

5.44
-0.65
-6.42
-4.81

4.23
2.52
-6.20 -3.79
-19.05 -11.79
-7.41 -4.50

-7.31
-6.94
-5.61
6.87

-4.43
-4.20
-3.39
4.07

-11.05
-10.24
-9.30
-0.85

-6.77
-6.23
-5.78
-0.56

3.55
9.50
19.68
13.56

19.12
20.47
22.10
9.63

11.12
11.89
12.80
5.60

14.36
19.23
25.56
21.02

8.40
11.16
14.86
12.23

c13
c14
c15
c16

13.61
7.93
1.68
0.75
-17.76 -11.34
-19.82 -12.48

-2.17
-9.23
-16.58
-13.73

-1.57
-5.85
-10.41
-8.38

9.96
3.78
-6.55
-12.08

5.66
1.96
-4.44
-7.63

c17
c18
c19
c20

-18.31 -11.31
-11.58 -6.83
4.25
2.67
5.10
2.90

-8.51
-2.79
3.30
-1.74

-4.93
-1.52
1.94
-1.26

-12.02
-14.36
-12.93
-10.79

-7.21
-8.55
-7.52
-6.50

c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
c6
c7
c8
c9
c10
c11
c12

6.04
16.17
34.88
23.43

ii

Table A.3: TFR response (in percent) from Experiments
Time

Baseline

TFP, age 20-40

LP, age 20-30

Goods Time

Period
Goods

Time

Goods

Time

1901-05
1906-10
1911-15
1916-20

-0.78
-4.14
-4.96
1.03

-0.47
-2.50
-2.99
0.60

-0.48
-0.54
-0.48
-1.24

-0.29
-0.32
-0.29
-0.75

4.61
4.06
-5.82
-9.24

2.72
2.39
-3.54
-5.61

1921-25
1926-30
1931-35
1936-40

4.71
-0.84
-12.74
-12.99

2.80
-0.59
-7.84
-8.06

-2.72
-4.43
-5.80
-3.31

-1.65
-2.69
-3.51
-2.01

-9.66
-10.66
-9.79
-5.01

-5.90
-6.51
-6.02
-3.13

1941-45
1946-50
1951-55
1956-60

-0.34
10.70
25.01
28.54

-0.25
6.38
14.42
16.42

3.46
10.44
17.37
17.61

2.06
6.15
10.12
10.28

6.63
16.81
22.41
23.19

3.84
9.78
13.02
13.49

1961-65
1966-70
1971-75
1976-80

17.94 10.47
7.85
4.41
-8.23 -5.37
-18.86 -11.93

11.40
3.67
-5.41
-10.56

6.67
2.07
-3.46
-6.60

15.10
6.81
-1.52
-9.26

8.71
3.77
-1.32
-6.00

1981-85
1986-90
1991-95
1996-00

-19.00 -11.85
-15.24 -9.19
-4.35 -2.33
4.70
2.79

-11.99
-10.37
-5.55
-2.58

-7.35
-6.22
-3.20
-1.49

-12.05
-13.15
-13.68
-11.89

-7.43
-7.86
-8.06
-7.03

iii

A.2

Additional experiment relating to Section 5.1

A second alternative is to use the average productivity shock ages 15 to 45, weighted by the
percentage of all births born to the particular age-groups. This takes the typical timing of
births into account. In addition, even if the shock we attribute to any individual cohort does
not correspond to the actual 20 year shock they experienced, it leaves the aggregate shock
in any five year period at its correct level (since different dynasties receive a fraction of it).
To see this, consider Table A.4. Now, consider a cohort that is age 15-19 in 1901-05. The
Table A.4: Percent of total births that occur to five-year age group (average 1940-70)
Age group
% all births

1: 15-19 2: 20-24 3: 25-29 4: 30-34 5: 35-39 6: 40-44 7: 45-49
12.45
32.84
27.19
16.54
8.40
2.39
0.18

seven relevant shocks are from 1901-05 to 1931-35. However, the weight of the shock in the
beginning of the Great Depression, 1931-35, will only receive weight 0.0018. The next cohort
of women, age 15-19 in 1906-10 will receive a weight of 0.0239 for the same shock and so on.
Finally, the cohort age 15-19 in 1931-35 will receive a weight 0.1245 for this shock. Hence,
100 percent of the Great Depression shock will be accounted for as part of 7 distinct cohort
shocks. The results from this experiment can be seen in Figure A.1. The results are quite
similar, albeit smoother and somewhat smaller, to the baseline described in Section 4.3.
Note, however, that this alternative does not allow our cohorts to adjust their timing
of births to shocks experienced at different ages while fertile. As shown in Doepke et al.
(2007), timing of births for any given cohort did change during the bust-boom-bust episode,
albeit to a limited extent. As mentioned before, decreasing the length of the period in order
to start addressing this issue would significantly increase the state space. In addition, it
would to require a bulk of additional assumptions and complicate the theoretical results.
We therefore chose to concentrate on the two simple mechanisms from Proposition 1 in the
main paper and leave this issue to future research.

A.3

Details on detrending methods used in Section 6

CBR deviations reported in Table A.5, columns 1 and 2, and Table A.7, columns 1 to 4, and
used in regressions reported in Tables 6 and 7, columns 1 and 2, are obtained by running an
HP filter (smoothing parameter, w = 20, 000) on annual CBR data for each country with
implied annual deviations averaged over five years.

iv

Figure A.1: Percent Deviations in TFR, Age 15-45, weighted
0.4

Percent Deviations TFR

0.3
0.2

Model: Goods cost
Model: Time cost
TFR: Data
TFP Shock

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year

GDP deviations reported in Table A.5, columns 3 and 4, and Table A.7, columns 5 and 6,
and used in regressions reported in Tables 6 and 7, column 1, are obtained by running an OLS
regression of the form ln GDPti = αi0 + αi1 t + εit using annual GDP per hcapita
P data for
 eachi
i
i
s+4
ε
\s−(s+4) = exp ln
t
country, i, with five-year deviations computed as GDP
− µi
t=s e
P
it
where µi = E(ln( s+4
t=s e )).
GDP deviations reported in Table A.5, columns 5 and 6, and Table A.7, columns 7 and
8, and used in regressions reported in Tables 6 and 7, column 2, are obtained by running
an HP filter (smoothing parameter, w = 20, 000) on ln GDP per capita data (smoothing
parameter, w = 20, 000) for each country, i, with five-year deviations computed as above
using HP residuals.
To account for the effect of wars, we first create four dummy variables, dik , k = 1, ...4,
for the time periods t = {1 : 1914 − 1918, 2 : 1919 − 1923, 3 : 1940 − 1945, 4 : 1946 − 1950}
for each country, i. We then run the following time series regression on annual data for
X i = {GDP i, CBRi } for each country, i.
ln Xti

=

αi0

+

αi1 t

+

4
X

αik+1 dikt + εit

k=1



e i = exp ln X i − P4 αk+1 di . The deviations used in regressions
We then compute X
t
t
kt
k=1
reported in Tables 6 and 7, columns 3 and 4, are then calculated exactly as those in columns
e i instead of X i .
1 and 2, except that we use X
t
t
v

A.3.1

Observations about Cross-Country Busts and Booms

From Tables A.5 and A.6 we make the following observations. Countries that, similar to
the U.S., have large depressions and large baby busts throughout the 1930s are Canada,
Australia and New Zealand. Countries with slightly smaller depressions and baby busts
are Germany, the U.K. and France. Note that France has a late depression (late 1930s)
and correspondingly, a late baby bust while Germany and the U.K. have large depressions
in the early 1930s and correspondingly large baby busts early on. For the Netherlands,
Belgium and Switzerland, the depression is noticeable only if the effects of wars are taken
into account when detrending (Table A.6). For Southern European countries, Italy, Portugal
and Spain, both the depression as well as the baby bust are small or non-existent, depending
on detrending method. For Northern European countries, Denmark, Norway and Sweden,
large baby busts can be observed, despite the fact that the depression is small or non-existent
depending on detrending method. These observations rationalize results in Table 6.
Because of the last observation, when analyzing baby booms in the main text, we use
[ 1930s rather than GDP
\1930s as the independent variable. This allows us to determine
CBR
whether baby busts are correlated with subsequent baby booms, independently of their cause.
Indeed, from Tables A.7 and A.8, all three Northern countries display substantial baby
booms in the 1950s, though potentially mitigated by a recession in the 1950s. Similarly,
Central European and Southern European countries, all have small baby booms in the late
1950s with GDP significantly below trend for most detrending methods. Southern European
countries have somewhat of a baby boom. The largest baby booms are to be observed in
the U.S., Canada, Australia and New Zealand where the baby bust was particularly large.
These observations rationalize the weaker results in Table 7.

A.4

Sensitivity to changes in parameters

we compute how elasticities and fertility levels change when we change parameter values
in Table 2. Results are reported in Table A.9. For each parameter change, we report two
cases. First, we give results in the case where costs of children remain at their baseline
value, which leads to varying fertility levels in steady state. Second, we recalibrate to the
target population growth by adjusting costs of children accordingly. Results show that
within a reasonable range of parameter values, the elasticity of contemporaneous fertility to
productivity shocks ranges from 1.6 to 1.9 in the goods cost case and 0.95 to 1.2 for the time
cost case, while the elasticity of lagged fertility ranges from -1.25 to -1.9 in the goods cost
case and -0.7 to -1.2 for the time cost case, whether we recalibrate or not. Thus, the results
don’t seem to be very sensitive to parameter choices.
vi

Table A.5: Depressions and Baby Busts across Countries
Country

[ 1930s
CBR

\1930s , Linear
GDP

\1930s , HP
GDP

1930-34 1935-39 1930-34 1935-39 1930-34 1935-39
U.S.

-0.167

-0.184

-0.264

-0.209

-0.206

-0.149

Canada
Australia
New Zealand

-0.127
-0.184
-0.181

-0.183
-0.185
-0.169

-0.256
-0.211
-0.243

-0.254
-0.124
-0.090

-0.179
-0.150
-0.177

-0.166
-0.043
-0.010

U.K.
Germany
France

-0.123
-0.137
-0.005

-0.111
0.087
-0.134

-0.115
-0.296
-0.014

-0.059
-0.076
-0.176

-0.058
-0.168
0.137

0.012
0.126
-0.001

Netherlands
Belgium
Switzerland

-0.084
0.009
-0.088

-0.121
-0.081
-0.135

0.016
0.039
0.017

-0.052
-0.046
-0.061

0.111
0.168
0.091

0.079
0.112
0.024

Italy
Spain
Portugal

-0.004
0.059
0.008

-0.003
-0.116
-0.031

-0.080
-0.041
-0.074

-0.060
-0.081
-0.178

0.019
0.039
0.086

0.094
0.030
0.007

Denmark
Norway
Sweden

-0.135
-0.184
-0.172

-0.094
-0.189
-0.128

0.027
-0.026
-0.083

-0.008
0.001
-0.014

0.093
0.040
-0.022

0.078
0.089
0.053

0.027

-0.010

-0.111

-0.083

0.029

0.138

Japan

vii

Table A.6: Depressions and Baby Busts across Countries, No War
Country

[ 1930s
CBR

\1930s , Linear
GDP

\1930s , HP
GDP

1930-34 1935-39 1930-34 1935-39 1930-34 1935-39
U.S.

-0.144

-0.163

-0.258

-0.202

-0.192

-0.129

Canada
Australia
New Zealand

-0.104
-0.170
-0.166

-0.158
-0.173
-0.147

-0.252
-0.211
-0.250

-0.251
-0.124
-0.098

-0.177
-0.152
-0.191

-0.165
-0.047
-0.032

U.K.
Germany
France

-0.137
-0.189
-0.047

-0.126
0.027
-0.160

-0.111
-0.305
-0.107

-0.055
-0.086
-0.251

-0.055
-0.178
-0.041

0.016
0.129
-0.181

Netherlands
Belgium
Switzerland

-0.065
-0.062
-0.101

-0.094
-0.141
-0.139

-0.064
-0.088
-0.036

-0.124
-0.156
-0.107

-0.035
-0.043
0.001

-0.085
-0.105
-0.067

Italy
Spain
Portugal

-0.021
0.046
0.013

-0.013
-0.126
-0.024

-0.093
-0.059
-0.119

-0.076
-0.098
-0.217

-0.028
0.003
-0.005

0.017
-0.011
-0.090

Denmark
Norway
Sweden

-0.126
-0.163
-0.147

-0.073
-0.169
-0.097

-0.016
-0.055
-0.106

-0.047
-0.028
-0.038

0.015
-0.017
-0.065

-0.011
0.018
0.004

0.080

0.052

-0.112

-0.087

0.010

0.100

Japan

viii

Table A.7: Baby Busts and Baby Booms across Countries

Country

[ 1950s
CBR

[ 1930s
CBR

\1950s , Linear
GDP

\1950s , HP
GDP

1950-55 1955-60 1930-35 1935-40 1950-55 1955-60 1950-55 1955-60
U.S.

0.144

0.167

-0.167

-0.184

0.049

0.009

0.072

0.016

Canada
Australia
New Zealand

0.155
0.102
0.093

0.198
0.097
0.121

-0.127
-0.184
-0.181

-0.183
-0.185
-0.169

-0.040
-0.085
0.006

-0.037
-0.077
0.057

0.033
-0.013
0.030

0.013
-0.022
0.056

-0.024
0.006
0.103

0.016
0.065
0.052

-0.123
-0.137
-0.005

-0.111
0.087
-0.134

-0.091
-0.314
-0.177

-0.068
-0.119
-0.112

-0.026
-0.172
-0.003

-0.014
0.017
0.025

0.039
0.060
0.013

0.045
0.100
0.042

-0.084
0.009
-0.088

-0.121
-0.081
-0.135

-0.152
-0.111
-0.104

-0.081
-0.102
-0.035

-0.021
0.040
-0.039

0.026
0.015
0.010

Italy
Spain
Portugal

-0.071
-0.066
-0.026

-0.042
0.018
0.025

-0.004
0.059
0.008

-0.003
-0.116
-0.031

-0.264
-0.133
-0.268

-0.177
-0.157
-0.237

-0.106
0.024
-0.087

-0.034
-0.013
-0.085

Denmark
Norway
Sweden

0.131
0.068
0.014

0.039
0.056
-0.025

-0.135
-0.184
-0.172

-0.094
-0.189
-0.128

-0.106
-0.061
-0.029

-0.103
-0.066
-0.016

-0.029
0.024
0.001

-0.049
0.002
-0.007

-0.020

-0.179

0.027

-0.010

-0.443

-0.353

-0.251

-0.168

U.K.
Germany
France
Netherlands
Belgium
Switzerland

Japan

ix

Table A.8: Baby Busts and Baby Booms across Countries, No War

Country

[ 1950s
CBR

[ 1930s
CBR

\1950s , Linear
GDP

\1950s , HP
GDP

1950-55 1955-60 1930-35 1935-40 1950-55 1955-60 1950-55 1955-60
U.S.

0.168

0.187

-0.144

-0.163

0.059

0.019

0.100

0.037

Canada
Australia
New Zealand

0.189
0.114
0.128

0.228
0.107
0.150

-0.104
-0.170
-0.166

-0.158
-0.173
-0.147

-0.038
-0.086
-0.003

-0.035
-0.078
0.048

0.034
-0.017
0.009

0.013
-0.025
0.038

-0.035
-0.026
0.105

0.009
0.040
0.058

-0.137
-0.189
-0.047

-0.126
0.027
-0.160

-0.089
-0.316
-0.243

-0.066
-0.120
-0.180

-0.021
-0.155
-0.170

-0.009
0.037
-0.112

0.083
0.021
0.025

0.083
0.073
0.054

-0.065
-0.062
-0.101

-0.094
-0.141
-0.139

-0.209
-0.195
-0.140

-0.140
-0.179
-0.071

-0.160
-0.134
-0.110

-0.091
-0.120
-0.049

Italy
Spain
Portugal

-0.066
-0.073
-0.016

-0.035
0.012
0.034

-0.021
0.046
0.013

-0.013
-0.126
-0.024

-0.281
-0.147
-0.298

-0.199
-0.170
-0.267

-0.182
-0.013
-0.168

-0.101
-0.042
-0.150

Denmark
Norway
Sweden

0.180
0.087
0.047

0.079
0.070
0.002

-0.126
-0.163
-0.147

-0.073
-0.169
-0.097

-0.138
-0.086
-0.048

-0.133
-0.091
-0.035

-0.103
-0.039
-0.037

-0.106
-0.048
-0.036

Japan

0.053

-0.126

0.080

0.052

-0.449

-0.361

-0.286

-0.200

U.K.
Germany
France
Netherlands
Belgium
Switzerland

x

Table A.9: Impulse Response (in percent and levels), Parameter Sensitivity
Cost
Type
Baseline
Goods
Time
Sensitivity
σ = 3.5
Goods
Time
σ = 2.5
Goods
Time
β = 0.9720
Goods
Time
β = 0.9520
Goods
Time
γ = 1.02620
Goods
Time
γ = 1.00620
Goods
Time
σ s = 0.08
Goods
Time
σ s = 0.06
Goods
Time
w 2 = 1.5
Goods
Time
w2 = 1
Goods
Time
w 2 = 0.5
Goods
Time

% Dev.
Init.

Lag.

CTFR Level
Init.

Lag.

% Dev.

SS

Init.

CTFR Lev.

Lag.

Init.

Lag.

Cost
(Rec.)

(σ = 3, β = 0.9620 , γ = 1.01620 , σ s = 0.07, w 1 = 1, w 2 = 1.25)
1.74
1.04

-1.56
-0.94

2.31
2.30

2.24
2.25

2.27
2.27

1.74
1.04

No Recalibration

-1.56
-0.94

2.31
2.30

2.24
2.25

0.193
0.193

Recalibration

1.81
1.16

-1.73
-1.12

2.17
2.16

2.10
2.11

2.13
2.14

1.83
1.20

-1.72
-1.13

2.32
2.30

2.24
2.25

0.150
0.150

1.66
0.88

-1.36
-0.73

2.52
2.50

2.44
2.46

2.48
2.48

1.66
0.86

-1.41
-0.74

2.31
2.29

2.24
2.26

0.246
0.247

1.68
0.99

-1.40
-0.83

2.47
2.46

2.40
2.42

2.43
2.44

1.65
0.96

-1.40
-0.82

2.31
2.30

2.24
2.26

0.242
0.243

1.81
1.09

-1.75
-1.06

2.15
2.14

2.08
2.10

2.12
2.12

1.82
1.11

-1.70
-1.04

2.32
2.30

2.24
2.25

0.151
0.152

1.88
1.14

-1.93
-1.18

2.03
2.02

1.95
1.97

1.99
2.00

1.88
1.17

-1.82
-1.13

2.32
2.30

2.23
2.25

0.122
0.123

1.61
0.94

-1.25
-0.73

2.63
2.62

2.55
2.57

2.59
2.59

2.22
1.29

-2.38
-1.48

2.32
2.30

2.22
2.24

0.294
0.295

1.75
1.04

-1.57
-0.94

2.31
2.30

2.24
2.26

2.27
2.28

1.75
1.04

-1.57
-0.94

2.31
2.30

2.24
2.25

0.193
0.194

1.74
1.04

-1.57
-0.94

2.31
2.30

2.23
2.25

2.27
2.27

1.74
1.04

-1.56
-0.94

2.31
2.30

2.24
2.25

0.191
0.192

1.84
1.11

-1.88
-1.15

2.33
2.32

2.25
2.27

2.29
2.30

1.83
1.10

-1.87
-1.14

2.32
2.30

2.23
2.25

0.198
0.199

1.61
0.95

-1.21
-0.71

2.28
2.27

2.22
2.24

2.25
2.25

1.61
0.95

-1.20
-0.71

2.31
2.30

2.25
2.26

0.186
0.187

1.29
0.73

-0.51
-0.29

2.23
2.23

2.19
2.20

2.21
2.21

1.30
0.73

-0.51
-0.29

2.30
2.29

2.26
2.27

0.176
0.177

xi

