                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PATIENT KNOWLEDGE AND ANTIBIOTIC ABUSE:
                     EVIDENCE FROM AN AUDIT STUDY IN CHINA

                                           Janet Currie
                                          Wanchuan Lin
                                            Wei Zhang

                                       Working Paper 16602
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16602


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2010




We thank Qingqing Cao, Naijia Guo, Yu Qin, Yu Wang, Hao Zhang for their research assistance.
We are grateful to conference participants at Academy Health. All errors are ours. Lin acknowledges
research grants support from the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 70903003 and No. 71073002).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Janet Currie, Wanchuan Lin, and Wei Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Patient Knowledge and Antibiotic Abuse: Evidence from an Audit Study in China
Janet Currie, Wanchuan Lin, and Wei Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 16602
December 2010
JEL No. I11,I12,I18

                                             ABSTRACT

We ask how patient knowledge of appropriate antibiotic usage affects both physicians prescribing
behavior and the physician-patient relationship. We conduct an audit study in which a pair of simulated
patients with identical flu-like complaints visits the same physician. Simulated patient A is instructed
to ask a question that showcases his/her knowledge of appropriate antibiotic use, whereas patient B
is instructed to say nothing beyond describing his/her symptoms. We find that a patient’s knowledge
of appropriate antibiotics use reduces both antibiotic prescription rates and drug expenditures. Such
knowledge also increases physicians’ information provision about possible side effects, but has a negative
impact on the quality of the physician-patient interactions.


Janet Currie                                        Wei Zhang
Princeton University                                Dept. of Management
316 Wallace Hall                                    China Europe International Business School
Princeton, NJ 08544                                 699 Hong Feng Road, Pudong
and NBER                                            Shanghai, 201206, China
jcurrie@princeton.edu                               wilson.zhang@gmail.com

Wanchuan Lin
Department of Applied Economics
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Rm. 325, Hall 2
Beijing 100871, China
wanchuan@gmail.com
I. INTRODUCTION
   China has a high rate of antibiotic usage for both inpatients and outpatients. Two thirds of

inpatients use antibiotics in China, compared to about a third of inpatients in many other

countries (Hu, Liu, and Peng, 2003). The World Health Organization has recommended that

Chinese hospitals decrease the rate of inpatient antibiotic usage to 30% (Guo 2004); the

Chinese Government has suggested a more modest reduction to a target rate of 50% (The

Ministry of Health of the People's Republic of China, 2000). Antibiotic use is high among

outpatients in China as well: forty to 60% use antibiotics (Dong et al. 1999; Zhang et al. 2008).

In comparison, in the U.S., the outpatient rate of antibiotic use is between 15% and 18%

(Roumie et al., 2005).

   Antibiotic abuse has substantial costs.       Perhaps the gravest concern is that it will

contribute the rise of “superbugs” that are resistant to most or all forms of antibiotics and

threaten global health.    The Chinese have already seen increased antibiotic resistance

compared to Western countries.       In China in 1999 and 2001, the mean prevalence of

resistance among hospital and community-acquired infections was 41% and 28%, respectively.

Comparable figures for the U.S. were 17 to 20% and 13% (Zhang et al., 2006).          Moreover,

the high prevalence of antibiotic resistance in China is accompanied by a rapid growth in the

rate of resistance. The annual growth rate was on average 22% between 1994 and 2000 in

China, while the growth rate was only 6% between 1999 and 2002 in the U.S. (Zhang et al.

2006).

   Resistant bacteria create immediate costs as well since treating them increases medical

expenditures and they may lead to death from uncontrolled infections (Phelps,1989; Yao and

Yang, 2008). A second immediate cost stems from adverse drug reactions. Between 2001
                                               3
and 2005, Xiao et al. (2010) estimate that there were 14,738,000 incidents of moderate to

severe antibiotic adverse drug reactions in China yearly, and that 150,000 patients died.

Treating these reactions cost 2.91 to 13.93 billion RMB and led to estimated social

productivity losses of about 340 million to 1.62 billion RMB yearly (Xiao et al. 2010).

   Several reasons have been advanced for antibiotic abuse. One strand of the literature

blames the consumer. The argument is that patients view antibiotics as a panacea, and

therefore demand them even when they are unwarranted (Cars and Hakansson, 1995; Sun et

al., 2009).   Patients may also demand newer antibiotics, perceiving them to be more

efficacious, or they may fail to follow dosage instructions (Bi, Tong, and Parton, 2000; Sun et

al., 2009). If patients expect antibiotics, and doctors are pressed for time, they may find it

easier to write a prescription than to explain to the patient why it is not necessary (Schwartz et

al, 1998). On the supply side, physicians may overprescribe antibiotics because they lack

professional knowledge about proper antibiotic usage (Yao and Yang, 2008; Sun et al., 2009)

or because they want to prevent potential infections (Dar-Odeh et al., 2010).

   However a third reason for antibiotic abuse that is likely to be particularly important in

China, is that physicians have substantial monetary incentives to prescribe medications. In

China, most outpatients are seen by doctors in hospital clinics. Hospitals rely heavily on drug

sales to make a profit: Drug sales account for over 50% of all hospital revenues and antibiotic

sales account for 47% of all drug sales (Chen, 2005; Gong, 2009).               Kickbacks from

pharmaceutical companies provide further economic incentives for physicians, with

physicians receiving payments of up to 20% of the value of the prescription (Day, 2006; Yip

and Hsiao, 2008). Thus doctors not only have an incentive to prescribe, they have an

                                                4
incentive to prescribe more expensive drugs, which are often the newer and more powerful

antibiotics.

    It is possible then that the high level of antibiotic abuse in China represents an egregious

example of physician “induced demand”.                  As Dranove (1988) argued, antibiotics are

particularly ripe for demand inducement because they are unlikely to inflict harm on most

patients, and because it is difficult for the patient to know for certain whether they are needed

or not. However, it has been difficult to identify demand inducement in observational data

given problems such as endogenous matching of doctors and patients, and unobserved patient

characteristics. Recently, many observers have argued that small area variations in the fraction

of patients receiving services are evidence of inappropriate use of medical care; but without

further information it is impossible to know whether this interpretation is correct, or whether

overuse in some areas is driven by the demand or the supply side.

    This study proposes a new method for examining physician demand inducement and

applies it to the problem of antibiotic abuse in China: We conduct an audit study with

simulated patients.1 We then run a field experiment to test the effectiveness of a simple

intervention designed to reduce antibiotic abuse by having patients signal to doctors that they

have information about inappropriate antibiotic use.

    More specifically, we trained students to act as simulated patients with identical flu-like

complaints. These patients were sent to physicians in hospital clinics for check-ups. In the

first audit study, we chose two large cities and one rural area (a county in a coastal province) as

study areas in order to assess the extent to which antibiotic abuse appears to result from

1
  There is a literature on “medical audit studies” but this usually refers to an analysis of a sample of patient
records.
                                                       5
demand inducement. None of our simulated patients were sick, none described symptoms

that merited the prescription of antibiotics, and none asked for antibiotics. Yet 65% of

simulated patients in urban areas and 55% of simulated patients in rural areas received

prescriptions for antibiotics. Moreover, doctors tended to prescribe more expensive drugs

rather than cheaper “old-line” antibiotics: 24% of urban patients (28% of rural patients)

received prescriptions for cephalosporin conditional on getting a prescription, whereas only

14% (15% rural) received prescriptions for penicillin.

    These prescriptions represented a heavy financial burden for the average consumer. Drug

expenditures per person were 84.18 RMB in City 1, 50.68 RMB in City 2 and 52.83 RMB in

the rural area, amounts that represent 4.1%, 2.4% and 4.2% respectively of the average

monthly personal income in each location. 2 Finally, after writing a prescription for the

simulated patient, 85% of physicians in City 1 and 47% of physicians in City 2 prescribed for

the simulated patient’s absent sister when requested to do so.3

    The field experiment was an audit study designed to see whether sending the physician a

signal that the patient was informed about inappropriate antibiotic use would reduce

prescription rates. We sent pairs of well-matched simulated patients, A and B, to the same

physician, with a short time interval between their audits. The pair followed the same

transcript except that following the physical examination, patient A said “I learned from the

internet that simple flu/cold patients should not take antibiotics.” Thus, A signaled to the

physician that they had some knowledge of inappropriate antibiotic use, while B did not.

2
  These figures are drawn from the Statistical Yearbooks of the two cities for 2009 and the County
Yearbook for 2009.
3
  Rural physicians were not asked to prescribe for an absent sister. Given the rural physician’s lower
volume of patients per day, we thought they might notice two such requests coming from otherwise
identical patients.
                                                     6
   We find that the signal reduced the probability of receiving an antibiotic prescription by 25

percentage points, from 64% for patient B to 39% for patient A. The signal also reduced drug

expenditures from an average of 145.81 RMB for patient B to 105.84 RMB for patient A.

Finally, patients who signaled knowledge of antibiotics received more information about

possible drug side effects than apparently uninformed patients, but fewer polite responses

from physicians.

    Our paper makes two important contributions.            First, by applying the audit study

methodology which has been used in other contexts to medical care, we are able to show that a

significant amount of antibiotic abuse in China is due to physician induced demand, which in

turn is likely driven by strong financial incentives. To our knowledge, this is the first time an

audit study with simulated patients has been applied to an examination of the appropriateness

of medical care. Second, we show that a simple intervention designed to signal patient

knowledge can dramatically reduce the abuse of antibiotics. It may be possible to achieve

similar reductions in antibiotic use by for example, a widespread public advertising campaign

noting that antibiotics are not appropriate for the treatment of simple colds and the flu, or by

requiring hospitals to post notices with this information in examination rooms. If physician

financial incentives are an important problem underlying the abuse, then regulation of

physician prescribing behavior or more far-reaching reforms to the system of financing

hospitals and physicians are also likely to be warranted.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II provides some background

knowledge, Section III describes the study design, Section IV explains the empirical model,

Section V presents the results of the study, and Section VI marks the conclusion.

                                               7
II. BACKGROUND

   In this section, we provide background on the induced demand literature, provide some

discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of our audit study methodology, and offer a

brief survey about the literature on patient “empowerment” that inspired our choice of

intervention strategy.

Physician Induced Demand

   As McGuire (2000) notes in his review of the literature on physician agency, “The basic

premise behind PID (physician induced demand) is that physicians may exploit the

information gap between themselves and patients (page 513).” However, there have been

remarkably few attempts to test this assumption directly. Instead, most empirical tests of the

PID theory either follow Fuchs (1978) and examine the effect of physician density on the

consumption of procedures, or they examine the effect of physician fee changes on the volume

of services rendered (e.g. Rice, 1983; McGuire and Pauly, 1991; Yip, 1998). Gruber and

Owings (1996) take a somewhat different tack and examine the effect of patient availability on

the use of Cesarean section for delivery.

   All of these papers take as their starting point a model in which physicians trade off the

income they can gain from inducing patients to consume unnecessary services against a cost of

engaging in inducement. This cost can either be in terms of a direct reduction in utility, or an

erosion of the physician’s reputation (and his/her ability to induce demand in future).

   Attempts to test these models empirically have run into many difficulties. For example,

Dranove and Wehner (1994) debunk one popular instrumental variables approach, which is to

use the local supply of physicians as an instrument. They show that using this instrument,

                                               8
childbirths appear to be induced, which is unlikely. Similarly, changes in physician fees can

affect demand as well as supply, given that most patients face copayments (Heaton and

Holland, 2009). A notable recent empirical test of PID is Iizuka (2007) who examines the

prescription drug market in Japan. He finds that doctors’ prescribing patterns are influenced

by the size of the markup that they are allowed to charge on the drugs.

   Another strand of the literature follows Wennberg and Gittelsohn (1973) and examines

“small area variations” in the utilization of medical procedures. It has been shown that there

are large variations in the use of some procedures, and that these variations are unrelated to

average patient health outcomes (Sutherland, Fischer, and Skinner. 2009). These variations

have been widely interpreted as evidence of excessive provision of medical care (e.g. Fuchs,

2004). However, Chandra and Staiger (2007) argue that the true picture is more complex

since patients in high spending areas who need high-tech care are better off in those areas,

while patients who would benefit from lower tech care may be worse off.

   Pauly (1980) attempts to address the role of information by arguing that low income

patients in big cities (where information about each physician may be less available) are most

likely to suffer from demand inducement. Using micro-level data from 1970, he finds some

evidence that this is the case. Bunker and Brown (1974) and Hay and Leahy (1982) attempt

to examine the role of information by looking at the use of services by physicians and their

families. Both find evidence that doctor’s families are more likely to use services, which

would seem to go against the information hypothesis. However, it is possible that doctors have

access to better quality or lower cost services (through professional courtesies).

   Through our audit study approach, we will provide evidence both on the extent to which

                                                9
antibiotic abuse is induced by physicians, and on the extent to which it depends on the

information available to consumers.

Advantages and Disadvantages of the Audit Study Approach

    Audit studies are used in numerous settings, especially where discrimination is suspected

(Pager 2007). This method can isolate effects of a particular variable through the use of

matched pairs of testers and random assignment. Moreover, an in-person audit can provide

not only quantitative data on the outcomes of the audit, but also qualitative information on the

process of the audit (Pager 2007). In our study we collect both quantitative data about the

whether or not an antibiotic is prescribed, and qualitative information about the patient’s

experience.

    Audit studies are not without potential weaknesses. A primary concern is effective

matching (Heckman and Siegelman, 1993). In the context of our study, effective matching

means that from the point of view of the physicians, pairs of simulated patients are identical

except for their knowledge of antibiotics.      We took two measures to achieve effective

matching. First, we designed detailed protocols and provided extensive training to ensure that

simulated patients dressed and behaved in a similar manner and gave the same chief symptoms.

Second, in the experiment involving pairs of simulated patients, the roles of A and B were

randomly assigned. Since the two students switch roles, we can include patient fixed effects

in our models to further reduce the possibility that personal characteristics accounted for the

different results between simulated patients A and B.

   Another concern in an audit study is that testers’ awareness of the experiment may affect

their expectations and/or behaviors and thus influence the results. For example, in a study on

                                              10
racial discrimination in hiring, a black experimenter may be more nervous or less confident

than a white experimenter due to the expectation of racial discrimination (Pager 2007).

Therefore, any observed differences in hiring patterns between black and white testers could

reflect subtle differences in their behavior.

   Since our simulated patients could observe that the only difference between the scripts

followed by patients A and B was the statement about antibiotics, we did tell them that the

purpose of the experiment was to see if a statement reflecting antibiotic knowledge would

affect prescription patterns. We tried to minimize the potential impact of this knowledge

through training.    As discussed further below, simulated patients were trained to dress

properly, to strictly follow the standard protocol, and to behave in an even-mannered way

during the outpatient visit so that, to the physicians, they differed only in terms of patient

knowledge.

   We also check that there is no difference in the physician’s reaction to A and B prior to

receiving the signal that Patient A is informed about appropriate antibiotic use. If A and B’s

behavior differed in a way that affected the doctor-patient interaction, then we might expect to

see differences appearing during the initial patient examination. However, as we show below,

there were no significant differences in the way doctors treated patients prior to patient A’s

comment about antibiotic use.

Background Literature on Patient Empowerment

    As discussed above, our intervention focuses on signaling to the doctor that the patient is

informed about appropriate antibiotic use in cold and flu patients. Our focus on information

is a natural outgrowth of the literature on induced demand, which emphasizes information

                                                11
asymmetry.      However, there is also a literature in medicine about patient education or

“empowerment” which we briefly summarize here.

     It has been argued that educating patients on medication options can increase the patients’

authority over a range of decisions, particularly treatment choice (Angelmar and Berman

2007). Empirical studies on the effects of patient empowerment can be divided into two

groups: a) Those that focus on effects on the prescription practices of physicians, and b) those

that focus on effects on the patient-physician relationship.

     Research has shown that patient empowerment can affect physicians’ diagnosing and

prescribing behavior. Some researchers have found that patient displays of knowledge can

positively influence physicians’ practices and improve patients’ health. For example, Hollon

et al. (2003) report that in comparison with matched control groups, women who are familiar

with osteoporosis drugs due to Direct-to-Consumer Advertising (DTCA) are nine times more

likely to receive a bone densitometry, which helps physicians diagnose osteoporosis at an

earlier stage. Weissman et al. (2003) also note that the more patients know about medical

drugs, the more likely it is that physicians will identify new conditions in patients who were

previously either under-diagnosed or undertreated.4

    A second line focus of the patient empowerment literature asks how patient knowledge

affects the patient-physician relationship.          Whereas some researchers argue that patient


4
  Other researchers argue that patient knowledge does not necessarily either improve treatment or benefit
health. For instance, Mintzes et al. (2003) find that even when physicians doubt the efficacy of drugs
patients request, they still prescribe requested drugs more than 70% of the time. Moreover, patient requests
can have a potentially harmful effect. Kravitz et al. (2005) discusses an example in which a physician
prescribes a requested anti-depression medication, rather than doing a careful examination and discovering
a patient’s underlying hypothyroidism. However, our design explicitly abstracts from issues arising from
patient requests for medication.
                                                       12
knowledge motivates more effective discussions between patients and physicians, others are

skeptical of this claim, as they fear that patient knowledge both decreases patients’ trust in

physicians and erodes the authority of physicians (Maguire, 1999; Kravitz, 2000, Jagsi, 2007).

By isolating the effect of information in our audit study, we provide new evidence on how

patient knowledge affects the patient-physician relationship.




III. STUDY DESIGN


   Our study includes two field audit studies. The first was conducted in City 1 and a rural

county from January 2008 to March 2008 and in City 2 in January 2009. The goal of this first

study was to assess the rate of inappropriate antibiotic usage for flu/cold patients. The second

study was conducted in City 1 from November 2008 to February 2009. In this experiment,

we use the audit study method to examine the effect of patient knowledge on health care

utilization and service quality.

The First Audit Study

   We began the first audit study by designing a standard protocol which appears in the

Appendix. In the protocol, the chief complaint for all simulated patients is, “For the last two

days, I’ve been feeling fatigued. I have a light fever, slight dizziness, a sore throat, and a poor

appetite. This morning, the symptoms worsened so I took my body temperature. It was 99°F.”

We purposely chose very minor symptoms so that it would be difficult for physicians to

determine if the infections were viral or bacterial without further tests.

   Since antibiotics are only effective in treating infections caused by a bacterium, it is

important for a physician to know the kind of infection a patient acquires before prescribing

                                                13
antibiotics. According to the official guidelines (Ministry of Health of the People's Republic

of China, 2004), antibiotics should only be prescribed when bacterial infections are confirmed

by a patient’s symptoms and the results of blood or urine tests. Hence, doctors faced with

these vague symptoms should not have prescribed antibiotics.

    In the rural area, we restricted our sample to general public hospitals at the county and

town level. In City 1 and City 2, we restricted our sample to general public hospitals with at

least 800 beds. We restricted our sample to large general public hospitals because in China,

most outpatient visits take place in hospitals rather than in clinics: In 2008, 61% of outpatient

visits took place in hospitals versus 39% in clinics (Ministry of Health of the People's

Republic of China 2009).5 The equivalent of a U.S. primary care physician does not really

exist, so a visit to a hospital or clinic is often the counterpart to a visit to a physician’s office in

the U.S. (Hsiao and Liu, 1996; Yip, Wang and Liu, 1998; Hew, 2006; Eggleston et al. 2008;).

We excluded private hospitals because in 2008, 87% of hospital outpatient visits took place in

public hospitals (Ministry of Health of the People's Republic of China, 2009). We excluded

specialized public hospitals because in 2008, 91% of hospital outpatient visits took place in

general hospitals (Ministry of Health of the People's Republic of China, 2009). Clearly,

general public hospitals in China are the main medical service providers.

     We obtained a list of all general public hospitals with more than 800 beds from the local

Health Department. We randomly choose ten large general public hospitals in City 1 and eight

5
  According to the 2009 Yearbook of Health in People's Republic of China, hospitals included general
hospitals, sanitariums, health service centers, urban/rural health centers; outpatient departments, women and
children care agencies, and specialized centers. The numbers of outpatient visits treated in these settings
were 1.7 billion, 1.5 million, 171 million, 828 million, 51 million, 131 million and 18 million people,
respectively. In total, there were 2.9 billion outpatient visits in hospitals in 2008, accounting for 61 percent
of all outpatient visits. Clinics included infirmaries, health service stations, village clinics, and they served
424 million, 84 million, and 1.4 billion outpatients respectively.
                                                        14
in City 2. Following a similar procedure, 52 general hospitals were randomly chosen in the

rural area. Our budget permitted us to recruit 39 college students to serve as simulated

patients, with an age range of 18 to 22 years. Specifically, we recruited 10 simulated patients

in City 1, 8 in City 2, and 19 in the rural area. In City 1, each of the 10 students was assigned

10 hospital visits, resulting in an overall sample of 100 observations; in City 2, each student

was assigned 8 hospital visits for a sample of 64 observations. Because hospitals were more

spread out in the rural areas, and transportation was more difficult, in the rural area 9 students

were each assigned 3 hospital visits and the remaining 10 students were each assigned 4

hospital visits, resulting in a total of 67 (9*3+10*4) visits. The total number of visits in the

three sample areas was 231 (100+64+67). Of these, two observations had to be dropped (in

City 2), one because the student went to the wrong hospital, and one because the student went

to an Emergency Room rather than to the Department of Respiratory Diseases or the

Department of Internal Medicine. In China, non-urgent care patients typically present at the

department that they expect to be seen in. We instructed our simulated patients to go to the

Department of Respiratory Diseases, or, if there was no such department, to the Department of

Internal Medicine.

   Simulated patients underwent nine hours of group instruction and individual practice,

during which they received instructions on the transcript and how to behave, dress, etc. We

also instructed them to give the chief complaint at a normal speech rate of around 22 seconds

so that they did not speak too fast or too slow. The main goal was to standardize the simulated

patients’ performance and appearance. To ensure that simulated patients were well trained,

after the group instruction and individual practice, simulated patients tested the protocol five

                                               15
times in out-of-sample hospitals before the actual implementation of the first audit study.

    The protocol for the audit study is displayed in Figure I. First, the physician collects the

chief complaint and a clinical history from the simulated patient. The patient does not claim

nausea, sputum, or other clinical symptoms that are not included in the chief complaint, nor do

they claim any previously related clinical history.

    Second, the physician gives a physical examination, which is likely to include temperature

taking, tonsil checks, auscultation, etc. Third, the physician diagnoses and decides whether or

not to give a prescription. If the physician does prescribe medications, the simulated patient

waits for three to four seconds for the physician to voluntarily inform him/her of any side

effects. If the physician does not supply such information, the simulated patient asks for it.

    Fourth, in the experiments in City 1 and City 2, the simulated patient asks the physician for

a prescription for his/her “absent sister” who has similar symptoms. We did not ask this absent

sister question in the rural area because rural hospital doctors see fewer patients per day, and a

question about an “absent sister” is not a common one. We were concerned that having

several patients repeat a rare question might seem strange to a physician and hence might

influence their behavior. Fifth, the simulated patient thanks the physician before leaving the

office..

    If the simulated patient receives a prescription, we calculate drug expenditures as follows:

In 17% of all cases the total drug expenditure is listed on the prescription; In 57% of all cases,

simulated patients go to a pricing window to obtain total drug

expenditures. In the remaining 26% of all cases in which we did not obtain drug prices from

the hospitals, we found them either on the website of the local Price Bureau or through Google

                                               16
or Baidu searches.6

      Finally, we asked simulated patients to complete an on-site survey immediately after they

finished each outpatient visit. The questions covered information about the physician and the

complete check-up process, including inquiries the physician made, the physical examination,

the diagnosis, and the type and price of the drugs prescribed (if applicable).

The Second Field Experiment

      For our second field experiment, we recruited eight college students, four males and four

females, from a local university as simulated patients. We randomly chose 16 large general

public hospitals with over 800 beds out of the 23 hospitals within 13 miles of a major

university as our sample hospitals. As in the first experiment, simulated patients underwent

nine hours of group training and individual practice. This time, however, the four male and

four female students were grouped into four matched pairs; in each pair, simulated patients A

and B shared the same gender, a similar age, and physical appearance. Throughout our study,

the pairing was fixed and each of the four pairs visited 16 physicians, resulting in 128

observations total. In order to investigate differences between chief and attending physicians,

the first member of the pair to go in was instructed to ask for the chief physician in about one

third of the pair visits.

      Before each audit, the roles of A and B and the order of their visits to the hospital were

randomly assigned within each pair. Since the roles of A and B were chosen randomly, each

student played role A approximately as often as role B. As the sequence of their visits was

also randomly assigned, simulated patient A visited the physician first or second with almost


6
    Baidu is the biggest Chinese search engine. Website: http://www.baidu.com.
                                                     17
equal frequency. Each member of a pair visited the physician in the same half day, either in the

morning or in the afternoon. Unless they were requesting a chief physician, the “first in”

patient did not request any particular physician. However, two hours after the first simulated

patient visited a physician, the other member of the pair approached the registration desk to

request the same physician.

    During the outpatient visit, simulated patients reported the same chief complaint and

followed the same procedures as in the first audit study. Unlike the first audit study, however,

after the physical examination, A said “I learned from the internet that simple flu/cold patients

should not take antibiotics. Is that correct?” Regardless of the reply the physician gave, A

simply listened and nodded without further questions. In contrast, B did not say anything at

this point in the visit. Thus, A and B played the role of the well-informed and less-informed

patient, respectively.

    To analyze the effects of patient knowledge on service quality, we had simulated patients

complete an additional evaluation form in addition to the on-site summary form. After

completing all the audits, simulated patients evaluated the service they received from each

physician. They rated on a 1 to 5 scale (low to high) the service and their degree of satisfaction.

The last question on the evaluation form asked simulated patients how willing they were to

recommend the physician to their own parents in the event that their parents had similar

symptoms. A zero indicated that they were against recommending the physician while a 10

indicated that they would definitely recommend the physician.




IV. EMPIRICAL MODELS


                                                18
    Our first audit study asks whether the high rates of antibiotic use in China can be plausibly

accounted for by physician behavior.          Given that our young, healthy patients neither

requested antibiotics nor gave symptoms that suggested that antibiotics were appropriate, a

large and positive level of antibiotic prescription is a cause for concern. We also examine the

data to see how frequently physicians prescribe more expensive classes of antibiotics rather

than penicillin, and we look to see whether there are large differences in the prescription rate

across areas, consistent with the literature on small-area variations in the U.S..

    In the second experimental audit study, we can assess the effects of the information

intervention by comparing the fraction of the time patient A received an antibiotic prescription

to the fraction of time patient B received one. However, given that there are some observable

differences between the simulated patients and physicians, and that practice patterns may vary

from one hospital to another, we also estimate models that include patient characteristics,

physician characteristics, hospital fixed effects and/or patient fixed effects. We also control

for whether a patient was the first or second patient to see the doctor in all our models.

    To be more specific, in order to analyze the data from the second experiment, we first

estimate models of the following form:

    (1) Yijk = α0 + α1RoleAijk + α2Xi + α3Zj + α4Go_firstijk + εijk

where i indicates the simulated patient, j indicates the physician, k indicates the hospital, Yijk is

the outcome of interest for simulated patient i's visit with physician j in hospital k; RoleAijk is a

dummy equal to 1 if simulated patient i plays role A in the visit with physician j in hospital k,

and 0 if he/she plays role B; Xi is a vector of control variables including the simulated patient’s

gender and age; Zj is a vector of control variables including the physician j’s gender, title, and

                                                 19
a categorical variable for the physician’s age, divided into four groups: 20-30, 30-40, 40-50

and 50+ years;7 and Go_Firstijk is a dummy which equals 1 if simulated patient i visits

physician j first in the pair at hospital k , and 0 if this simulated patient is second in the pair.

       We next estimate models including hospital fixed effects. Our most restrictive models

include patient fixed effects as well and have the following form:

      (2) Yijk = β0 + β1RoleAijk + β2Zi + β3Go_firstijk + β4δi + β5ηi + εijk,

where δk is a vector of hospital fixed effects and ηi is a vector of patient fixed effects.

      The parameter of interest in these models is β1, which shows the effect of the patient’s

knowledge on the outcomes. When Yijk is a health care utilization measure, such as the

prescription rate for antibiotics, we expect β1 to be significantly negative if patient knowledge

decreases utilization, and significantly positive if patient knowledge increases utilization.

When Yijk is a measure of good service quality, such as whether physicians respond politely

after being thanked, we expect β1 to be significantly negative if patient knowledge degrades

service quality, and significantly positive if patient knowledge improves service quality.

      As chief physicians are more experienced than attending physicians, there may be

systematic differences between the practices of chief and attending physicians. Chief

physicians may react differently to patient knowledge for two reasons. First, in keeping with

the induced demand literature examining the effects of physician fees, attending physicians

have lower incomes than chief physicians and may therefore have a stronger incentive to give

antibiotic prescriptions in order to increase their income. Alternatively, since attending

physicians may be less knowledgeable than chief physicians, they may be more likely to make


7
    This age variable is based on the patient’s assessment of the physician’s age.
                                                       20
errors, such as prescribing antibiotics when antibiotics are unwarranted. In this case, they

may also be less likely to provide information about side effects in response to simulated

patients A’s intervention.

    We test to see whether patient knowledge has different effects on chief physicians and

attending physicians by including an interaction term RoleAijk*Attendingj in our model. The

model then becomes:

    (3) Yijk = γ0 + γ1RoleAijk + γ2Attendingi + γ3RoleAijk*Attendingj + γ4Zi + γ5Go_firstijk + γ6δi

+ γ7ηi + εijk.

    The parameters of interest in model (3) are γ1, and γ3. The parameter γ1 shows the main

effect of patient knowledge on chief physicians; γ3 shows the difference between the effects of

patient knowledge on chief physicians and attending physicians; the sum of γ1 and γ3 shows

the main effect of patient knowledge on attending physicians. If the effects are larger for

attending physicians, then we would expect γ3 to be significant and of the same sign as γ1.




V. RESULTS

     This section summarizes the results regarding physicians’ antibiotic prescribing practices

and their variations across the three study areas; the effects of patient knowledge on antibiotic

prescribing; the effects of patient knowledge on physician service quality; and differences in

outcomes between chief and attending physicians.

Physicians’ Antibiotic Prescribing Practices

     Table I summarizes baseline prescription rates from the first audit study. Antibiotic

prescribing rates are alarmingly high in all three areas. It is remarkable that the rates are in

                                                21
line with the 40 to 60% rates reported in previous studies, suggesting that much of the

antibiotic abuse in China may be accounted for by physician behavior without recourse to

demand-side explanations (Dong et al., 1999; Zhang et al., 2008). Prescription rates are

higher in urban areas with 64% of simulated patients receiving such a prescription in the two

urban areas, compared to 55% in the rural area. We indicate statistically significant

differences between average urban and rural areas with asterisks in the “average” column.

Overall, 62% of the simulated patients received a prescription for an antibiotic. This high

rate suggests that Chinese doctors make little distinction between patients with and without

diagnoses that would merit antibiotic prescription.

     Panel B focuses on the number and type of drugs that are prescribed conditional on a

prescription. Most simulated patients actually received prescriptions for three or more drugs

in urban areas. In rural areas, the majority received a prescription for two drugs. In terms of

the types of drugs prescribed, 14% of patients received prescriptions for penicillin, while 25%

received prescriptions for the more expensive and powerful cephalosporin.                       In general,

penicillin is considered a “first line” drug for infection, and cephalosporin is a second line drug,

meaning that it should only be used after penicillin has failed.                 Hence, prescription of

cephalosporin represents a more serious example of antibiotic abuse than prescription of

penicillin. Since cephalosporin is on average much more expensive than penicillin, doctors

have a larger financial incentive to prescribe it.8 In urban areas, 22% of patients also received


8
  Penicillin and cephalosporin are actually classes of drugs, and there are many different types within each
class, which all have different prices. However, in City 1 prices for a defined daily dose of penicillin vary
from 2.80 RMB for Amoxicillan to 6.04 RMB for Ampicillin. For cephalosporin, the least expensive is
Cefalexin at 5.24 RMB while the most expensive is Cefdinir (a “third line” antibiotic) at 76.84 RMB. We
estimate that in our data, the average course of penicillin was about half the price of the average course of
cephalosporin prescribed.
                                                      22
a prescription for Chaihu, which is not an antibiotic but a Chinese medicine commonly used to

treat colds. Another striking finding in Panel B is that the abuse of cephalosporin appears to

be much more common in City 2 and the rural area than in City 1, which is consistent with the

large differences in medical care that have been observed across areas in countries such as the

U.S.

    Panel C of Table I shows that physicians are willing to prescribe for absent patients and

that total drug expenditures are high. Note that physicians were only asked to prescribe for

absent relatives in urban areas, and only if they had already prescribed for the simulated

patient. As is shown in the top row, when the simulated patient requested medications on

behalf of his/her absent sister, the physician gives a prescription 85% of the time in City 1, and

47% of the time in City 2.

    Total drug expenditures are significantly higher in the urban areas than in the rural area,

though this result is driven by high drug expenditures in City 1. For example, row (3) of Panel

C shows that the total drug expenditure conditional on prescription is on average 151.51 RMB

in City 1, more than twice the 52.68 RMB in the rural area. As the prices of the drugs differ

little across study areas, the disparity in drug expenditures is driven mainly by different drug

types, with physicians in City 1 prescribing more expensive drugs on average.

    In Panel C, rows (2) and (3) show total drug expenditures, whereas rows (4) and (5) of

Panel C show drug expenditures per person. If the physician does not prescribe for the

simulated patient’s absent sister, then drug expenditure per person equals total drug

expenditure; if the physician does prescribe for the simulated patient’s absent sister, then drug

expenditure per person equals total drug expenditure divided by two. Rows (4) and (5) of

                                               23
Panel C show that, even after taking into account the number of patients the physicians

prescribes for, drug expenditures per person are high and fluctuate across the three study areas.

As is shown in the bottom row, given that the physician prescribes, drug expenditure per

person is 84.18 RMB in City 1, 50.68 RMB in City 2, and 52.68 RMB in the rural area. These

expenditures are high compared to local living standards. They represent 4.1% of the 2,060

RMB monthly personal income in City 1, 2.4% of the 2,110 RMB personal income in City 2,

and 4.2% of the 1,271 RMB personal income in the rural area, respectively.9

       In summary, data from the first audit study demonstrates that: high rates of antibiotic

abuse are likely due to physician induced demand, at least in our study areas. Two thirds of

simulated patients received unwarranted prescriptions for antibiotic drugs; patients were likely

to receive multiple drug prescriptions; and drug expenditures are high relative to personal

incomes. Finally, there were large variations in prescribing patterns across study areas.

The Effects of Patient Knowledge on Antibiotic Abuse

      Table II shows how patient knowledge affected antibiotic abuse. The first two columns in

Table II present summary statistics by simulated patient group. Column (3), (4), (5) and (6)

present OLS estimates of the parameter α1 from a model without control variables, with

control variables but without hospital or patient fixed effects, with control variables and

hospital fixed effects, and with control variables and both hospital and patient fixed effects,

respectively. A comparison across columns provides some assurance that the experimental

design was correctly implemented: The additional controls should not affect the coefficient

estimates, and in fact, including them has little impact on the estimates.


9
    These figures are taken from the year books for the two cities and the county for 2009.
                                                       24
    Panel A of Table II shows that patient knowledge leads to significant decreases in

prescription rates.    Row (2) indicates that the overall probability that antibiotics were

prescribed was 25 percentage points less for patient A than for patient B. Sixty-four percent

of patient B’s received a prescription for antibiotics, which is very similar to the rate estimated

in our baseline audit, while only 39% of patient A’s received a prescription. However, it is

remarkable that even after patients had questioned the efficacy of antibiotic use, 39% of

physicians still prescribed antibiotics.

    Patient knowledge not only reduced prescription rates, but also significantly reduced the

proportion of simulated patients receiving three or more types of drugs, as shown in Panel B of

Table II. The first two columns of row (4) show that simulated patient A’s received three or

more types of drugs 47% of the time, compared to 65% of the time for patient B’s. Row (3)

suggests that most of these patients received prescriptions for two drugs instead of three.

    The last three rows of Panel B show that physicians prescribed fewer antibiotics for more

informed patients. In particular, they were significantly less likely to prescribe cephalosporin,

the more advanced and expensive antibiotic. The point estimates suggest that they were

correspondingly more likely to prescribe Chaihu, the Chinese cold remedy; however, this

difference is not statistically significant.

    Panel C of Table II illustrates the effects of patient knowledge on drug expenditures. Row

(2) shows that total drug expenditures for Type A patients were 105.84 RMB, significantly less

than the 145.81 RMB for Type B patients.             Based on the summary statistics, patient

knowledge decreases drug expenditure by 39.97 RMB, which is 27% of the expenditure for B.

Drug expenditures per person are also significantly lower for A than for B. For example, row

                                                25
(4) demonstrates that patient knowledge decreases drug expenditure per person unconditional

on prescription by 27.96 RMB from 83.74 RMB to 55.77 RMB.

   In summary, Panel A shows that patient knowledge significantly decreased both the overall

prescription rate and antibiotic prescription rates, Panel B shows that patient knowledge

significantly decreased the probability of receiving three or more types of drugs, and Panel C

shows that patient knowledge significantly decreased drug expenditures.

The Effects of Patient Knowledge on Service Quality

   Table III shows how patient knowledge affects service quality. Panel A illustrates the

effects before the information intervention, while Panel B and C illustrate the effects after

intervention.

   To eliminate the potential effects of differences other than patient knowledge between

simulated patients A and B, we matched simulated patients A and B, instructed them to report

the same chief complaint; and randomly assigned the roles of A and B and the sequence of

their visits. If these measures were effective, then simulated patients A and B should receive

the same treatment prior to the information intervention. We can track this by checking to see

whether the physician performed the same actions in both types of patient prior to the

information intervention. Panel A shows that there are indeed no significant differences in

physician behavior prior to the information intervention.

   After simulated patient A’s intervention, however, there are some significant differences in

the way that physicians behave towards the two groups of patients, as is shown in Panel B.

For example, row (3) of Panel B shows that Type A patients received voluntary explanations

of potential drug side effects from physicians 6% of the time, whereas Type B patients were

                                               26
never given such explanations. However, patient knowledge seems to have a negative effect

on the physicians’ attitude, which is reflected in a lower probability of the physician

responding politely after being thanked. The bottom row of Panel B shows a 20 percentage

point difference in the probability of a polite response between Type A (57%) and Type B

patients (73%).

   As discussed above, our simulated patients were asked to rate the physicians after the

outpatient visit. This section of our study may have the least external validity in that our

patients knew that they were not sick, and that they were participating in a study of physician

behavior. Hence, their situation was quite different from that of a standard patient. Still,

like other similarly situated patients, they brought with them some expectations about how a

physician should treat them, and it is presumably with reference to these expectations that they

formed their subjective opinions of physician quality.

   Note that if the simulated patients understood that the point of the experiment was to

assess antibiotic abuse, then the fact that a physician improperly prescribed antibiotics should

have caused them to lower their opinion of his or her professional competence.              An

experimental effect of this type would cause them to evaluate the doctors they saw while in the

role of patient B more harshly, since physicians were much more likely to improperly

prescribe antibiotics in experimental condition B. Thus, if such an experimental effect was

the only source of differences in physician evaluations, we might expect that patient B’s would

be less satisfied than patient A’s on average.

   Panel C summarizes the ratings that simulated patients give physicians. The summary

statistics in the first two columns show that physicians audited while the simulated patient was

                                                 27
in role A received lower ratings on average. However, only the differences in the summary

measure of whether the patient would be willing to recommend the physician to his/her own

parents are statistically significant. This result is consistent with previous research that has

suggested that the “recommendation question” is a more sensitive measure of patient

satisfaction (Cheng, Yang and Chiang, 2003).

Differences Between Chief and Attending Physicians

   Table IV explores differences in the effect of patient knowledge on the antibiotic

prescribing patterns of chief and attending physicians. Columns (1), (3) and (5) present OLS

estimates from the model with hospital fixed effects; columns (2), (4) and (6) present estimates

from the model with hospital fixed effects and patient fixed effects.

   The differences between the effects of patient knowledge on chief physicians and

attending physicians are reflected in the coefficients on the interaction term

RoleAijk*Attendingj in columns (5) and (6). None of the coefficients are significantly

different than zero. Overall, Table IV suggests that patient knowledge has little differential

effect on chief and attending physicians with regard to health care utilization.

   Table V illustrates the effects of patient knowledge on service quality by chief physicians

and attending physicians. The main effects in columns (3) and (4) show that patients are

more satisfied with chief physicians than with attending physicians on average. One

indicator of lower quality is that attending physicians are much less likely to give patients any

instructions about drug usage. In row (3) of Panel B, the estimates from our preferred model

show that, given that the physician prescribes medication, patient knowledge increases the

probability that a chief physician will voluntarily inform the patient about possible side effects

                                               28
by 24 percentage points.

   The probability that an attending physician will offer such information is not affected.

Hence, all of the increase in the probability of being given information about side effects is

accounted for by the behavior of chief physicians.




VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


   We use the audit study method to examine the role physicians plays in inducing

inappropriate use of antibiotics in China. Our results are of interest for several reasons.

First, they demonstrate the feasibility and power of audit studies as a method for measuring

induced demand. Our results provide unambiguous evidence that physicians in China often

prescribe antibiotics when they are unwarranted; and that they tend to prescribe more

expensive rather than less expensive antibiotics. They are also unlikely to instruct patients

about the proper use of antibiotics, or to warn them about side effects, although chief

physicians are somewhat better than attending physicians in this regard.

   Our study focuses on the supply side rather than the demand side. It is certainly possible

that patients demand inappropriate medications, or abuse the medications that they receive.

However, the rates of doctor initiated antibiotic use we uncovered in our first audit study

closely mirrors the rates of antibiotic use found in other Chinese studies. This finding

suggests that doctor initiated antibiotic use may well explain the high Chinese rates of

antibiotic abuse.

   In a second contribution we show that having patients demonstrate knowledge of

appropriate antibiotic use can dramatically reduce the abuse of these powerful medications.

                                               29
Is educating patients and encouraging them to speak up a public policy that could be brought

“to scale”? We show that from an individual patient’s point of view, there are costs and

benefits of challenging physicians by demonstrating knowledge. On the positive side, these

patients are more likely to be given additional information about possible side effects, and they

are less likely to be sold expensive medications that are unlikely to be efficacious. On the

negative side, there is a deterioration in the quality of their interactions with the physician. It

is possible that alternative interventions, such as placing posters about inappropriate antibiotic

use and possible side effects in doctor’s examining rooms, might have a more positive effect.

   While our findings provide striking evidence about the extent of induced demand for

antibiotics in China, we caution against drawing overly strong conclusions from our study.

Audit studies have important advantages over other approaches to investigating induced

demand in terms of separating supply and demand effects. However, our results are based on

a small sample of doctors, in a small number of locations. Therefore, it will be important to

assess the generalizabilitiy of our findings in other settings and with larger samples. Future

research could also be directed at whether alternative interventions could be equally or more

effective in reducing antibiotic abuse.




                                                30
                   APPENDIX I: FIELD EXPERIMENT PROTOCOL

                                       I. INTRODUATION
   Two audit studies are described in this protocol. Both studies were conducted during the
flu season. The first was conducted in a large city and one rural county from January 2008 to
March 2008, and in a second city in January 2009. The purpose of this first experiment was
to measure antibiotic prescription rates for symptoms resembling a simple cold in the three
areas. The second audit study was conducted in one of the large cities between November
2008 and February 2009. The purpose of this audit study was to conduct an experiment
examining the effect of patient knowledge on physician prescribing patterns and physician
behavior.
   The basic design of an audit study involves sending testers who follow a prescribed script
to the people who are being audited. All of our testers presented with a set of vague
cold/flu-like symptoms which are described in the script appended to this protocol. They did
not ask for antibiotics or any other particular treatment. In the second audit study, we sent
matched pairs of testers to visit the same physician, with a short time interval between their
audits. This pair followed the same transcript as in the previous audit except that following the
physical examination, patient A said “I learned from the internet that simple flu/cold patients
should not take antibiotics” while patient B said nothing. Thus, A represented a well-informed
patient and B a less-informed one. Note that whether the first or second patient played A or B
was randomly assigned. Prescriptions and evaluation forms are collected after the audits.
   Sections II and III describe the way in which hospitals and students were selected. Section
IV describes how students were trained to play the role of a simulated patient. The fifth and
sixth sections discuss physician-visiting procedures. Section VII provides transcripts of the
physician visits. Section VIII summarizes criteria for discarding observations, if necessary.
Section IX describes how testers were asked to evaluate their visits. Lastly, Section X
describes how we collected further data about the medicines prescribed.


                                   II. HOSPITAL SELECTION
   All hospitals selected were large general public hospitals with more than 800 beds in cities,

                                               31
or with more than 400 beds in the rural area, excluding traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)
institutions. We restrict our sample to large general public hospitals because in China, most
outpatient visits take place in public general hospitals rather than in clinics; hospital outpatient
visits are the analogue of visits to primary care physician’s offices in the U.S. (Ministry of
Health of the People's Republic of China 2009).
      Specifically, we selected hospitals according to the following procedure. In the two cities,
we obtained the list of all large general public hospitals with more than 800 beds from local
Health Department statistics. We randomly chose nine large general public hospitals in City 1
and eight in City 2. In the rural area, we randomly chose 52 general public hospitals with
more than 400 beds.


                                     III. STUDENT SELECTION
Experiment 1
      We recruited students by advertising in collegiate online forums one month before the
recruitment (i.e. BBS10), offering a monetary compensation of 40 yuan per hour in rural
settings or 60 yuan per hour in city settings. Students who responded were interviewed for
suitability regarding time commitment. Specifically, we told them that they would visit
approximately 8 hospitals as well as partake in some pre-experiment training and
post-experiment surveying.
      Due to time and budget constraints in different areas, we recruited 39 simulated patients
who were college students between 18 and 22 years. Specifically, we recruited 10 simulated
patients in the first city. Each of the 10 students was assigned 10 hospital visits, resulting in
100 observations; we recruited 8 simulated patients in the second city, and each of the 8
students was assigned 8 hospital visits. However, there were two cases that were not usable: In
one the student went to the wrong hospital. In the second, the student went to an Emergency
department rather than to a Department of Respiratory Diseases or Department of Internal
Medicine. All students had been instructed to go to the Department of Respiratory Diseases (or
in the absence of such a department, the Department of Internal Medicine) because that is


10
     Bulletin board system.
                                                 32
where most non-urgent cases are seen.
    Finally, we recruited 19 simulated patients in the rural area. Nine students were each
assigned three hospital visits and the remaining 10 students were each assigned four hospital
visits, resulting in a total of 67 visits. The total number of visits in the three sample areas was
229 (see Table A. I). We chose more hospitals (52) because rural hospitals are not as busy so
that multiple students reporting the same symptoms would be likely to stand out. We chose
more students because the hospitals are far apart in rural areas so that it would not be practical
to have the same student visit many hospitals.
Experiment 2
    For this experiment, the procedures for student selection were exactly the same as those of
experiment 1. Specifically, we recruited another eight college students, four males and four
females, from City 1 as simulated patients. The students were matched by gender, height and
weight into 4 fixed pairs. Each of the four pairs visited 16 physicians, resulting in 64 pairs of
visits and 128 observations in total. In order to investigate differences between chief and
attending physicians, around two thirds of pairs (48 pairs) visited attending physicians while
the rest pairs (16 pairs) visited chief physicians.


                                  IV. STUDENT TRAINING
    Simulated patients underwent nine hours of group instruction and individual practice,
during which they learned the goal of the audit study, how to conduct the study, etc. The
training process was organized by Dr. Wanchuan Lin, Dr. Wei Zhang and research fellow
Guoming Shi. As a graduate student in medical school, Guoming Shi is familiar with the
Chinese hospital system. The training process progressed as follows:
     1. The students were gathered in a room.
     2. The students were asked to sign a pledge of confidentiality.
     3. The research fellow explained the purpose of the study to the students.
     4. Students were given voice recorders and instructed how to operate them. This was
         done in order to ensure procedural accuracy regarding students following the
         transcript during practice sessions.
     5. Students were next instructed to read and memorize the distributed transcripts. The
                                                 33
   transcripts included the patient’s chief complaints, and potential doctor responses.
    a) Transcripts are explained in further details in Section VI.
    b) Students were asked to give the chief complaint at a normal speech rate of
        around 22 seconds so that they did not speak either too quickly or too slowly.
6. Students were separated into pairs and instructed to practice the memorized
   transcripts via role-play (i.e. one student plays the role of the “physician” while the
   other plays the role of the “patient”).
7. Each student then practiced the script with either of the two principle investigators,
   Dr. Wanchuan Lin and Dr. Wei Zhang. Each student practiced individually with the
   principle investigator, isolated from the other students. This was done as a check on
   whether the student had memorized the entire transcript and could answer patient
   evaluation questions successfully.
8. To ensure that simulated patients were well trained, after the group instruction and
   individual practice, simulated patients tested the protocol five times in out-of-sample
   hospitals before the actual implementation of the first audit study. Each visit was
   recorded using the concealed voice recorder.
9. Students were given the patient evaluation questionnaire (see Section IX) and were
   told to memorize these questions and pay attention to them when visiting physicians.
10. Research assistant and the principle investigators then worked together to analyze the
   recordings of the visits in order to determine whether the standards of the experiment
   had been met. Conditions of analysis included:
    a) Faithfulness in adhering to the transcript.
    b) Quantification of speech rate.
11. Check to ensure completion of the patient evaluation questionnaires (please see
   Section IX). Students who turned in incomplete questionnaires were reminded to pay
   attention to the questions during their future experimental visits.
12. Neither the names of the hospitals nor the names of the audited physicians were
   recorded at any time, and the audio tapes were destroyed after they had been reviewed
   by the principal investigators as described above.

                                             34
          Students who did not perform adequately were asked to redo the in-field training.


             V. PHYSICIAN-VISITING PROCEDURES IN EXPERIMENT 1
     This section aims to summarize the simulated patients’ physician visits, beginning with the
patient registration process (i.e. which department of the hospital to visit and the patient’s
request for a physician) and ending with the termination of the examination (i.e. the writing of
a prescription and the physician’s goodbye). Detailed transcripts and patient evaluations can
be found in Section VII and Section IX.
The Registration Process
     All of the simulated patients were instructed to go to the Department of Respiratory
Diseases, or in the absence of such a department, the Department of Internal Medicine.
     In experiment 1, all of the simulated patients asked for an attending physician. The
registration staff at the hospital assigned a physician after the simulated patients requested to
see an attending physician in the Department of Respiratory Diseases (or in the absence of
such a department, the Department of Internal Medicine). Please see transcription 1 (in
Section VII) for further details.
     Following the registration process, the visit followed the steps shown in the text as Figure
I.


            VI. PHYSICIAN-VISITING PROCEDURES IN EXPERIMENT 2
     The only difference between experiment 1 and experiment 2 is in the Registration Process
and Physical examination (Please refer to Figure I).
Registration Process
      In experiment 1, all of the simulated patients asked for an attending physician. In
experiment 2, however, simulated patients were told before visiting whether they should ask
for a chief physician or an attending physician.
Physical Examination
     In experiment 1, during the physical examination, simulated students say nothing about
antibiotics; in experiment 2, when physicians are performing physical examinations, simulated
patient A says “I learned from the internet that simple flu/cold patients should not take
                                                35
antibiotics. Is that correct?” while simulated patient B says nothing.
   Visiting orders among these four pairs were determined before doing the experiment. Each
pair individually decided on four days in which both students were free. Students visited 4
hospitals per day, with a total of 16 pair-visit or 32 individual visits. No sample hospital was
visited by a pair more than once in three weeks.
   Roles and the order in which each role-playing patient visited the physician were
randomized in every instance. Before going to the hospital, the simulated patients were given a
sheet with Table II, containing all the information about roles, the order of visits, etc.
Specifically, the Case column represents the case number. The Date column represents the
date on which the case took place. The Student ID column represents which pair of students
executed any given case. The column marked “Random Variable 1” represents a random
number generated for the purpose of assigning a student to role A or B. The Roles column
shows the role assigned. “Random Variable 2” shows a random number generated for
assigning the order of visits (whether A or B goes first). The Sequence column shows the
sequence of visits that was assigned. The Random Variable 3 column shows a random number
generated for assigning chief or attending physician request. The Physician column shows
whether a chief or attending physician was supposed to be requested. The Hospital ID column
shows the hospital assigned. The 16 hospitals in Table A.II were selected, numbered, and
assigned to each pair.
   There were two students in each pair: the first student and the second student. Using the
Excel function “=rand()”, a random number was generated for each simulated patient pair. If
the generated number was less than 0.5 (< 0.5), first student was assigned role A and second
student was assigned role B. Otherwise the first student was assigned role B and second
student was assigned role A. This randomization was repeated for each distinct physician visit.
Similar procedures were used to randomize the sequence of visits and whether they asked for a
chief physician.


                                  VII.THE TRANSCRIPT
   This section provides the transcript of the template for each physician-visit.
Transcript 1 (Registration Process)
                                               36
1. Hello, I don’t feel quite well. How can I register?
2. I want to see a/chief/attending physician. How much does it cost?
3. Where should I go?
4. Thank you.
Transcript 2 (Step 1: Physician Information Collection)
1. Hello, doctor!
2. For the last two days, I’ve been feeling fatigued. I have been having a low grade fever,
   slight dizziness, a sore throat, and a poor appetite. This morning, the symptoms worsened
   so I took my body temperature. It was 99°F.
3. If the doctor asks about the following symptoms: dizziness, fever, throat-ache and poor
   appetite, patients should answer “yes”; if the doctor asks about a cough, simulated patients
   should answer “a little bit”
4. Answer NO if asked the following questions:
             Do you feel nauseous?
             Do you have any phlegm?
             Do you have any muscle soreness?
             Have you eaten anything bad or unclean recently?
             Are you currently taking any medications?
             Do you have medicine at home?
             Can you think of anything that might have induced your symptoms?
5. Answer “I’m not certain”/ “I don’t know” when asked questions you are not sure of.: e.g. Are you
   allergic to any medications?

Transcript 3 (Step 2: Physical Examination)
Doctor: I’ll give you a physical examination/I will now conduct a physical exam.
You: Okay.

Transcript 4 (Step 3: Physician’s Diagnoses and Explanation of Findings)
Doctor: I’ll prescribe […] for you.
You: Okay. (ask the physician for information regarding side effects of the medicine after 3-4
       seconds if the physician does not voluntarily inform you of the side effects).
Transcript 5 (Step 4: Additional Medical Requests for an Absent Sister):
                                                37
You: By the way, doctor, my sister is having similar symptoms. Could you prescribe some
         medicine for her as well?
Doctor: Yes/No.
Transcript 6 (Step 5: Departure)
You: Thank you! (Make sure to bring all notes and prescriptions with you as you leave).
Doctor: (Does the physician respond politely?).


                VIII. CONDITIONS FOR DISCARDING OBSERVATIONS
      The simulated patients did not conduct the survey in one of the selected hospitals.
    1.    The simulated patients did not go to the Department of Respiratory Diseases, or in the
          absence of such a department, the Department of Internal Medicine.
    2.    The simulated patients played the roles incorrectly.       For instance, the patient
          assigned to play A actually played role B or vice versa (Experiment 2 only).
    3.    When the second member of the pair of patients arrived at the hospital, the first
          physician was no longer available (Experiment 2 only).
In practice, situations 3 and 4 did not arise.


                                 IX. PATIENT EVALUATION
    After completing all the audits, simulated patients were asked to evaluate their visit
according to the following questionnaire. Note that when someone goes to the hospital in
China, the doctor will often record information about the visit in a booklet that serves as an
outpatient medical record. Hence, patients are also asked about this booklet below.


Registration Process
1: Was the registration staff polite? Did they include greetings such as “Hello”, “Please”, “You
     are welcome” etc.?
Step 1: Physician Information Collection
(Note, that the only information retained about physicians was their gender, and their
     approximate age).
2: What was the gender of the physician?
                                                 38
           (1) Male       (2) Female
3: What was the approximate age of the physician?
           (1) 20-30       (2)30-40       (3) 40-50     (4) above 50
4A: Was there an outpatient medical record? (If there is, do not fill in any of your own patient
   information, i.e. name, age, etc. The purpose of this question is to determine whether the
   physician is kind enough to fill in the outpatient record on behalf of the patient.)
4B: If there was an outpatient medical record did the physician fill in your name, age etc. for
   you?
5A: Were you interrupted by the physician before you finished your chief complaints?
5B: If yes, how many times did he interrupt?
         (1)1 time     (2) 2 times    (3) 3 times (4) 4 times (5) 5 and above
6: Did the physician ask whether or not you have cough symptoms?
7: Did the physician ask whether or not you have sputum?
Step 2      Physical Examination
8: Did the physician/nurse take your temperature?
9A: Did the physician examine your tonsils?
9B: If yes, did the physician give you some information about the examination
10A: Did the physician use a stethoscope?
10B: If yes, did the physician give you some information about the examination
Step 3      Physicians Diagnose and Explain Findings
11: Did the physician ask you whether you have a history of allergies?
12: Did the physician ask you whether you have cold medicine at home?
13A: Did the physician prescribe medication(s)?
13B: If yes, did the physician take initiative in telling you how to use the medicine? (i.e. before
    meals, after meals, how many times a day, how many pills a time, etc.)
13C: If yes, did the physician take initiative in telling you the side effects of the medicine?
13D: If no, did the physician explain after you asked him/her?
14: Did the physician take initiative in telling you to pay attention to certain things? (i.e. drink
    more, have more rest).
Step 4      Additional Medical Requests for an Absent Sister
                                                 39
15: Was the physician willing to prescribe medication for your “absent sister”?
Step 5      Departure
16: Did the doctor explain what disease you might have?
17: After you said “Thank you, doctor,” did the physician respond to you with polite words
    like “You are welcome”, etc?
Satisfaction Appraisement for Physician (scores)
   Lastly, simulated patients evaluated the service they received from each physician. Service
and degree of satisfaction were rated on a scale of 1 to 5 (low to high).
18: How considerate was your physician during your hospital visit?
(1)extremely inconsiderate (2)not very considerate (3)neutral (4)very considerate (5)
         Extremely considerate
19: How would you rate the medical capability of your doctor?
(1) very bad     (2) bad   (3) neutral     (4) good   (5) very good
20: How respectful was the physician of your opinions during the diagnosing process?
(1)very disrespectful (2)disrespectful (3)neutral (4)respectful (5)very respectful
21: Do you think the physician offered you enough information about your treatment and
  illness?
(1) definitely not enough (2) no (3) neutral (4) yes (5) definitely enough
22: Overall, how was your experience?
(1) extremely bad     (2) very bad       (3) neutral (4) very good (5) extremely good
23: Would you recommend this physician to your parents, given that they presented with the
  same symptoms? (Score between 0 and 10, exclude external factors such as travel
  inconvenience).


                                 X. PRESCRIPTION ANALYSIS
   All the simulated patients were asked to turn their prescriptions over to two research
assistants who were hired by the medical department of Peking University. By analyzing these
prescriptions, the research assistants obtained the following information:
1: The total number of drugs prescribed.
2: Whether antibiotics were prescribed.
                                                 40
3: If yes, the level of antibiotic prescribed where there are 3 levels:
              1) unlimited medicine; 2) limited medicine; 3) specialized medicine.
4: The cost of the drugs prescribed.
5: Whether there were likely to be any adverse interactions between the medicines prescribed?


   Costs were determined as follows. If the physician did not prescribe, then the drug
expenditure was zero. If drugs were prescribed, expenditures were calculated in one of three
ways: In some cases, the cost of the drug(s) was already listed on the prescription, so we could
calculate the drug expenditure directly. If the physician didn’t provide the price information on
the prescription, patients obtained total drug costs from the hospital pharmacy. If we could
not obtain drug prices from the hospital pharmacy, we searched for them either on the website
of the local Price Bureau or through Google or Baidu.
    After being analyzed, the prescriptions were destroyed.




                                                41
                                     REFERENCES
Angelmar, Reinhard, and Philip C. Berman, “Patient Empowerment and Efficient Health
   Outcomes,” in Financing Sustainable Healthcare in Europe: New Approaches for New
   Outcomes, (Helsinki, Finland: The Steering Group, 2007)

Benjamin, Schwartz, Arch G. Mainous, and Marcy, S. Micheal, “Why do Physicians Prescribe
   Antibiotics for Children with Upper Respiratory Tract Infections?,” The Journal of the
   American Medical Association, 279 (1998), 881-882.

Bunker, John P., and Byron Wm. Brown, Jr., “The Physician-Patient as an Informed Consumer
   of Surgical Service,” The New England Journal of Medicine, 290(1974), 1051-1055.

Cars, Hakan, and Anders Hakansson, “To Prescribe-or not to Prescribe-Antibiotics: District
   Physicians’ Habits Vary Greatly, and Are Difficult to Change,” Scandinavian Journal of
   Primary Health Care, 13(1995), 3-7.

Chen, Meiping, “Analysis on the Condition of, Reasons for and Control on Antibiotic Abuse,”
   Jiangsu Health Care Management, 16(2005), 49-50.

Cheng, Shouhsia, Mingchin Yang, and Tungliang Chiang, “Patient Satisfaction with and
   Recommendation of a Hospital: Effects of Interpersonal and Technical Aspects of Hospital
   Care,” International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 15(2003), 345-55.

Dar-Odeh, Najla S., Osama A. Abu-Hammad, Mahmoud K. Al-Omiri, Ameen S. Khraisat, and
   Asem A. Shehabi, “Antibiotic Prescribing Practices by Dentists: A Review,” Therapeutics
   and Clinic Risk Management, 6(2010), 301-306.

Day, Lisa, “Industry Gifts to Healthcare Providers: Are the Concerns Serious?,” American
   Association of Critical-Care Nurses, 15(2006), 510-513.

Dong, Hengjin, Lennart Bogg, Keli Wang, Clas Rehnberg, and Vinod Diwan, “A Description
   of Outpatient Drug Use in Rural China: Evidence of Differences due to Insurance
   Coverage,” The International Journal of Health Planning and Management 14(1999),
   41-56.

Dranove, David, “Pricing by Non-Profit Institutions: The Case of Hospital
   Cost-Shifting,”Journal of Health Economics, 7(1988), 47-57.

Dranove, David, and Paul Wehner, “Physician-Induced Demand for Childbirths,” Journal of
   Health Economics, 13(1994), 61–73.

Eggleston, Karen, Jian Wang, and Keqin Rao, “From Plan to Market in the Health
   Sector?--China’s Experience,” Journal of Asian Economics, 19(2008), 400–412.
                                             42
Eggleston, Karen, Ling Li, and Qingyue Meng, Magnus Lindelow, and Adam Wagstaffd,
   “Health Service Delivery in China: A Literature Review,” Health Economics, 17(2008),
   149-165.

Eggleston, Karen, Yu-Chu Shen, Joseph Lau, Christopher H. Schmid, and Jia Chan, “Hospital
   Ownership and Quality of Care: What Explains the Different Results in the Literature?,”
   Health Economics, 17(2008), 1345-1362.

Fuchs, Victor R., "The Supply of Surgeons and the Demand for Operations," The Journal of
   Human Resources, 13(1978), 35-56.

Gong, Aiqun, “The Reasons for and Consequences of Antibiotic Abuse,” Heilongjiang
   Medicine Journal, 22 (2009), 3.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Maria Owings, “Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean Section
   Delivery,” RAND Journal of Economics, 27(1996), 99–123.

Guo, Dongmei, “Analysis of Current Situation of the Anti-Infective Market in China,” China
   Pharmacy, 9(2004), 528-531.

Hay, Joel, and Michael J. Leahy, “Physician-Induced Demand: An Empirical Analysis of the
   Consumer Information Gap,” Journal of Health Economics, 1(1982), 231-244.

Heaton, Paul, and Eric Helland, “Does Treatment Respond to Reimbursement Rates?
   Evidence from Trauma Care,” RAND Working Paper No. WR-648-ICJ, 2009.

Heckman, James J., and Peter Siegelman, “The Urban Institute Audit Studies: Their Methods
   and Findings, ” in Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement of Discrimination in
   America, Michael Fix and Raymond Struyk, ed. (Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press,
   1993)

Hew, Chee, Healthcare in China: Towards Greater Access, Efficiency and Quality, (New York,
   NY: IBM Business Consulting Services, Inc., 2006)

Hollon, Matthew F., Eric B. Larson., Thomas D. Koepsell, and, Ann E. Downer,
   “Direct-to-Consumer Marketing of Osteoporosis Drugs and Bone Densitometry,” The
   Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 37 (2003), 976-981.

Hsiao, Willlliam C., and Yuanli Liu, “Economic Reform and Health —Lessons from China,”
   The New England Journal of Medicine, 335(1996), 430-432.

Hu, Suping., Xiuheng Liu, and Yan Peng, “Assessment of Antibiotic Prescription in
   Hospitalized Patients at a Chinese University Hospital,” Journal of Infection, 46 (2003),
                                             43
   161-163.

Jha Ashish K., Douglas O. Staiger, Lucas F. Lee, and Amitabh Chandra, “Do Race-Specific
    Models Explain Disparities in Treatments after Acute Myocardial Infarction?,” American
    Heart Journal, 153(2007), 785–791.

John, Pitts, and Stephen Vincent “What Influences Doctors' Prescribing? Sore Throats
   Revisited,” The Journal of the Royal College of General Practitioners, 39 (1989), 65-66.

Kravitz, Richard L., “Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of Prescription Drugs: Implications for
   the Patient-Physician Relationship,” The Journal of the American Medical Association,
   284 (2000), 2240-2245.

Kravitz, Richard L., Ronald M. Epstein, Mitchell D. Feldman, Carol E. Franz, Rahman Azari,
       Michael S. Wilkes, Ladson Hinton, and Peter Franks. “Influence of Patients’ Requests
       for Directly Advertised Antidepressants: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” Journal of
       the American Medical Association, 293(2005), 1995-2002.

Lizuka, “Experts’ Agency Problems: Evidence from the Prescription Drug Market in Japan,”
   RAND Journal of Economics, 38(2007), 844-862

Maguire, Phyllis, “How Direct-to-Consumer Advertising is Putting the Squeeze on
  Physicians,” American College of Physicians-Annals of Internal Medicine, 19(1999),
  1-24.

McGuire Thomas G., “Physician agency”, Handbook of Health Economics, 1(2000), 461-536

McGuire, Thomas G., and Mark V. Pauly, “Physician Response to Fee Changes with Multiple
  Payers,” Journal of Health Economics, 10(1991), 385-410.

Mintzes, Barbara, Morris L. Barer, Richard L. Kravitz, Ken Bassett, Joel Lexchin, Arminée
   Kazanjian, Robert G. Evans, Richard Pan and Stephen A. Marion, “How Does
   Direct-to-Consumer Advertising (DTCA) Affect Prescribing? A Survey in Primary Care
   Environments with and without Legal DTCA,” Canadian Medical Association Journal,
   169 (2003), 405-412

Pager, Devah, “The Use of Field Experiments for Studies of Employment Discrimination:
   Contributions, Critiques, and Directions for the Future,” The Annals of the American
   Academy of Political and Social Science, 609 (2007), 104-133.

Pauly, Mark.V., The Doctor and His Workshops, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,1980)

Peng Bi, Shilu Tong, Ken Donald, Kevin Parton, and Jack Hobbs, “Southern Oscillation Index
   and Transmission of the Barmah Forest Virus Infection in Queensland, Australia,”
                                             44
   Epidemiology Community Health, 54(2000), 69-70.

Phelps, Charles E., “Bug/drug Resistance: Sometimes Less Is More,” Medical Care, 27 (1989),
   194-203.

Reshma, Jagsi, “Conflicts of Interest and the Physician-Patient Relationship in the Era of
   Direct-to-Patient Advertising,” Journal of Clinical Oncology, 25 (2007), 902-905.

Rice, Thomas H., “The Impact of Changing Medicare Reimbursement Rates on
   Physician-Induced Demand,” Medical Care, 21(1983), 803-815.

Roumie, Christianne L., Natasha B. Halasa, Carlos G. Grijalva, Kathryn M. Edwards, Yuwei
   Zhu, Robert S. Dittus, and Marie R. Griffin, “Trends in Antibiotic Prescribing for Adults in
   the United States—1995 to 2002,” Journal of General Internal Medicine, 20 (2005),
   697-702.

Sun, Qiang, Michael A. Santoro, Qingyue Meng, Caitlin Liu, and Karen Eggleston
   “Pharmaceutical Policy in China,” Drug Policy, 2008, 1042-1050.

Sun, Qiang, Michael A. Santoro, Qingyue Meng, Caitlin Liu, and Karen Eggleston, “Family
   Self-Medication and Antibiotics Abuse for Children and Juveniles in a Chinese City,”
   Health Affairs, 27 (2008), 1042-1050.

Sun, Xiaoyun, Sukhan Jackson, Gordon A. Carmichael, and Adrian C. Sleigh, “Prescribing
   Behavior of Village Doctors under China's New Cooperative Medical Scheme,” Social
   Science and Medicine, 68(2009), 1775-1779.

Sutherland, Jason M., Elliott S. Fisher, and Jonathan S. Skinner, “Getting Past Denial — The
   High Cost of Health Care in the United States,” The New England Journal of Medicine,
   361(2009), 1227-1230.

Szefler, Stanley J., Herman Mitchell, Christine A. Sorkness, Peter J. Gergen, George T.
   O’Connor, Wayne J. Morgan, Meyer Kattan, Jacqueline A. Pongracic, Stephen J. Teach,
   Gordon R. Bloomberg, Peyton A. Eggleston, Rebecca S. Gruchalla, Carolyn M. Kercsmar,
   Andrew H. Liu, Jeremy J. Wildfi re, Matthew D. Curry, and William W. Busse.
   “Management of Asthma Based on Exhaled Nitric Oxide In Addition To Guideline-Based
   Treatment for Inner-City Adolescents and Young Adults: A Randomised Controlled Trial,”
   The Lancet, 372(2008), 1065–72.

Weissman, Joel S., Robert W. Dubois, Thomas Bodenheimer, Elaine Batchlor, Marianne
   Laouri, Jerry Avorn, John E. Calfee, and Martin T. Gahart, “Consumers’ Reports on the
   Health Effects of Direct-to-Consumer Drug Advertising,” Health Affairs, 3(2003), 82-95.

Wennberg, John, and Alan Gittelsohn, “Small Area Variations in Health Care Delivery,”
                                              45
   American Association for the Advancement of Science, 182, (1973), 1102-1108.

Xiao,Yonghong, Fang Hou, Jin Wang, Qing Yan, Ziyong Sun, Xiaoju, Lu, Li Yang, and
   Yingdong, Zheng, “An Investigation into Socio-Economic Impact of Adverse Drug
   Reactions of Antibacterial Agent Irrational Use,” Chinese Health Economics, 29 (2010),
   94-96.

Yao, Kaihu, and Yonghong Yang, “Streptococcus Pneumoniae Diseases in Chinese Children:
   Past, Present and Future,” Vaccine, 16 (2008), 4425-4433.

Yip, Winnie C., Wang, Hong, and Yuanli Liu, “Determinants of Patient Choice of Medical
   Provider: a Case Study in Rural China,” Health Policy Planning, 13(1998), 311-322.

Yip, Winnie, and William C. Hsiao, “The Chinese Health System at a Crossroads,” Health
   Affairs, 27 (2008), 460-468.

Zhang, Ruifang, Karen Eggleston, Rotimi Vincent, and Richard J. Zeckhauser, “Antibiotic
   Resistance as a Global Threat: Evidence from China, Kuwait and the United States,”
   Global Health, 2 (2006), 1-14.

Zhang, Wenshuang, Xuzhuang Shen, Yi Wang, Yuan Chen, Min Huang, Qiyi Zeng, Maohuai
   Fan, Ulf Bergman, and Yonghong Yang, “Outpatient Antibiotic Use and Assessment of
   Antibiotic Guidelines in Chinese Children’s Hospitals,” European Journal of Clinical
   Pharmacology, 64(2008), 821-828.




                                            46
Figure I : Field Experiment Protocol




                 47
                                                   TABLE I
                     VARIATIONS IN BASELINE PRESCRIPTION RATES BY STUDY AREA
                                                               Urban areas
                                                       All                                                     Rural area
                                                               City 1   City 2 Avg.
                                                       (1)     (2)      (3)    (4)                             (5)
Panel A. Prescription rates
Prescription rate                                      0.90    0.96     0.82   0.91                            0.88
                                                       [0.30]  [0.20]   [0.39] [0.29]                          [0.33]
Unconditional prescription rate for antibiotics        0.62    0.64     0.68   0.65***                         0.55
                                                       [0.49]  [0.48]   [0.47] [0.48]                          [0.50]
Prescription rate for antibiotics                      0.69    0.67     0.82   0.72**                          0.63
 conditional on prescription                           [0.46]  [0.47]   [0.39] [0.45]                          [0.49]
Panel B. Types of drugs (conditional on prescription)
Number of drugs prescribed                             2.69    2.92     2.57   2.80***                         2.42
                                                       [0.94]  [1.05]   [0.70] [0.96]                          [0.83]
One type of drug prescribed                            0.06    0.06     0.04   0.05                            0.07
                                                       [0.23]  [0.24]   [0.20] [0.23]                          [0.25]
Two types of drugs prescribed                          0.40    0.27     0.43   0.33***                         0.58
                                                       [0.49]  [0.45]   [0.50] [0.47]                          [0.50]
Three or more types of drugs prescribed                0.54    0.67     0.53   0.62***                         0.36
                                                       [0.50]  [0.47]   [0.50] [0.49]                          [0.48]
Three most commonly prescribed drugs in this study:
Prescription rate for cephalosporin                    0.25    0.19     0.35   0.24                            0.25
                                                       [0.43]  [0.39]   [0.48] [0.43]                          [0.44]
Prescription rate for chaihu                           0.17    0.19     0.27   0.22***                         0.05
                                                       [0.38]  [0.39]   [0.45] [0.41]                          [0.22]
Prescription rate for penicillin                       0.14    0.16     0.10   0.14                            0.14
                                                       [0.34]  [0.36]   [0.3]  [0.34]                          [0.35]
Panel C. Drug expenditures
Physician prescribes drug for absent sister            0.50    0.85     0.47   0.70***                         N/A
                                                       [0.50]  [0.36]   [0.50] [0.46]
Total drug expenditure in RMB (unconditional)          92.79   145.45 58.00    111.98***                       46.39
                                                       [88.69] [99.18] [40.05] [92.05]                         [58.43]
Total drug expenditure in RMB (conditional)            103.15  151.51 70.51    123.41***                       52.68
                                                       [87.61] [96.55] [32.51] [89.02]                         [59.57]
Unconditional drug expenditure per person (RMB)        66.87   84.18    50.68  72.56***                        52.68
                                                       [54.05] [55.62] [30.10] [50.79]                         [59.57]
Conditional drug expenditure per person (RMB)          66.87   84.18    50.68  72.56***                        52.68
                                                       [54.05] [55.62] [30.10] [50.79]                         [59.57]
Number of hospitals                                    83      23       8      31                              52
Number of observations                                 229     100      62     162                             67
Notes. Standard deviations are in brackets. 5. (***, **, *) denote that the difference between urban and rural areas is
significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. If the physician does not prescribe for simulated patient’s absent
sister, drug expenditure per person equals total drug expenditure; if the physician prescribes for simulated patient’s
absent sister, drug expenditure per person equals total drug expenditure divided by two.




                                                            48
                                                     TABLE II
                              EFFECTS OF PATIENT KNOWLEDGE ON HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION
                                                         Average Average
                                                                                  Coefficient on Role Aijk
                                                         for A   for B
Dependent variable                                       (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)
Panel A. Prescription rates
Prescription rate                                                        0.83***     0.97          -0.14***    -0.13***     -0.13**        -0.12**
                                                                                                     [0.05]     [0.05]       [0.05]         [0.05]
Prescription rate for antibiotics (unconditional on prescription)        0.39***     0.64          -0.25***    -0.23***     -0.23***      -0.22***
                                                                                                     [0.09]     [0.09]       [0.08]         [0.08]
Prescription rate for antibiotics (conditional on prescription)          0.47**      0.66           -0.19**     -0.19*      -0.18**         -0.17*
                                                                                                     [0.09]     [0.09]       [0.09]         [0.09]
Panel B. Types of drugs (conditional on prescription)
Number of drugs prescribed                                               2.57        2.84           -0.27          -0.28         -0.26        -0.24
                                                                                                    [0.17]         [0.17]        [0.16]       [0.16]
One type of drug prescribed                                              0.06        0.06           -0.01          -0.01          0.00         0.00
                                                                                                    [0.05]         [0.05]        [0.05]       [0.05]
Two types of drugs prescribed                                            0.47**      0.29           0.18**         0.19**        0.18**       0.15*
                                                                                                    [0.09]         [0.09]        [0.08]       [0.09]
Three or more types of drugs prescribed                                  0.47*       0.65           -0.17*         -0.18*       -0.18**       -0.15*
                                                                                                    [0.09]         [0.09]        [0.08]       [0.09]
Prescription for cephalosporin                                           0.08*       0.19           -0.12*         -0.11*        -0.11*       -0.12*
                                                                                                    [0.06]         [0.07]        [0.06]       [0.06]
Prescription for chaihu                                                  0.26        0.18            0.09           0.07           0.06        0.05
                                                                                                    [0.08]         [0.08]        [0.06]       [0.06]
Prescription for penicillin                                              0.11        0.18            -0.06         -0.08          -0.08        -0.07
                                                                                                    [0.07]         [0.07]        [0.06]       [0.06]
Panel C. Drug expenditures
Physician prescribed drug on behalf of an absent sister                  0.75        0.81             -0.06        -0.04       -0.03    -0.02
                                                                                                      [0.07]      [0.07]      [0.06]    [0.06]
Total drug expenditure in RMB (unconditional on prescription)            105.84** 145.81            -39.97**    -36.57**    -36.89** -36.25**
                                                                                                     [17.07]     [17.41]     [15.46]   [15.89]
Total drug expenditure in RMB (conditional on prescription)              127.80      150.51          -22.71       -18.97      -16.24   -15.24
                                                                                                     [17.44]     [17.93]     [14.13]   [14.53]
Unconditional drug expenditure per person (RMB)                          55.77*** 83.74            -27.96***   -27.64***    -27.61*** -28.26***
                                                                                                      [9.37]      [9.67]      [8.91]    [9.12]
Conditional drug expenditure per person (RMB)                            67.35**     86.44          -19.09**     -16.40*     -14.91* -15.05*
                                                                                                      [9.62]      [9.81]      [8.19]    [8.35]
Control variables                                                                                              √            √             √
Hospital fixed effects                                                                                                      √             √
Patient fixed effects                                                                                                                     √
Notes. (***, **, *) denote that the difference between simulated patients A and B or the coefficient on "RoleAijk" is significant at the 1%, 5%




                                                                       49
                                                                TABLE III
      EFFECTS OF PATIENT KNOWLEDGE ON SERVICE QUALITY, BEFORE AND AFTER INFORMATION INTERVETION
                                                                         Average Average
                                                                         for       for              Coefficient on Role Aijk
                                                                         Patient A Patient B
Dependent variable                                                       (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)        (5)        (6)
Panel A. Before Intervention
Physician asks patient about coughing                                    0.75      0.78      -0.03   -0.03      -0.03      0.00
                                                                                             [0.08]  [0.08]     [0.07]     [0.07]
Physician asks patient about sputum                                       0.38     0.39      -0.02   0.01       0.00       0.00
                                                                                             [0.09]  [0.09]     [0.08]     [0.08]
Physician/nurse takes patient's temperature                              0.12      0.12      0.00    0.01       0.01       0.00
                                                                                             [0.06]  [0.06]     [0.06]     [0.06]
Physician checks tonsils                                                  0.95     0.92      0.03    0.04       0.03       0.04
                                                                                             [0.04]  [0.04]     [0.04]     [0.04]
Physician uses a stethoscope                                              0.39     0.41      -0.02   -0.01      -0.01      -0.02
                                                                                             [0.09]  [0.08]     [0.07]     [0.08]
Panel B. After Intervention (conditional on prescription)
Physician asks about allergies                                           0.68      0.73      -0.05   -0.04      -0.05      -0.02
                                                                                             [0.09]  [0.08]     [0.08]     [0.07]
Physician instructs on drug usage                                         0.38     0.35      0.02    0.03       0.01       0.03
                                                                                             [0.09]  [0.09]     [0.09]     [0.08]
Physician voluntarily informs patient of drug side effects               0.06*     0.00      0.06*   0.05*      0.06*      0.06**
                                                                                             [0.03]  [0.03]     [0.03]     [0.03]
Physician voluntarily suggests drinking more water, etc.                 0.45      0.58      -0.12   -0.11      -0.11      -0.10
                                                                                             [0.09]  [0.09]     [0.09]     [0.09]
Physician responds politely after being thanked                          0.57*     0.73      -0.16*  -0.15*     -0.15*     -0.14*
                                                                                             [0.09]  [0.08]     [0.08]     [0.08]
Panel C. Ratings of Service Evaluation (after outpatient visit)
Degree of care from the physician (1-5: lowest-highest)                   3.34     3.52      -0.18   -0.15      -0.13      -0.07
                                                                                             [0.23]  [0.23]     [0.23]     [0.23]
Physician's professional competency (1-5: lowest-highest)                 3.39     3.55      -0.16   -0.14      -0.13      -0.09
                                                                                             [0.20]  [0.21]     [0.21]     [0.21]
Degree of respect from the physician (1-5: lowest-highest)                3.30     3.57      -0.27   -0.29      -0.29      -0.19
                                                                                             [0.22]  [0.21]     [0.20]     [0.19]
Patient's satisfaction with information provided (1-5: lowest-highest)   3.07      3.32      -0.25   -0.21      -0.20      -0.12
                                                                                             [0.25]  [0.24]     [0.24]     [0.24]
Patient's satisfaction with the visit (1-5: lowest-highest)               3.20     3.48      -0.27   -0.24      -0.22      -0.15
                                                                                             [0.22]  [0.22]     [0.21]     [0.21]
Patient's willingness to recommend the physician to his/her own
                                                                         5.36*     6.36      -1.00*  -0.93*     -0.88*     -0.69
parents (0-10: will not recommend-high recommendation)
                                                                                             [0.51]  [0.50]     [0.50]     [0.48]
Control variables                                                                                    √          √          √
Hospital fixed effects                                                                                          √          √
Patient fixed effects                                                                                                      √
Notes. (***, **, *) denote that the difference between simulated patients A and B or the coefficient on "Role Aijk" is significant at the 1%, 5% and
10% level, respectively.




                                                                         50
                                                   TABLE IV
                    EFFECTS OF PATIENT KNOWLEDGE ON HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION BY PHYSICIAN TITLE
                                                         Coefficient on Role Coefficient on  Coefficient on Role
                                                         Aijk                  Attendingj    Aijk×Attendingj

Dependent variable                                                       (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)    (5)       (6)
Panel A. Prescription rates
Prescription rate                                                        -0.22**     -0.21**     -0.16*    -0.16*    0.12      0.13
                                                                         [0.10]      [0.09]      [0.09]    [0.09]    [0.11]    [0.11]
Prescription rate for antibiotics (unconditional on prescription)        -0.26       -0.22       -0.06     0.01      0.04      0.00
                                                                         [0.16]      [0.16]      [0.15]    [0.15]    [0.19]    [0.19]
Prescription rate for antibiotics (conditional on prescription)          -0.16       -0.13       0.03      0.08      -0.02     -0.06
                                                                         [0.18]      [0.18]      [0.16]    [0.16]    [0.20]    [0.21]
Panel B. Types of drugs (conditional on prescription)
Types of drugs prescribed                                                -0.05       -0.04       -0.39     -0.33     -0.28     -0.27
                                                                         [0.31]      [0.33]      [0.28]    [0.29]    [0.37]    [0.38]
One type of drug prescribed                                              -0.09       -0.07       -0.07     -0.09     0.12      0.10
                                                                         [0.09]      [0.09]      [0.08]    [0.08]    [0.11]    [0.11]
Two types of drugs prescribed                                            0.12        0.06        0.08      0.08      0.08      0.12
                                                                         [0.17]      [0.18]      [0.15]    [0.16]    [0.20]    [0.21]
Three or more types of drugs prescribed                                  -0.03       0.01        -0.01     0.01      -0.20     -0.22
                                                                         [0.17]      [0.18]      [0.15]    [0.16]    [0.20]    [0.20]
Prescription for cephalosporin                                           -0.10       -0.11       0.11      0.12      -0.01     -0.01
                                                                         [0.12]      [0.13]      [0.11]    [0.11]    [0.14]    [0.14]
Prescription for chaihu                                                  0.00        0.00        0.29***   0.28***   0.07      0.07
                                                                         [0.12]      [0.12]      [0.11]    [0.11]    [0.14]    [0.14]
Prescription for penicillin                                              -0.08       -0.09       0.13      0.15      0.00      0.03
                                                                         [0.12]      [0.12]      [0.10]    [0.11]    [0.13]    [0.14]
Panel C. Drug expenditures
Physician prescribed drug on behalf of an absent sister                  -0.03       -0.04       -0.11     -0.15     0.00      0.02
                                                                         [0.12]      [0.12]      [0.11]    [0.12]    [0.14]    [0.15]
Total drug expenditure in RMB (unconditional on prescription)            -76.26**    -81.33**    -44.44    -43.38    53.59     61.21*
                                                                         [30.20]     [31.20]     [27.97]   [28.79]   [35.40]   [36.57]
Total drug expenditure in RMB (conditional on prescription)              -27.83      -31.43      -6.59     -4.91     15.66     21.63
                                                                         [28.32]     [29.47]     [25.45]   [26.15]   [33.11]   [34.21]
Unconditional drug expenditure per person (RMB)                          -50.23***   -53.13***   -19.87    -16.20    30.80     33.76
                                                                         [17.41]     [17.92]     [16.12]   [16.53]   [20.40]   [21.00]
Drug expenditure per person in RMB (conditional on prescription)         -18.89      -22.29      2.65      6.02      5.38      9.67
                                                                         [16.43]     [16.95]     [14.67]   [15.04]   [19.21]   [19.67]
Control variables                                                        √           √           √         √         √         √
Hospital fixed effects                                                   √           √           √         √         √         √
Patient fixed effects                                                                √                     √                   √




                                                                    51
                                                TABLE V
                     EFFECTS OF PATIENT KNOWLEDGE ON SERVICE QUALITY BY PHYSICIAN TITLE
                                                    Coefficient on Aijk Coefficient on Coefficient on
                                                                         Attendingj    RoleAijk×Attendingj
Dependent variable                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
Physician asks patient about coughing                                 -0.01       -0.02        -0.08      -0.14      -0.02      0.03
                                                                      [0.13]      [0.13]       [0.12]     [0.12]     [0.16]     [0.15]
Physician asks patient about sputum                                   0.09        0.09         -0.19      -0.21      -0.13      -0.12
                                                                      [0.15]      [0.16]       [0.14]     [0.15]     [0.18]     [0.19]
Physician/nurse takes patient's temperature                           -0.02       -0.01        -0.12      -0.16      0.04       0.02
                                                                      [0.11]      [0.11]       [0.10]     [0.10]     [0.13]     [0.13]
Physician checks tonsil                                               -0.02       -0.02        -0.14*     -0.15**    0.06       0.08
                                                                      [0.08]      [0.08]       [0.07]     [0.07]     [0.09]     [0.09]
Physician uses a stethoscope                                          0.17        0.18         -0.48***   -0.49***   -0.25      -0.27
                                                                      [0.14]      [0.15]       [0.13]     [0.14]     [0.17]     [0.17]
Panel B. After Intervention (conditional on prescription)
Physician asks about allergies                                        0.03        0.08         0.12       0.02       -0.11      -0.14
                                                                      [0.16]      [0.14]       [0.14]     [0.12]     [0.18]     [0.16]
Physician instructs on drug usage                                     0.02        0.04         -0.25      0.31**     -0.01      -0.02
                                                                      [0.17]      [0.16]       [0.15]     [0.14]     [0.20]     [0.19]
Physician voluntarily informs patient of drug side effects            0.21***     0.24***      -0.01      -0.01      -0.21***   -0.24***
                                                                      [0.06]      [0.06]       [0.05]     [0.05]     [0.07]     [0.06]
Physician voluntarily suggests drinking more water, etc.              -0.17       -0.18        -0.25      -0.27*     0.08       0.11
                                                                      [0.17]      [0.18]       [0.16]     [0.16]     [0.20]     [0.21]
Physician responds with polite words after being thanked              -0.24       -0.30*       -0.03      -0.04      0.12       0.22
                                                                      [0.16]      [0.16]       [0.15]     [0.14]     [0.19]     [0.19]
Panel C. Service Evaluation (after outpatient visits)
Degree of care from the physician                                     0.05        0.10         -0.74*     -0.87**    -0.24      -0.21
                                                                      [0.49]      [0.47]       [0.43]     [0.42]     [0.55]     [0.54]
Physician's professional competency                                   0.00        -0.02        -0.63      -0.72*     -0.18      -0.08
                                                                      [0.45]      [0.44]       [0.39]     [0.39]     [0.50]     [0.50]
Degree of respect from the physician                                  -0.15       -0.13        -0.66*     -0.83**    -0.18      -0.07
                                                                      [0.44]      [0.41]       [0.38]     [0.36]     [0.49]     [0.46]
Patient's satisfaction with information provided                      -0.12       -0.16        -1.15**    -1.31***   -0.10      0.05
                                                                      [0.51]      [0.50]       [0.45]     [0.44]     [0.58]     [0.57]
Patient's satisfaction with the visit                                 -0.13       -0.16        -1.03**    -1.17***   -0.11      0.00
                                                                      [0.46]      [0.44]       [0.40]     [0.38]     [0.51]     [0.50]
Willingness to recommend the physician to a parent                    -0.35       -0.49        -2.27**    -2.66***   -0.68      -0.26
                                                                      [1.07]      [1.00]       [0.939]    [0.878]    [1.208]    [1.134]
Control variables                                                     √           √            √          √          √          √
Hospital fixed effects                                                √           √            √          √          √          √
Patient fixed effects                                                             √                       √                     √
Note. 1. (***, **, *) denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                     52
                               TABLE A.I.
             STUDENT ASSIGNMENT AND NUMBER OF OBSERVATIONS
                                                                             Rural area: 19
                          City 1: 10 Students          City 2: 8 Students
                                                                               Students

                                                                              9 Students
                                                                              Assigned 3
                                                     8 Students Assigned 8     Hospital
Specific Arrangement   10 Students Assigned 10
                                                     Hospital ( 2 Unusable
                               Hospital
                                                         Observations)        10 Students
                                                                              Assigned 4
                                                                                Hospital

                                                  39 Students in total


                                                                             Rural area:67
                       Beijing: 100 Observations         Nanjing: 62
                                                                             Observations
                                 (10*10)             Observations (8*8-2)
   Obeservation                                                               (9*3+10*4)



                                                229 Observations in total




                                            53
                                                            TABLE A.II.

                             DETERMING THE TOLE AND ORDER OF SIMULATED PATIENTS
                              Random              Random
                     Student                                            Random
                             Variable 1          Variable 2                                                             Hospital ID
                        ID                                            Variable 3 for
Case       Date                  for      Roles for Deciding Sequence                Physicians                            (Pre-
                      (Each                                           Deciding the
                              Deciding               the                                                                Scheduled)
                       Pair)                                           Physicians
                             the Roles           Sequences
        December                                                                       Chief
  1                     1,2    0.137    1=A 2=B     0.211     A First    0.232                                               A
           1st                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                       Chief
  2                     1,2    0.643    1=B 2=A     0.564     B First    0.098                                               B
           1st                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  3                     1,2    0.558    1=B 2=A     0.265     A First    0.595                                               C
           1st                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  4                     1,2    0.605    1=B 2=A     0.948     B First    0.353                                               D
           1st                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  5                     1,2    0.684    1=B 2=A     0.277     A First    0.807                                               E
          2nd                                                                        Physician
        December                                                                       Chief
  6                     1,2    0.109    1=A 2=B     0.118     A First    0.102                                               F
          2nd                                                                        Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  7                     1,2    0.618    1=B 2=A     0.408     A First    0.577                                               G
          2nd                                                                        Physician
        December                                                                       Chief
  8                     1,2    0.061    1=A 2=B     0.722     B First    0.109                                               H
          2nd                                                                        Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  9                     1,2    0.555    1=B 2=A     0.872     B First    0.975                                                I
           4th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                       Chief
 10                     1,2    0.871    1=B 2=A     0.461     A First    0.216                                                J
           4th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 11                     1,2    0.255    1=A 2=B     0.422     A First    0.261                                               K
           4th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                       Chief
 12                     1,2    0.045    1=A 2=B     0.894     B First    0.165                                                L
           4th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 13                     1,2    0.424    1=A 2=B     0.058     A First    0.761                                               M
           6th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 14                     1,2    0.898    1=B 2=A     0.676     B First    0.371                                               N
           6th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 15                     1,2    0.522    1=B 2=A     0.715     B First    0.380                                               O
           6th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 16                     1,2    0.841    1=B 2=A     0.699     B First    0.968                                               P
           6th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  1                     3,4    0.995    3=B 4=A     0.472     A First    0.287                                               A
          27th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  2                     3,4    0.488    3=A 4=B     0.899     B First    0.944                                               B
          27th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  3                     3,4    0.071    3=A 4=B     0.400     A First    0.557                                               C
          27th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  4                     3,4    0.091    3=A 4=B     0.008     A First    0.355                                               D
          27th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                       Chief
  5                     3,4    0.204    3=A 4=B     0.820     B First    0.221                                               E
          29th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  6                     3,4    0.586    3=B 4=A     0.188     A First    0.627                                               F
          29th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  7                     3,4    0.062    3=A 4=B     0.405     A First    0.583                                               G
          29th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  8                     3,4    0.986    3=B 4=A     0.459     A First    0.368                                               H
          29th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
  9                     3,4    0.348    3=A 4=B     0.791     B First    0.252                                                I
          30th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 10                     3,4    0.932    3=B 4=A     0.416     A First    0.344                                                J
          30th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                       Chief
 11                     3,4    0.634    3=B 4=A     0.448     A First    0.133                                               K
          30th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 12                     3,4    0.700    3=B 4=A     0.132     A First    0.885                                                L
          30th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 13                     3,4    0.540    3=B 4=A     0.669     B First    0.808                                               M
          31th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                       Chief
 14                     3,4    0.926    3=B 4=A     0.381     A First    0.028                                               N
          31th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 15                     3,4    0.482    3=A 4=B     0.379     A First    0.870                                               O
          31th                                                                       Physician
        December                                                                     Attending
 16                     3,4    0.675    3=B 4=A     0.986     B First    0.488                                               P
          31th                                                                       Physician
Notes. (1)If random variable 1 is less or equal to 0.5,then the role assignment is "1=A,2=B".If random variable 1 is more than 0.5,
then the role assignment is "1=B,2=A". (2)If random variable 2 is less or equal to 0.5, then the sequence is "A First". If random
variable 2 is more than 0.5, then the sequence is "B First".(3)If random variable 3 is less to equal to 0.25, then we choose chief
physicians. If random variable 3 is more than 0.25, we choose attending physician.
                                                                  54
