                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    OVER THE CLIFF: FROM THE SUBPRIME TO THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS

                                          Frederic S. Mishkin

                                         Working Paper 16609
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16609


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2010




The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of Columbia University or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. I thank participants in a seminar at the Federal Reserve Bank
of San Francisco and the editors of the Journal of Economic Perspectives for their helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Over The Cliff: From the Subprime to the Global Financial Crisis
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 16609
December 2010
JEL No. E58,G01,G18

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines what transformed a significant, but relatively mild, financial disruption into a
full-fledged financial crisis. It discusses why, although the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy was a key
trigger for the global financial crisis, three other events were at least as important: the AIG collapse
on September 16, 2008; the run on the Reserve Primary Fund on the same day; and the struggle to
get the Troubled Asset Relief Plan (TARP) plan approved by Congress over the following couple of
weeks. The paper then looks at the policy responses to the financial crisis to evaluate whether they
helped avoid a worldwide depression. The paper ends by discussing the policy challenges raised in
the aftermath of the crisis.


Frederic S. Mishkin
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu
        The financial crisis of 2007 to 2009 can be divided into two distinct phases. The first,
more limited, phase from August of 2007 to August of 2008 stemmed from losses in one,
relatively small segment of the U.S. financial system—namely, subprime residential mortgages.
Despite this disruption to financial markets, real GDP in the United States continued to rise into
the second quarter of 2008, and forecasters were predicting only a mild recession. For example,
the Congressional Budget Office (2008) released one of its periodic “The Budget and Economic
Outlook: An Update” reports on September 8, 2008. It wrote: “According to CBO’s updated
forecast for the rest of 2008 and for 2009, the economy is about halfway through an extended
period of very slow growth. … Whether or not that period of slow growth will ultimately be
designated a recession is still uncertain. However, the increase in the unemployment rate and the
pace of economic growth are similar to conditions during previous mild recessions.” In keeping
with that view, CBO projected that unemployment would rise modestly from 5.4 percent in
2008 to 6.2 percent in 2009, and that fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter real GDP would grow only
0.9 percent in 2008, but would rebound modestly to 1.8 percent growth in 2009. In summer of
2008, when I was serving on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, there was even talk that
the Fed might need to raise interest rates to keep inflation under control.
       In mid-September 2008, however, the financial crisis entered a far more virulent phase.
In rapid succession, the investment bank Lehman Brothers entered bankruptcy on September 15,
2008, the insurance firm AIG collapsed on September 16, 2008; there was a run on the Reserve
Primary Fund money market fund on the same day; and the highly publicized struggle to pass the
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) began.
       What caused the transformation from what appeared in mid-2008 to be a significant but
fairly mild financial disruption into a full-fledged global financial crisis? Did the government
responses to the global financial crisis help avoid a worldwide depression? What challenges do
these government interventions raise for the world financial system and the economy going
forward? Let’s start with a brief step back to the first phase of the global financial crisis.




                                                  1
THE FIRST PHASE: THE SUBPRIME MORTGAGE CRISIS


       The first disruption of credit markets in the recent financial crisis is often dated to August
7, 2007, when the French bank BNP Paribas suspended redemption of shares held in some of its
money market funds. A boom in U.S. housing prices had peaked around 2005. As housing prices
started to decline, mortgage-backed financial securities—in many cases, securities based on
subprime residential mortgages but then divided into more senior claims that were supposedly
safe and junior claims that were recognized to be risky—began to experience huge losses. By
early 2008, losses on these securities were estimated to be on the order of $500 billion dollars
(for example, Greenlaw, Hatzius, Kashyap, and Shin (2008).
       What developed in late 2007 and into 2008 was a series of runs on financial institutions,
but instead of the classic bank run, it was, as described by Gorton and Metrick (2009), a run on
the shadow banking system. A bank has deposits that are short-term liabilities and assets that are
long-term loans. Thus, in a classic bank run, when bank depositors run to withdraw deposits, the
bank cannot readily convert its long-term assets into cash. In the shadow banking system,
institutions has short-term liabilities in the form of short-term borrowing, like repurchase
agreements (or repos), which use longer-term assets like mortgage-backed securities as
collateral. A key element of this borrowing is the use of a “haircut,” that is, a requirement that
borrowers post collateral that is valued at more than the loan. For example, if a borrower took
out a $100 million loan in a repo agreement, it might have to post $105 million of mortgage-
backed securities as collateral, and the haircut would then be 5 percent. As the value of
mortgage-backed securities fell and uncertainty about their future value increased, haircuts to
levels as high as 50 percent. The result was that the same amount of collateral would now
support less borrowing, leading to deleveraging in which financial institutions had to sell off
assets. The resulting “fire sale” dynamic (discussed by Shleifer and Vishny in this issue) led to
an adverse feedback loop in which the decline in asset values lowered the collateral’s value
while further raising uncertainty, causing haircuts to rise further, which forced financial
institutions to deleverage and sell more assets, and so on.
       One signal of the resulting credit market disruptions appears in the interest rate spreads
between safe and risky financial instruments.. For example, the “TED spread” is the spread
                                                 2
between the interest rate on interbank lending (as measured by the LIBOR interest rate on three-
month eurodollar deposits) and the interest rate on three-month U.S. Treasury bills. The TED
spread provides an assessment of counterparty risk from one bank lending to another, reflecting
both liquidity and credit risk concerns. Figure 1 shows how the TED spread rocketed up from an
average of around 40 basis points (0.40 percentage points) before August 7, 2007, to 240 basis
points by August 20, 2007, before abating somewhat.
        The collapse of Bear Stearns in March 2008 was the most visible of these runs on the
shadow financing system. Short-term financing for Bear Stearns dried up. Its long-term assets
could not quickly be turned into ready cash at a fair price, and without access to short-term
funding, it could not continue. The Federal Reserve brokered a deal a deal for J.P. Morgan/Chase
to purchase Bear, which was not unprecedented, but as part of the deal the Fed also took onto its
books $30 billion of Bear Stearn’s toxic assets, which was unprecedented. However, this deal
and the opening of new Federal Reserve lending facilities to investment banks helped restore
some calm to the market. The TED spread surged to over 200 basis points in March 2008, but
then fell back below 100 basis points.
        By summer 2008, credit markets were clearly impaired and credit risk was rising, as can
be seen by the rise in the spread between interest rates on Baa corporate bonds and Treasury
bonds in Figure 1. However, the financial crisis looked like it could be contained. The Baa-
Treasury spread had climbed to over 200 basis points, but these levels were similar to those that
occurred in the aftermath of the mild recession in 2001. The TED spread, although elevated, was
also below its peak values immediately after the revelations of problems at BNP Paribas and the
Bear Stearns collapse. Many forecasters in the public and private hoped that the worst was over.
After all, they reasoned that the subprime mortgage sector was only a small part of overall
capital markets, and the losses in the related mortgage-backed securities, although substantial,
seemed manageable. Indeed, the Congressional Budget Office (2008) was forecasting in early
September 2008 that the Consumer Price Index would rise from 2.9 percent in 2007 to 4.7
percent in 2008. As discussed in Wessel (2009), there was talk in the Federal Reserve as to
whether the easing phase of monetary policy might have to be reversed in order to contain
inflation.


                                                 3
       The story of this first phase of the 2007-2009 financial crisis has been discussed
extensively in many places, including in symposia in the Winter 2009 and Winter 2010 issues of
this journal. Here, the focus is on understanding what happened next.




THE SECOND PHASE: GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS




       In the space of a few short weeks in the fall 2008, everything changed. On Monday,
September 15, 2008, after suffering losses in the subprime market, Lehman Brothers, the fourth-
largest investment bank by asset size with over $600 billion in assets and 25,000 employees,
filed for bankruptcy—the largest bankruptcy filing in U.S. history. Conventional discussions of
the evolution of the financial crisis often view the Lehman bankruptcy as the key event that
morphed the subprime crisis into a virulent global financial crisis. Although the Lehman
bankruptcy led a large increase in uncertainty and a wave of distressed selling of securities that
caused a collapse in asset prices and a drying up of liquidity, I will argue that the collapse of
Lehman was followed by three events that were at least as important in causing the subprime
crisis to go global: the AIG collapse on September 16, 2008; the run on the Reserve Primary
Fund on the same day; and the struggle to get the Troubled Asset Relief Plan (TARP) plan
approved by Congress over the following couple of weeks.
       In considering these events, it’s also important to remember that the financial system had
been greatly weakened before September 2008 in ways that had not yet been fully recognized at
that time. Just as a relatively small sound or vibration can trigger an avalanche, if the snow
conditions have made the danger of such an avalanche high, it may be that with given the amount
of systemic risk embedded in the financial system, some other stress or failure of a financial
institution would also have revealed the fragility of the financial system—and then led to a chain
reaction that could also have tipped the financial system over the cliff.




                                                  4
The Lehman Bankruptcy
       Many commentators have argued that the Treasury and the Fed’s decision to allow
Lehmann to go bankrupt was a colossal mistake that turned a mild financial disruption into a
global financial crisis. With hindsight, it is hard to argue that allowing Lehman to go bankrupt
was the right decision. But it’s useful to remember that at the time, there was a plausible case for
letting Lehman go into bankruptcy.
       First, in practical terms, the U.S. government or its regulatory authorities had no authority
to put Lehman into a government conservatorship so it could keep functioning, as the Treasury
was able to do with Fannie and Freddie Mac. Thus, the only possible solution was to broker a
purchase of Lehman. Barclays was in discussions about buying Lehman, but British bank
regulators were skeptical and the Fed refused to take more bad assets on to its balance sheet, as it
had done with Bear Stearns. Barclays ended up buying parts of Lehman a week after it declared
bankruptcy.
       Second, the bailout of Bear Stearns had extended the government safety net outside the
banking system to investment banks, and the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve were
concerned about increasing moral hazard incentives on the part of a wider set of financial
institutions to take on excessive risk. Indeed, as we now know, Lehman was going to
extraordinary efforts, including engaging in shady accounting practices, to hide its leverage, even
after the financial crisis started in August 2007.3 Letting Lehman fail would serve as a warning
to other financial firms that they needed to reign in their risk taking.
       Third, it was an open secret in the financial markets and among government officials that
if any of the major investment banks would run into trouble, Lehman would be at the top of the
list. Lehman was among the most leveraged of the major investment banks; it was unwilling to
raise capital; it had a poor reputation for risk management; and it had a high exposure to losses
on subprime mortgages because it had large holdings of securities tied to valuations of these
3
 As described in the Examiner’s Report for the United States Bankruptcy Court, Southern
District of New York, Valukas (2009), Lehman Brothers used a repo transaction, referred to as
Repo 105, to reduce net leverage by $50 billion when reporting earnings at Q1 2008 and Q2
2008. In this transaction, repos were treated as sales, rather than borrowings, thereby taking them
off the books. In addition, Lehman did not report that only $2 billion of $40 billion of liquid
assets were readily accessible.

                                                  5
mortgages on its books (McDonald 2009; Sorkin, 2009). Sorkin (2009) documents that
immediately after the Bear Stearns bailout, the U.S. Treasury Secretary immediately turned his
attention to Lehman because he thought it would be the next trouble spot. With Lehman’s
vulnerability already well-known, it seemed that Lehman’s was a natural test case to provide an
object lesson to market participants that they should take measures to protect themselves.
Indeed, many of the derivative contracts with Lehman’s counterparties were unwound
successfully after Lehman’s bankruptcy.
       Finally, the financial system in mid-September 2008 was far more vulnerable than almost
all policymakers and market participants realized at that time. There is a distinct possibility that
the financial system would have imploded even if Lehman had been bailed out.


The AIG Collapse
       The Financial Products Unit of American International Group (AIG) had written over
$400 billion dollars of insurance contracts called credit default swaps, which had to make
payments when subprime mortgage securities suffered losses. With the Lehman Brothers
collapse, it seemed more likely that the AIG might have to make enormous payments under these
contracts, so short-term funding to AIG dried up. On September 16, 2008, the Federal Reserve
stepped in with an $85 billion loan to keep AIG afloat (with total loans from the Fed and the U.S.
government eventually rising to over $170 billion).
       The enormous risk taking at AIG and its potential to blow up the financial system had
been largely unrecognized by government officials, regulators, and markets. Once Bear Stearns
had to be bailed out, it became apparent that a wider group of financial institutions could pose
major systemic risks to the financial system. But in discussions at that time among regulators and
academics about the need to regulate a wider group of financial institutions (in which I
participated), AIG was not mentioned in the category of firms that would require special
supervisory attention. This, along with Chairman Bernanke’s later statement in Congressional
testimony about how angry he was that AIG took on such risk, describing AIG as effectively
running a huge hedge fund inside an insurance company (Torres and Son, 2009), indicates how
much the AIG blow up was a surprise.


                                                  6
Reserve Primary Fund
       The same day of the AIG collapse—September 16, 2008—also saw a run on the Reserve
Primary Fund, a large money mutual market fund run by Bruce Bent, one of the originators of
money market mutual funds in 1970. Before the crisis, Bent had publicly criticized the industry
for taking on too much risk in its asset holdings. He stated in a letter to the Securities and
Exchange Commission in September 2007 (Bent, 2007): “When I first created the money
market fund in 1970, it was designed with the tenets of safety and liquidity.” He added that these
principles had “fallen by the wayside as portfolio managers chased the highest yield and
compromised the integrity of the money fund.” Alas, Bent did not follow his own advice, and
the Reserve Primary Fund held $785 million of Lehman paper. With the Lehman bankruptcy,
the fund could no longer afford to redeem its shares at the par value of $1—a situation known as
“breaking the buck”—and shareholders pulled out their money, with the fund losing 90 percent
of its assets. A run on money market funds followed, with assets in institutional money market
mutual funds falling from $1.36 trillion to $0.97 trillion from September to October 2008. In
turn, this run put pressure on the banks, since a significant amount of bank funding was coming
from bank commercial paper and certificates of deposits held by money market mutual funds.


TARP
       In the wake of these events, U.S. Treasury Secretary, Hank Paulson, then proposed on
September 19, 2008, the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) in an infamous three-page
document. In its original form, it would have given the U.S. Treasury the authorization, with no
accountability to the Congress, to spend $700 billion purchasing subprime mortgage assets from
troubled financial institutions, but which subsequently was used to inject capital into banking
institutions. It soon became clear that Congress would vote down the original bill, which it did
on September 29. Eventually the bill was finally passed on October 3, but passage required
numerous “Christmas-tree” provisions such as a tax break for makers of toy wooden arrows.




                                                  7
The Broader Context
       If the Federal Reserve had cut a deal with Barclays to rescue Lehman before bankruptcy,
would the crisis have been defused? The underlying stresses in the financial system were all too
real. A counterfactual history would have to take into account that a weakened Lehman,
purchased before bankruptcy, might have later brought down Barclays. Rescuing Lehman would
have increased moral hazard among other financial institutions, perhaps setting up a larger crash
later. The costs of the AIG credit default swaps were eventually going to come due, quite
possibly unexpectedly. Runs on various shadow banking institutions, like the run on Reserve
Primary Fund and then on money market funds in general, were becoming more common. Here,
rather than try to lay out a persuasive counterfactual history, I will emphasize two major changes
that occurred by late September 2008.
       First, even though markets had been digesting bad news about mortgage-backed
securities since mid-2007, the events of September 2008 showed that risk taking was far more
extensive than markets had realized and the fragility of the financial system was far greater than
most market participants could have imagined. The AIG blow up and the run on the Reserve
Primary Fund revealed that the financial system was engaged in what could be described as one
huge “carry trade”. Technically carry trades are ones in which a trader borrows at a low interest
rate to fund the purchase of assets that yield a high interest rate. Carry trades generate immediate
profits, but may be very risky because the higher interest rate on the purchased assets may just
reflect greater tail risk for that asset. AIG’s issuing of credit default swaps is a classic example
of a type of carry trade, because the firm was earning large profits on the premiums paid on these
contracts until the tail risk became a realization. In a prescient and now-famous paper, Rajan
(2005) warned that this carry-trade problem was a danger to the financial system because
incentives in compensation schemes for financial firms were leading to financial market
participants engaging in financial transactions that produced immediate income, but exposed the
financial system to massive risks.
       Second, although markets had been watching government agencies scramble to deal with
the financial crisis since late 2007, the events of September 2008 raised serious doubts that the
U.S. government had the capability to manage the crisis. After all, the Fed and the U.S. Treasury
proved unable to craft a solution so that Lehman would not fail. The AIG bailout was huge and
                                                  8
unexpected. TARP was originally proposed as a flimsy, three-page proposal, which raised
concerns that the Treasury was unprepared, and the initial TARP proposal failed on a bipartisan
vote. Even though the TARP legislation was eventually passed, the reputational damage was
done.
         After September 2008, the pattern of runs on the shadow banking system intensified and
worsened. Banks began to horde cash and were unwilling to lend to each other, despite huge
injections of liquidity into the financial system by the European Central Bank, the Bank of
England and the Federal Reserve, The subprime crisis had become a full-fledged, global
financial crisis.
        The patterns of credit spreads tell the story. As shown in Figure 1, the TED spread rose
from around 100 basis points during the week before the Lehman bankruptcy to over 300 basis
points on September 17, the day after the liquidity squeeze on AIG and the Reserve Primary
Fund materialized. The TED spread then dropped by 100 basis points, but as confidence in the
ability and competence of the government to react quickly to contain the crisis weakened over
the next couple of weeks, it climbed to over 450 basis points by October 10. The spread
between interest rates on Baa corporate and Treasury bonds, shown in Figure 1, also rose by over
200 basis points and now rose well above levels that had been seen in 2001 during the prior
recession period. The stock market crash also accelerated, with the week of October 6 showing
the worst weekly decline in U.S. history .
        Conditions in the financial markets continued to deteriorate. The public anger that
resulted from the TARP “bailouts”— which involved injections of capital into financial
institutions, with little restrictions on their use— became so intense that it became increasingly
clear that the new Obama administration, taking office in January 2009, would not be able to get
additional funds beyond those already allocated to TARP if needed. Figure 1 shows that
although the TED spread fell from its peak in October 2008 with the help of government support
to the financial sector, the spread between Baa and Treasury bonds continued to rise, peaking at
over 500 basis points in December 2009. By the end of 2008, the stock market had fallen by over
half from its peak in the fall of 2007.




                                                 9
The Links from Financial Crisis to Recession


        Later data showed that the U.S. economy had turned down in the third quarter of 2008,
falling at a -1.3 percent annual rate, but the recession that started in December 2007 became the
worst economic contraction in the United States since World War II. Real U.S. GDP contracted
sharply in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter or 2009, declining at annual rates of -
5.4 and -6.4 percent, respectively. The unemployment rate skyrocketed, exceeding 10 percent
by October 2009.     A worldwide recession ensued as well. World economic growth fell at an
annual rate of -6.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2008 and -7.3 percent in the first quarter of
2009. A more extensive description of how financial crises lead to sharp economic downturns
can be found in Mishkin (2011), but the basic story has three interrelated parts.
        First, a financial crisis widens credit spreads, like the difference between interest rates on
Baa corporate and Treasury bonds shown earlier in Figure 1. The result is that conventional
monetary policy is defanged: even if interest rates on Treasury bonds fall because of a
weakening economy and easing of monetary policy, the interest rates relevant to household and
business purchase decisions go up, causing a drop in aggregate demand. Panel (a) of Figure 2
shows that Baa corporate bond rates barely budged at the beginning of the financial crisis in
2007 or during the Bear Stearns episode in March 2008, but climbed substantially in September
2008.
        Second, the decline in asset prices during a financial crisis causes a decline in the value
of collateral, which makes it harder for nonfinancial firms to borrow. In addition, the
deterioration of balance sheets at financial firms, which have the expertise to mitigate adverse
selection and moral hazard problems, causes their lending to fall, a process which is described by
the term “deleveraging”, which causes spending to decline. Panel (b) of Figure 2 shows how
total bank lending continued to rise early in the financial crisis in 2007, and even remained stable
through March 2008 and the Bear Stearns rescue. Right after September 2008, bank lending rises
largely because lenders were drawing heavily on already-established lines of credit, but by mid-
2009 bank lending is on a downward trend. Of course, this decline should not only be attributed
to the decline in the supply of loans, but also to the decline in the demand for loans as a result of
weakening economic conditions.
                                                  10
        Third, the general rise in uncertainty that occurs during a financial crisis also leads to an
increase in asymmetric information, further hindering the ability of financial markets to allocate
funds to households and businesses with productive investment opportunities. Panel (c) of Figure
2 shows how the market for asset-backed commercial paper, which had seemed to be recovering
in mid-2008, which dwindled from daily average issuance of $64 billion at the beginning of
September 2008 to $16.6 billion by the end of 2009.


Policy Responses To The Financial Crisis


        The most powerful U.S. policy responses to the financial crisis came through policies that
applied to the financial and banking system: conventional and unconventional monetary policies,
bank “stress tests,” and bailouts of some banks and financial institutions. Many of these policies
were implemented by the Federal Reserve, but others involved cooperation with fiscal
authorities.




Nonconventional Monetary Policy
        In 2002, when Ben Bernanke was member of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve, gave a speech (Bernanke, 2002) on the occasion of Milton Friedman’s 90th birthday and
concluded by saying: “Regarding the Great Depression. You’re [referring to Milton Friedman
and Anna Schwarz] right, we did it. We’re very sorry. But thanks to you, we won’t do it again.”
He clearly meant it. The Federal Reserve’s modus operandi during the financial crisis can be
characterized by saying that the Fed was engaged in massive experimentation in an
unprecedented situation: that is, it was employing a large number of measures to contain the
crisis, not knowing exactly which ones would work.
        To be sure, the Fed started off using conventional monetary policy—that is, targeting a
lower federal funds interest rate. Starting in the September 2007 meeting, the Federal Reserv3e
lowered its federal funds rate target by ½ percentage point from 5.25% to 4.75%, and
subsequently pushed the rate steadily downward. By April 2008, the rate was down to 2 percent,
and by December 2008, the target range for the federal funds rate was 0 to 0.25%. Even before
                                                  11
the zero-bound for interest rates was reached, the Fed had turned to nonconventional monetary
policy measures. Two nonconventional policy measures, liquidity provision asset purchases,
result in an expansion of the central bank balance sheet and are therefore usually described under
the heading “quantitative easing.” One other nonconventional measure is management of
expectations. I will say a few words about each.
       The first nonconventional form of monetary policy, liquidity provision, involves
expanding Fed lending to both banks and other financial institutions. Liquidity provision is
directed at maintaining the smooth functioning of financial markets, but it does affect household
and business spending.
       The traditional method for the Fed to provide liquidity has been through loans made at
the discount rate—the interest rate on loans it makes to banks. In mid-August 2007, the Fed
lowered the discount rate to 50 basis points (0.5 percentage points) above the federal funds rate
target from the normal 100 basis points. It then lowered it further in March 2008 to only 25 basis
points above the federal funds rate target. In addition, the Fed expanded the types of securities
that would be eligible to be used as collateral. But discount lending has two problems: 1) it’s
typically viewed as a bad signal for banks to borrow through the discount mechanism, because it
suggests they had nowhere else to turn; and 2) discount lending has traditionally only gone to
banks, not to other financial institutions.
       To solve the problem of negative signals, the Fed set up a temporary Term Auction
Facility (TAF) which enabled banks to borrow anonymously at a rate determined through a
competitive auction. The TAF auctions started at amounts of $20 billion, but as the crisis
worsened, the total loans outstanding though this mechanism rose to exceed $400 billion. (The
European Central Bank conducted similar operations, with one auction in June 2008 leading to
lending of over 400 billion euros.)
       The Fed also invented new lending programs to broaden its provision of liquidity to
beyond banking institutions. These included lending to investment banks, and lending to
promote purchases of commercial paper, mortgage backed-securities and other asset-backed




                                                12
securities. In addition, the Fed engaged in lending to prop up Bear Stearns,6 AIG and to Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac. The enlargement of the Fed’s lending programs during the 2007-2009
period was remarkable, expanding the Fed’s balance sheet by over $1 trillion by the end of 2008,
with the balance-sheet expansion continuing into 2009. The number of new programs over the
course of the crisis spawned a whole new set of acronyms: TSLF, PDCF, AMLF, MMIFF, CPFF
and TALF.
       Yet another method to increase liquidity was through swap lines with foreign central
banks. These foreign central banks also engaged in massive amounts of liquidity provision, but
could create liquidity only in their own domestic currency, while many of their financial
institutions required dollar funding to conduct their operations. The Federal Reserve provided
foreign central banks with U.S. dollar deposits in exchange for deposits in their home currency,
often in essentially unlimited amounts.
       Overall, the available research suggests that liquidity provision did help stabilize
financial markets during this crisis. For example, McAndrews, Sarkar and Wang (2008) find that
announcements about the Term Auction Facility (TAF) did significantly lower credit spreads.
Wu (2008), Christensen, Lopez and Rudebusch (2009) and Sarkar and Shrader (2010) also
conclude that the TAF and other credit facilities helped lower interest rates.1 Baba and Packer
(2009) and McAndrews (2009), Goldberg, Kennedy and Miu (2010) find that the U.S. dollar
swap facilities helped improve the performance of the dollar swap markets. Using a similar
event-study methodology, Ait-Sahalia et al.(2010) find that liquidity provision in not only the
United States, but also in the United Kingdom and Japan, did help lower interbank risk
premiums.

6
 The lending to J.P. Morgan to prop up Bear Stearns was in effect a purchase of asssets. In order
for the Federal Reserve to abide by its legal authority, it could not purchase private assets
outright. Instead, it made a nonrecourse loan: that is, the Fed had no recourse to require J.P.
Morgan to pay back the loan, but instead would take ownership of the collateral, the $30 billion
of toxic assets. Hence the Fed would bear any losses or gains on these assets so in economic
terms it had purchased these assets.
1
  For an alternative view, Taylor and Williams (2009) find no evidence that actual lending from
the Terrm Auction Facility (TAF) helped to ease credit markets.

                                                13
       The second category of nonconventional approaches to monetary policy, asset purchases,
is based on the belief that a direct purchase can stimulate spending by raising prices on particular
classes of bonds, thereby lowering the interest rates that households and businesses have to pay.
This policy began with the purchase of $300 billion of long-term Treasury bonds, which started
in March 2009 and ended in October 2009. Empirical evidence on a previous Fed attempt to
lower long-term interest rates relative to short-term rates in the 1960s—which was dubbed
“Operation Twist” because its intent was to “twist” and flatten the yield curve—deemed that it
didn’t work (Modigliani and Sutch, 1967). However, as Solow and Tobin (1987) pointed out,
Federal Reserve purchases of long-term Treasury bonds were small and ended up being offset by
issuance of long-term bonds.
       The more important asset purchase program, announced in November 2008 and
terminated in March 2010, was the outright purchase of $1.25 trillion of mortgage-backed
securities. The Fed purchased mortgage-backed securities in an attempt to lower residential
mortgage rates, thereby stimulating the demand for housing, which would not only stabilize
housing prices and the financial markets, but would also stimulate spending on residential
construction.   Research on the impact of the Fed’s large-scale asset purchases during the global
financial crisis by Gagnon, Raskin, Remache and Sack (2010), finds that these programs lowered
long-term bond rates relative to short rates on the order of 50 basis points, and lowered interest
rates on mortgage-backed securities even further by improving liquidity in this market, thereby
having a substantial impact on residential mortgage rates.
       Both liquidity provision and asset purchased fit under the general heading of quantitative
easing—that is, ways in which the Federal Reserve greatly expanded the monetary base along
with its balance sheet. There has been some question as to whether this expansion of the
monetary base, by itself, could stimulate the economy. It’s not clear why this would work: as
Curdia and Woodford (2010) argue, why should an expansion of the monetary base lead to
higher aggregate demand when it was unable to further lower interest rates or stimulate bank
lending? In addition, evidence from the Japanese episode does not provide much support that a
pure expansion of a central bank’s balance sheet is particularly effective in stimulating aggregate
demand (Kuttner, 2004). Bernanke (2009) has also expressed his skepticism that quantitative
easing, by itself would be effective. He indicated that the expansion of the balance sheet should
                                                 14
instead be viewed as a result of what he referred to as credit easing, that is, an attempt to lower
spreads between different asset classes through asset purchases and liquidity provision.
       A final nonconventional approach to monetary policy is management of expectations. In
March 2009, the Fed Open Market Committee added to its policy statement that it would
maintain “exceptionally low” interest rates “for an extended period. There is theoretical support
for the proposition that a commitment to keep short-term interest rates low for a substantial
period of time helps lower long-term interest rates and also raises inflation expectations, thereby
reducing the real interest rate (Eggertsson and Woodford, 2003, 2004; Woodford, 2003). But at
least so far, no empirical evidence is available for how effective management of expectations
was during this episode.


The Bank Stress Tests
       Financial markets began to recover in the first half of 2009. The provision of huge
amounts of liquidity appeared to do the trick in the interbank lending market, with the TED
spread falling from its peak of over 400 basis points in October to below 100 basis points in
January 2009. This spread fell to below pre-crisis levels (less than 20 basis points) by May
2009. Credit spreads also began to fall with the Baa-Treasury spread declining from its peak in
October, but at a slower pace than the improvement in the interbank market, as illustrated in
Figure 1. By late 2009, however, credit spreads were returning to normal, reaching levels that
were just a little above those before the crisis, and actually lower than the spreads that existed in
2002, shortly after the previous recession ended. The stock market also began to recover from its
trough in March 2009, leading to a sustained bull market in which it rose over 50 percent over
the next year.
       A key element in the financial market recovery was the U.S. Treasury’s requirement,
announced in February 2009, that the 19 largest banking institutions undergo the Supervisory
Capital Assessment Program or SCAP, which are commonly referred to as stress tests. The
stress tests were a supervisory assessment, led by the Federal Reserve in cooperation with the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the FDIC, of the balance sheet position of these
banks to ensure that they had sufficient capital to withstand bad macroeconomic outcomes. The
stress tests were designed as a forward-looking exercise to project possible erosion of bank
                                                 15
capital under two scenarios: the baseline consensus forecast by private sector economists as of
February 2009, which entailed a continuing decline in economic activity, and a worse scenario of
a much more severe recession (for details of the scenarios, see Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, 2009).
       The Treasury announced the results in early May 2009 and they were well received by
market participants, allowing these banks to raise substantial amounts of capital from private
capital markets that were required by the stress tests. The stress tests were a key factor that
helped increase the amount of information in the marketplace, thereby reducing asymmetric
information and adverse selection and moral hazard problems. Hoshi and Kashyap
(forthcoming) found that similar stress tests in Japan in 2003 were a key element of the recovery
of the Japanese banking system after the “lost decade” from 1992 to 2002.


Bailing Out Financial Institutions
       Some of the Fed’s liquidity provision was to bail out financial institution, as occurred
with Bear Stearns, AIG and the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
In each of these cases, the Federal Reserve provided this liquidity in cooperation with the U.S.
Treasury, which also made large loans.
       Although the Troubled Asset Relief Plan (TARP) was initially intended to purchase
subprime mortgage assets to help prop up financial institutions’ balance sheets, it soon became
clear that agreeing on a prices for those assets was unworkable. The Treasury switched to using
the TARP funds to inject capital into financial institutions, thereby shoring up their balance
sheets more directly. In addition, on September 29, the U.S. Treasury announced a Temporary
Guarantee Program for Money Market Funds, which insured that investors would receive at least
the $1 par value per share. On October 14, 2008, the FDIC announced the Temporary Liquidity
Guarantee Program (TLGP) that guaranteed newly-issued senior unsecured bank debt, such as
federal funds (loans of deposits at the Federal Reserve) and commercial paper, as well as
noninterest bearing transaction accounts. Its stated purpose was to “strengthen confidence and
encourage liquidity in the banking system” (FDIC, 2008). Although these programs were
initially intended to last less than a year, they have been extended several times.


                                                 16
        The spreading bank failures in Europe in fall 2008 led to similar bailouts of financial
institutions: for example, the U.K. Treasury set up a bailout plan that guaranteed 250 billion
pounds of bank liabilities, added 100 billion pounds to a facility that swaps these assets for
government bonds, and allowed the U.K. government to buy up to 50 billion pounds of equity
stakes in British banks. Allessandri and Haldane (2009) discuss $10 trillion worth of these
bailout packages across 20 countries, which includes both guaranteeing the debt of the banks and
injecting capital into them. There was a high degree of international coordination in these
policies.
        Ait-Sahalia et al.(2010) find that comprehensive bailouts which helped recapitalize the
financial sector did help lower interbank risk premiums, but bailouts of individual banks on an ad
hoc basis were received poorly by the markets and led to a rise in interbank risk premiums. A
plausible explanation is that when governments pursue ad hoc bailouts, it suggests to markets
that the problem in the credit markets may be worse than they expected. In contrast, pursuing a
comprehensive approach to recapitalize the financial system helps to restore confidence and to
unfreeze the credit markets. Furthermore, they find that there were strong spillovers from
actions taken in one country to others, suggesting the benefits of a coordinated policy response
between countries to cope with a global financial crisis.




Expansionary Fiscal Policy
        Fiscal stimulus to directly increase aggregate demand was another key piece of the.
government response to the global financial crisis, both in the United States and in many other
countries. The incoming Obama administration pushed for the $787 billion fiscal stimulus
package, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. The plan featured $288 billion
of tax cuts and $499 billion in government spending increases. The evidence on the effect of the
fiscal stimulus package is mixed, but two arguments suggest that that it was far less important to
addressing the financial crisis than were actions by central banks to provide liquidity and
government recapitalization and guarantees of the financial system.
        First, as a basic matter of timing, most of the additional government stimulus package
did not come on line until late 2009 and into 2010. While one can construct a theoretical
                                                 17
argument that the expectation of the stimulus package helped to reassure financial markets, any
direct effect of the stimulus on the financial crisis through the early months of 2009 was
necessarily quite limited.
       Second, there has is a very active debate about how much a fiscal stimulus will affect
output. For example, Hall (2009) summarizes the theoretical and empirical evidence on fiscal
stimulus as yielding an output multiplier between 0.7 and 1. Analysis of the stimulus using
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models in Cogan et al. (2009) and Uhlig (2010) find that
multipliers in the 0.6 range, while econometric evidence employed by Barro and Redlick (2009)
finds an output multiplier of around 0.7. On the other hand, economists in the Obama
Administration and the Congressional Budget Office, using Keynesian, large scale econometric
models, estimated that the output multiplier for fiscal stimulus were well above one. Moreover,
a number of models point out that when the interest rate falls to the zero lower bound after a
large negative aggregate demand shock, the output multiplier from a fiscal stimulus may be
much higher because expansionary fiscal policy raises inflation expectations, thereby lowering
real interest rates: for example, Eggertsson (2009), Woodford (2010) and Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2009) find such a result in calibrated New Keynesian models. The
controversy over discretionary fiscal stimulus is explored by Auerbach and Gale in this issue.




Have Policies to Ameliorate the Financial Crisis Succeeded?
       The question of whether or in which ways the policies to defuse the financial crisis have
succeeded will be debated for years. One group of skeptics points out that households and firms
have seen tighter credit standards and a higher cost of credit during the recession, from which
they conclude that monetary policy has not been effective during the recent financial crisis (for
example, Krugman, 2008). Another view holds that many government actions were ineffective,
while others may have raise the perceived level of risk in financial markets (for example, see
Taylor, 2009).
       My own view, as I have argued more extensively elsewhere (Mishkin, 2009), it that
conclusions about the effectiveness of policy should begin by considering the counterfactual—
that is, what would the likely course of events without the policy interventions. For example, if
                                                18
the Federal Reserve had not lowered the federal funds rate by over 500 basis points starting in
September 2007, its clear that, interest rates on default-free Treasury securities would have been
higher, but I believe further that credit spreads would have widened by even more than they did
during this crisis, because the weaker economy would have made conditions in financial markets
even more stressed. The outcome would then surely have been that households and firms would
have faced much higher interest rates, with the result that household and firm spending would
have declined even more precipitously than we saw. The banking stress tests and systematic
efforts to recapitalize the banking system also seem to have been useful. Some parts of the
government intervention were less useful than others. But taken as a whole, I believe the
government actions helped to prevent a far deeper recession and even possibly a depression.




AFTERMATH: CLEANING UP AFTER THE CRISIS


       The global financial crisis of 2007-2009 appears to be waning. There are three key areas
of government policies to clean up after the crisis in order to restore the world’s financial sector
and the broader economy to health.


Shrinking Central Bank Balance Sheets
       Actions by central banks to contain the global financial crisis resulted in huge expansions
of their balance sheets. The expansion of balance sheets arising from liquidity provision is
typically easy to reverse because most of the liquidity facilities have provided loans at interest
rates that are higher than market rates during normal times. As financial markets return to
normal, market participants are no longer willing to borrow at above-market ranks, this source of
balance sheet expansion naturally reverses itself as the financial system recovers—which is
exactly what has happened.
       The asset market purchases of long-term mortgage-backed securities are not self-
liquidating in this way. Over $1 trillion of the mortgage-backed securities have maturities of ten
years or more. Thus, a strategy of just letting them run off will leave the Federal Reserve in this
market for a long time, which raises several issues. First, by holding these securities the Federal
                                                 19
Reserve will be exposed to both credit and interest rate risk.2 Second, the presence of private
securities on the Federal Reserve balance sheet means that the Fed has become directly involved
in perhaps the most politicized financial market in the United States. The public and Congress
may begin to hold the Fed accountable for what happens specifically to mortgage rates, rather
than to interest rates in general. Politicians may tend to see the Fed as institutionally responsible
for developments in the housing markets.
         Can the Fed extricate itself from this situation by selling the mortgage-backed securities?
The experience of the end of the purchase program for mortgage-backed securities at the end of
March 2010 is encouraging. For some months before this date, the Fed had been in essence the
sole buyer in this market. However, given that financial markets had stabilized and that the end
of the purchase program was well publicized, the Fed’s exit from the market did not cause any
disruption. The spreads of mortgage-backed securities over Treasury bills did not rise after April
1, 2010. This experience suggests that if the Fed announces a program of asset sales well in
advance and financial markets are functioning normally, it should be able to liquidate its
positions. Of course, if this turns out not to be the case, then the Fed could discontinue its sales
and announce that its sales are contingent on the market continuing to function normally.
         A final concern sometimes raised is that the expansion in the monetary base will
necessarily be inflationary, but this is unlikely to be the case in the current environment. The
reason is that banks are perfectly happy to hold huge amounts of excess reserves—thus
essentially neutralizing the effect this money would have on demand or the price level— as long
as they are paid interest on the reserves, as is now the case. However, purchase of long-term
government bonds has raised concerns that the Fed is willing to accommodate profligate fiscal
policy by monetizing government debt, and this does have the potential to unanchor inflation
expectations, which could have inflationary consequences in the future.




2
 Because the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve is in effect part of the overall government balance sheet, it is not
clear why potential losses on the Fed’s balance sheet should matter. However, such losses would likely result in
severe criticisms of the Federal Reserve and so weaken its independence.

                                                          20
Too-Big-To-Fail
        The global financial crisis has encouraged efforts to revamp financial regulation. French
et. al. (2010) offer discussions of financial regulation in the future, as do some of the other
papers in this symposium. Here I will just focus on one issue, the too-big-to-fail problem.
        Too-big-to-fail is a misnomer. A financial firm can be systemically important—that is, its
failure can threaten the health of the financial system—either because it is so large or its
activities are so interconnected with the rest of the financial system. A more accurate term would
be too-interconnected-to-fail or too-systemically-important-to-fail. The failure of the hedge fund
Long Term Capital Management in 1998 is a classic example of a firm that was not enormous in
size, but was systemically important. In any case, the difficulty is that when creditors know that a
firm falls into this category, they can expect government provide some assistance if the firm gets
into trouble, which means that they have less incentive to monitor the firm and pull out their
money if it is taking on too much risk. Of course, this makes excessive risk-taking more likely,
and raises the cost to taxpayers of the eventual government bailout.
        Too-big-to-fail is now a larger problem than before, in part because banks have merged
in a way that creates even larger banking institutions, and because with the Fed bailout of Bear
Stearns in March 2008, and then the financial assistance to AIG by the Fed and the U.S. Treasury
in September of 2008, it has become clear that a much wider range of financial firms are likely to
be considered to be too-big-to-fail in the future. Indeed, the most prominent case of a firm that
was not bailed out—Lehman Brothers in September 2008—was followed by such a severe crisis,
that it is unlikely that governments would let this happen again. In the wake of the Lehman
failure, governments throughout the world bailed out or guaranteed all their major financial
institutions.
        One way to address the too-big-to-fail problem is to limit the size of financial institutions,
which might involve either the breakup of large financial institutions and/or limits on what
activities banking institutions can engage. However, arbitrary limits on their size or activities
might well decrease the efficiency or raise other risks in the financial system. An alternative
view is to subject systemically important institutions to greater regulatory oversight, say by a
systemic regulator (as discussed in Mishkin, 2010a; French et. al., 2010), or by imposing larger
capital requirements for systemically important financial firms.
                                                 21
       The Dodd-Frank financial reform bill passed in summer 2010 gives the federal
government one more tool for dealing with systemically important financial companies. Before
Dodd-Frank, the U.S. government only could take over individual banking institutions, but not
financial holding companies that own banks and other financial institutions. (In other words, it
could take over Citibank, but not Citigroup or a free-standing investment bank like Lehman
Brothers.) It used to be that the government had only two alternatives with such firms: send
them into bankruptcy or bail them out. Now, the federal government has “resolution authority”
over such firms, which means that they can treat them as they would an insolvent bank. Critics
have expressed concerns that this federal resolution authority will further entrench too-big-to-fail
and so make the moral hazard problem worse (for example, Wallison, 2010). As with all
regulatory authority, the devil will be in the details. But the new resolution authority is likely to
help limit moral hazard because it gives the government a big stick to force systemically
important financial institutions to desist from risk taking or to raise more capital—or else to face
a government takeover that imposes costs on managers and shareholders.




Retrenching Fiscal Policy
       The combination of massive bailouts, fiscal stimulus packages, and the sharp economic
contractions that reduced tax revenue have shifted the fiscal situation for many countries. As
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) point out, the aftermath of financial crises is almost always a large
increase in government indebtedness and we have seen exactly this pattern in the aftermath of
the current crisis. Budget deficits over 10 percent of GDP in advanced countries like the United
States have been common in 2009 and 2010. This rise in government borrowing can even raise
the risk of sovereign debt defaults, which can be a particular problem if sovereign debt is being
held by many banks as a “safe” asset. This risk has become a serious concern in Europe after the
Greek sovereign debt crisis.
       As budget deficits surged after the crisis, the ratio of government debt to GDP is
projected to jump to very high levels in many countries. In the next decade or so, getting fiscal
houses in order will become one of the highest priorities for government policy throughout the
world. In many countries, governments already faced a long-term problem of unsustainable
                                                  22
spending growth on health care and pensions; the current fiscal imbalances have brought those
problems forward in time from the long-term into the middle-term, and in some countries into
the short-term and the immediate future.


CONCLUSION


       What started in 2007 as a crisis in one small part of the financial system led to a world-
wide economic conflagration by late 2008 and early 2009. There are two key lessons from what
has happened. First, the global financial system is far more interconnected than was previously
recognized and excessive risk taking that threatened the collapse of the world financial system
was far more pervasive than almost anyone realized. Understanding how systemic risk can arise
and designing policies to rein in this risk taking are tasks of the highest priority. Second,
extraordinary actions by central banks and governments have contained this global financial
crisis, but successfully unwinding these policies will prove to be a highly challenging task.




                                                 23
REFERENCES


Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Jochen Adnritzky, Andreas Jobst, Sylwia Nowak and Natialia
Tamirisa. 2010. “Market Response to Policy Initiatives During the Global Financial Crisis,”
NBER Working Paper 15809, March.

Allessandri, Piergiorgio and Andrew G. Haldane. 2009, “Banking on the State,” Bank of
England, November,
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech409.pdf.

Baba, Naohiko and Frank Packer. 2009. “From Turmoil to Crisis: Dislocations in the FX
Swap Market Before and After the Failure of Lehman Brothers,” Bank for International
Settlements Working Paper No. 285, July. Journal of International Money and Finance,
forthcoming.

Barro, Robert and Charles Redlick. 2009. “Macroeconomic effects of government purchases
and taxation,” NBER Working Paper, No. 15369.

Bent, Bruce R. 2007.      Letter to SEC, September 5. http://www.sec.gov/comments/s7-19-
08/s71908-40.pdf

Bernanke, Ben S. 2002. “On Milton Friedman’s Ninetieth Birthday,” speech given at the
Conference to Honor Milton Friedman, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, November 8,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2002/20021108/default.htm

Bernanke, Ben. S. 2009. “The Crisis and the Policy Response,” Stamp Lecture, London School
of Economics, London England, January 13,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20090113a.htm

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,. 2009. “The Supervisory Capital
Assessment Program: Design and Implementation,” April 24,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/bcreg20090424a1.pdf.

Christensen, Jens. H.E., Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch. 2009. “Do Central Bank
Liquidity Facilities Affect Interbank Interest Rates?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Working Paper 2009-13, June.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. 2009. “When is the
government spending multiplier large?”, manuscript, Northwestern University.
http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/~yona/research/Multiplier-version12.pdf

Congressional Budget Office. 2008. “The Budget and Economic Outlook: An Update.” At
<http://www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=9706&type=0>.

                                              24
Cogan, John, Tobias Cwik, John Taylor and Volcker Wieland. 2009. “New Keynesian
versus old Keynesian government spending multipliers,” NBER Working Paper, No. 14782.

Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford. 2010. “Conventional and Unconventional Monetary
Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review (July/August): 229-264.

Eggertsson, Gauti B.. 2006. “Was the New Deal contractionary?” Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Staff Report, No. 264

Egertsson, Gauti B. 2009. “What fiscal policy is effective at the zero interest rates.” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report, No. 402

Eggertsson, Gauti, B. And Michael Woodford. 2003. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2003:1, pp. 139-211.

Eggertsson, Gauti, B. And Michael Woodford. 2004. “Policy Options in a Liquidity Trap,”
American Economic Review 94(2): 76-79.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 2008, “FDIC Announces Plan to Free Up Bank
Liquidity,” Press Release, October 14, http://www.fdic.gov/news/news/press/2008/pr08100.html.

French, Kenneth R., et al. 2010. The Squam Lake Report: Fixing the Financial System
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010).

Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack. 2010. “Large Scale
Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Staff Report No. 441, March.

Greenlaw, David, Jan Hatzius, Anil K Kashyap, Hyun Song Shin. 2008. “ Leveraged
Losses: Lessons from the Mortgage Market Meltdown,” Proceedings of the U.S. Monetary
Policy Forum, 2008. (Chicago: U.S. Monetary Policy Forum): 7-59.

Goldberg, Linda, Craig Kennedy and Jason Miu. 2010. “Central Bank Dollar Swap Lines
and Overseas Dollar Funding Costs,” National Burea of Economic Research Working Paper
15763, February.

Gorton, Gary B. and Andrew Metrick. 2009. “Securitized Lending and the Run on Repo,”
NBER Working Paper No. 15223 (August).

Hall, Robert E. 2009. “How much does GDP rise if the government buys more output,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2009(2), 183‐249.



                                                25
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil S. Kasyhap. forthcoming. "Will the U.S. Bank Recapitalization
Succeed? Eight Lessons from Japan, " Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Journal of Economic Perspectives. 2009. “Symposium: Early Stages of the Credit Crunch,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 3-119.

Journal of Economic Perspectives. 2010. “Symposium: Financial Plumbing,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 24(1): 3-118.

Krugman, Paul. 2008. “Depression Economics Returns,” New York Times, November 14, 2008.

Kuttner, Kenneth N. “Comment on ‘Price Stability and Japanese Monetary Policy’ by Robert
Hetzel,” Bank of Japan Instittute for Monetary and Economic Studies Monetary and Economic
Studies 22: 37-46.

McAndrews, James 2009. “Segmentation in the U.S. Dollar Money Markets During the
Financial Crisis,” Paper presented at the International Conference of the Bank of Japan’s
Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Tokyo, May.
http://www.frbatlanta.org/filelegacydocs/seminars/seminar_mcandrews_052009.pdf

McAndrews, James, Asani Sarkar, and Zhenyu Wang. 2008. “The Effect of the Long-Term
Auction Facility o the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Staff Report No. 335, July.

McDonald, Lawrence G. 2009. A Collosal Failure of Common Sense: The Inside Story of the
Collapse of Lehman Brothers (New York: Crown Business).

Mishkin, Frederic S. 2009. ”Is Monetary Policy Effective During Financial Crises,” American
Economic Review, 99 (2): 573-577.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 2010a.“The Financial Crisis and the Federal Reserve,” NBER Macro
Annual, 2009: 495-508.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 2010b. The Economics of Money, Banking and Financial Markets, 9th
edition, (Boston: Addison-Wesley).

Mishkin, Frederic S. 2011. Macroeconomics: Policy and Practice (Boston: Addison-Wesley)

Modigliani, Franco and Richard Sutch. 1967. “Debt Management and the Term Structure of
Interest Rates: An Empirical Analysis of Recent Experience,´ Journal of Political Economy
75(4): 569-89.




                                               26
Rajan, G. Rhaguram, 2005 “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” The
Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future. (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City):
313-369.

Reinhart, Carmen M and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press)

Sarkar, Asani and Jeffrey Shrader. 2010. “Financial Amplification Mechanisms and the
Federal Reserve’s Supply of Liquidity During the Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Staff Report No. 431. March.

Solow, Robert and James Tobin. 1987. “The Kennedy Economic Reports: Introduction,” in
James Tobin and Murray Weidenbaum, eds., Two Revolutions in Economic Policy: The First
Economic Reports of Presidents Kennedy and Reagan, (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).

Sorkin, Andrew Ross. 2009. Too Big To Fail: The Inside Story of How Wall Street and
Washington Fought to Save the Financial System–and Themselves. (New York: Viking).

Taylor, John, B. 2009. Getting Off Track: How Government Actions and Interventions, Caused,
Prolonged and Worsened the Financial Crisis (Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press).

Taylor, John, B. and John Williams, 2009. “A Black Swan in the Money Market,” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 58-83.

Torres, Craig and Hugh Son. 2009. “Bernanke Says Insurer AIG Acted Like a Hedge Fund”,
March 3.
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aqw5b2yJyB1o&refer=home

Uhlig, Harald. 2010. “Some Fiscal Calculus,” American Economic Review, 100(2): 30–34.

Wallison, Peter J. 2010. “Taypayers and the Dodd Bill,” Wall Street Journal, April 26.

Wessel, David. 2009. In Fed We Trust: Ben Bernanke’s War on the Great Panic, (New York:
Crown Business).

Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
(Princeton: Princeton University Press).

Woodford, Michael. 2010. "Simple analytics of the government expenditure multiplier,"
NBER Working Paper, No. 15714.

Wu, Tao. 2008. “On the Effectiveness of the Federal Reserve’s New Liquidity Facilities,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Working Paper No. 0808, May.
http://www.dallasfed.org/research/papers/2008/wp0808.pdf

                                              27
Valukas, Anton R. 2010. Examiner’s Report for the United States Bankrupty Court, Southern
District of New York, March 11, 2010, http://lehmanreport.jenner.com/VOLUME%203.pdf




                                            28
Figures


Figure 1: Credit Spreads 2000-2009




Source: FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis British Bankers’ Association

Note: TED spread is the difference between the 3-month Libor rate and the constant maturity 3-
month Treasury bill rate. Baa spread is the difference between constant maturity Baa rate and
the 10-year constant maturity Treasury bond rate.




                                              29
Figure 2: Financial Variables, 2007-2009




                    a) Baa corporate bond rate




                                           30
b) Bank Lending




                  31
   (c) Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Issuance




Source: FRED database, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and Federal Reserve Board of
Governors.

Note: The Baa corporate bond rate is the constant maturity interest rate, asset-back commercial
paper issuance is the daily average of issuance of asset-backed commercial paper, and bank
lending is total loans and leases of commercial banks.




                                               32
