NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BEHAVIORAL RESPONSE TO VOLUNTARY PROVISION OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC GOOD:
EVIDENCE FROM RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY DEMAND
Grant D. Jacobsen
Matthew J. Kotchen
Michael P. Vandenbergh
Working Paper 16608
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16608

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

We are especially grateful to Becky Williamson of Memphis Light, Gas and Water (MLGW) for generously
providing data used in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Grant D. Jacobsen, Matthew J. Kotchen, and Michael P. Vandenbergh. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Behavioral Response to Voluntary Provision of an Environmental Public Good: Evidence
from Residential Electricity Demand
Grant D. Jacobsen, Matthew J. Kotchen, and Michael P. Vandenbergh
NBER Working Paper No. 16608
December 2010
JEL No. H41,Q42,Q54
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a theory of voluntary provision of a public good in which a household’s decision
to engage in a form of environmentally friendly behavior is based on the desire to offset another behavior
that is environmentally harmful. The model generates predictions about (1) participation in a green-electricity
program at the extensive and intensive margins, and (2) changes in electricity consumption in response
to participation. We test the theory using billing data for participants and nonparticipants in a green-electricity
program in Memphis, Tennessee. High-consumption households are more likely to participate, and
they participate at higher levels. In terms of a behavioral response, households participating above
the minimum threshold level do not change electricity consumption, but those participating at the minimum
threshold increase electricity consumption 2.5 percent after enrolling in the program. The result is
based on identification strategies that exploit before-after differences between participants and nonparticipants,
and differences in the timing of enrollment among participants only. Despite the increase in electricity
demand upon the purchase of green electricity for the households with a “buy-in” mentality, the net
effect for the buy-in households is a reduction in pollution emissions, as the behavioral response is
not large enough to offset the environmental benefit of the green-electricity purchase.
Grant D. Jacobsen
Department of Planning,
Public Policy, and Management
1209 University of Oregon
119 Hendricks Hall
Eugene, OR 97403
gdjaco@uoregon.edu
Matthew J. Kotchen
School of Forestry & Environmental Studies
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
matthew.kotchen@yale.edu

Michael P. Vandenbergh
Vanderbilt University Law School
131 21st Avenue South
Nashville, TN 37203
michael.vandenbergh@vanderbilt.edu

1. Introduction
Why do individuals and households engage in pro-environmental behavior? It often comes at
substantial private cost for frequently diffuse and, on its own, inconsequential public,
environmental benefit. Such behavior is nevertheless common, especially in the realms of energy
efficiency and the reduction of greenhouse-gas (GHG) emissions. Some behaviors, such as the
purchase of a hybrid car, solar panels, or home weatherization products, can be justified on the
basis of private payback periods, but the rate of return in many cases is too low to fully explain
the prevalence of observed purchases. Other behaviors, such as the purchase of many green
products, carbon offsets, and participation in green-electricity programs, operate more like
charitable contributions.1 With these behaviors, the primary goal is to promote environmental
quality. This paper seeks to broaden the understanding of why we observe the latter type of proenvironmental behavior, referred to here as voluntary provision of an environmental public good.
We begin with a theory of voluntary provision in which a household’s decision to engage
in a form of environmentally friendly behavior is based on the desire to offset another behavior
that is environmentally harmful. The interrelated behaviors that we consider throughout the
paper are a household’s conventional electricity consumption and participation in a voluntary
green-electricity program that provides financing for electricity generation from renewable
sources of energy. In this context, the theory is built on the idea—which we ultimately test—that
households purchase green electricity in order to mitigate disutility associated with pollution
emissions generated through their own consumption of conventional electricity. We consider two
variants of the model’s setup. In one version, a household cares about the exact amount of greenelectricity it purchases. In the other version, a household only cares about whether it purchases
the minimum amount required to participate in the green-electricity program. For both cases we
derive conditions for participation at the extensive and intensive margins for a green-electricity
program that is based on the voluntary contribution mechanism.
The model is also useful for examining how participation in the green-electricity program
might affect demand for electricity more generally. Does participation in the green-electricity
1

According to survey data, the number of consumers buying “green products” increased from 12 percent in 2007 to
36 percent in 2008, and remained at 36 percent in 2009 despite the recession (Mintel International Group, 2009).
The voluntary carbon offset market grew over 15-fold between 2005 and 2008, increasing in size from $45 million
to $705 million (Ecosystem Marketplace & New Carbon Finance, 2009). With respect to green electricity, over 5
million residential and commercial customers participate in such programs in order to provide financing for the
generation of electricity through renewable sources of energy (REN21, 2009).

1

program affect a household’s electricity demand? How might potential changes in electricity
demand differ if participation is prompted with an offset motive or an offset motive combined
with a “buy-in” mentality? And if electricity consumption changes, what is the net effect on
emissions? It is easy to envision cases where households purchase a minimum amount of green
electricity that is used to justify an increase in electricity demand; and if the increase in demand
is greater than the purchase of green electricity, net emissions increase. With these questions in
mind, we use the model to motivate the study of behavioral responses to voluntary provision of
an environmental public good.
We then test implications of the model using billing data from the Green Power Switch
(GPS) program in Memphis, Tennessee. We obtained data from Memphis, Light, Gas and Water
(MLGW) on monthly electricity bills between 2003 and 2008 for all 910 households
participating in the GPS program as well as a sample of 30,012 nonparticipating households.2 In
total, the dataset consists of more than 779,037 monthly observations. The GPS program at
MLGW began in 2005, so we have billing data for two years before and three years after
households could first participate in the program. The first part of our empirical analysis
examines the relationship between average electricity consumption and decisions about
participation in the GPS program. The models are based on cross-sectional variation in
household electricity consumption prior to enrollment in the GPS program, and we evaluate the
relationship between consumption and program participation at both the extensive and intensive
margins. The second part of our analysis examines whether households that participate in the
GPS program change their electricity consumption after doing so—that is, we test for a
behavioral response to participation. We employ a fixed-effects research design whereby
identification of the behavioral response is based on comparisons between participants and
nonparticipants, before and after enrollment in the GPS program. Specifically, we estimate
models that exploit before-after differences between participants and nonparticipants, in addition
to models that exploit before-after differences in the timing of enrollment among participants
only.
We find that households with greater electricity consumption are more likely to
participate in the GPS program and to participate at a higher level. We interpret these results as

2

These data were provided in such a way that names and address were excluded from each observation to ensure
anonymity of MLGW customers.

2

consistent with our model—meaning that participating in the green-electricity program is
motivated in part by households feeling an obligation to offset, to some degree, the pollution
emissions associated with their own conventional-electricity consumption. With respect to
evidence of a behavioral response, we find that when participants at all levels are lumped
together, GPS participation does not lead to a statistically significant change in electricity
consumption. If, however, we consider only participants that enroll at the minimum level, we do
find evidence of a behavioral response: these households increase electricity consumption 2.5
percent after enrolling in the GPS program. This result, and the fact that it differs from that for
participants at higher levels, is also consistent with our theoretical model, which links a “buy-in”
mentality to expected differences in the behavioral response. Finally, given that in some cases
the purchase of green electricity causes an increase in electricity consumption, we consider the
net effect on emissions. It turns out that the 2.5 percent increase in consumption, which translates
into 30 kwh/month for the average household, is less than the GPS minimum participation
threshold of 150 kwh/month in green-electricity capacity. Hence, despite a behavioral response
of increased electricity consumption, the net effect on environmental quality even for the buy-in
households is a reduction in emissions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the most
relevant literature and explains the contributions of our theoretical and empirical analysis.
Section 3 develops the theoretical framework. Section 4 describes the GPS program and our data
collection and preparation. Section 5 describes our empirical methods and reports the results.
Section 6 summarizes and concludes the paper.

2. Relation to Existing Literature
Economists often perceive pro-environmental behaviors, such as the voluntary purchase of green
electricity, as examples of private provision of public goods. Important features of the standard
model for privately provided public goods are developed in Bergstrom et al. (1986) and
Andreoni (1988). The models are useful for understanding who provides public goods and who
free rides. More recently, this approach has been extended to explicitly model consumption
decisions within green markets (Kotchen 2006) and participation in green electricity programs in
particular (Kotchen and Moore 2007).

3

A substantial empirical literature examines the private provision of environmental public
goods, and many studies focus on green electricity. Several studies employ stated- or revealedpreference techniques to derive estimates of willingness to pay for various types of green
electricity (e.g., Goett et al. 2000; Champ and Bishop 2001; Roe et al. 2001). Other studies
analyze factors that influence participation in specific green-electricity programs (e.g.,
Oberholzer-Gee, 2001; Rose et al. 2002; Clark et al. 2003). In general, the results of this research
show that households frequently state a willingness to pay a premium for green electricity, yet
actual participation in programs depends on household characteristics, attitudes related to the
environment, and the existence of “warm-glow” motives.3
The particular structure of a green-electricity program is another important factor that
affects participation. Kotchen and Moore (2007) focus on the distinction between the two most
common types of programs. The first are those based on the voluntary contribution mechanism
(VCM). In VCM programs, households choose to contribute an additional amount of money
each month, through their electricity bills, in support of green electricity, and the monthly
contribution is fixed and independent of the household’s actual electricity demand. The second
type of program is the green tariff mechanism (GTM). Households that participate in a GTM
program pay a price premium for each unit of their actual electricity consumption, and the
additional revenue is used to support green-electricity capacity. With the GTM, participation is
more costly for households with greater electricity consumption, and Kotchen and Moore (2007)
find that high-consumption households are less likely to participate in GTM green-electricity
programs.
While understanding the determinants of participation in green electricity programs is
important, it is also important to understand whether these programs lead to behavioral
responses, such as an increase in energy consumption. In addition to our analysis in this paper,
one other paper has examined whether enrolling in a green electricity program leads to changes
in household energy consumption. Kotchen and Moore (2008) find that energy consumption fell
for participants in a green electricity program that was based on a GTM. The magnitude of the
effect, however, was within the range predicted by estimates of the price elasticity of demand for
3

A “warm-glow” motive captures the idea that households might participate in a green-electricity program because
it makes them feel good, rather than because they care about any public benefits that may arise from reduced
pollution emissions. See Andreoni (1990) for the general formulation of warm-glow motives for private provision of
public goods.

4

electricity. Hence the study could not determine whether the behavioral response was due to the
voluntary price premium or some other response of households from having offset their own
emissions. In contrast, participants in the green electricity program under study in this paper
contribute a fixed amount each month in support of green electricity through a VCM. Because
the amount contributed is independent of how much electricity is consumed, any changes in
consumption that we find in the present study can be attributed to reasons other than changes in
the marginal price—namely a household simply knowing that it has offset some fraction of its
emissions.
The literature on green-electricity programs has relevance to the understanding of more
recently formed markets for voluntary carbon offsets. Offsets are based on the idea that agents
need not reduce their own emissions in order to reduce the amount of greenhouse gases (GHGs)
in the atmosphere; instead, they can pay someone else to reduce emissions and achieve the same
effect on atmospheric concentrations. Typically, offsets arise through investments in renewable
energy, energy efficiency, reforestation, or other projects that reduce emissions or sequester
GHGs. While the purchase of voluntary carbon offsets is consistent with private provision of a
public good, it differs because provision is related to other behaviors that provide a public bad
(Kotchen 2009). For example, climate change awareness campaigns, which emphasize how
many consumer choices lead to increases in carbon emissions, have been shown to increase
purchases of carbon offsets (Jacobsen 2010). Though the connection is rarely made (somewhat
surprisingly), participation in a green-electricity program is very similar to voluntary purchases
of carbon offsets. Households aware that their conventional electricity consumption generates
GHG emissions may seek to offset those emissions through the purchase of green electricity.
It follows that many of the concerns about green electricity mirror those about carbon
offsets. Households contribute a third or more of U.S. GHG emissions (Dietz et al. 2009), and
carbon offsets may be an important component of policy efforts to reduce household GHG
emissions (Vandenbergh and Steinemann 2007). But questions are frequently raised about
whether the emission reductions are “additional” in the sense that they would not have occurred
without the purchase of green electricity or offsets.4 Even if the emission reductions are
additional, critics are still skeptical about the actual environmental benefits because of the

4

See Conte and Kotchen (2010) for a discussion about additionality and how concerns about it affect the price of
carbon offsets.

5

potential behavioral response to such purchases. Many claim that carbon offsets are effectively
indulgences that are used to assuage guilt and justify more polluting activities. In the context of
green electricity, the same reasoning leads to questions about whether households that participate
in programs consequently increase their consumption and thereby negate some (or all) of the
supposed environmental benefits. More generally, the same type of behavioral response might
exist across a broad spectrum of behaviors related to climate change or energy. Households that
choose to weatherize their residence or purchase a more efficient heating and cooling system
may be doing so, in part, to mitigate their own carbon emissions. Having done so, these
households may become somewhat less concerned about curbing their emissions generated
through other behaviors, and this behavioral response could potentially undercut the benefits of
their initial action. In all cases, the explanation of the behavioral response is closely related to
psychological theory on “moral licensing,” which is used to explain how individuals use their
own “good” behaviors to self-justify “bad” behaviors.5 To date, however, we are not aware of
any empirical evidence on the moral licensing of environmentally related behaviors that is based
on measurable and revealed-preference data.
The present paper makes a contribution by linking participation in a green-electricity
program with the offset motive. The theoretical model is novel and closely linked to an empirical
application. Our results are consistent with the theory and differ in predictable ways from those
of Kotchen and Moore (2007, 2008). A further contribution of the paper is that we provide
revealed-preference evidence of a moral-licensing (or indulgence) effect with respect to
environmentally related behavior. We find that the purchase of green electricity does in fact
result in greater electricity demand for some households, but importantly, the behavioral
response is not large enough to negate within household environmental benefits.6

5

With experiments designed to test racial and gender prejudices, psychologists find strong evidence in support of
moral licensing (Monin and Miller 2001). A more related psychology study, though not focused on green electricity,
involves a laboratory experiment that examines whether green purchases crowd out other types of altruistic
behavior. Mazar and Zhong (2010) find that University of Toronto students who purchased goods from a “green”
store were less altruistic than students who purchased goods from a conventional store. A limitation of their study,
however, is that students were assigned to one type of store or the other, rather than having the ability to choose
which store they preferred.
6
The paper also contributes to the literature on heterogeneous behavior in charitable giving. Similar to our results, a
recent study shows that individuals who donate small amounts to charities do so for different reasons than do those
that give large amounts. In particular, DellaVigna et al. (2009) find evidence that individuals who give small
amounts to charity are more likely to give their donations to avoid the disutility of saying “no” to a request than
those who make larger donations.

6

3. Conceptual Framework
Households may choose to participate in a green-electricity program through a voluntary
contribution mechanism. An important feature of the model that distinguishes it from previous
work (i.e., Kotchen and Moore 2007) is that households choose to participate in order to
minimize disutility from knowing their conventional electricity consumption generates
emissions. We also consider the implications of a potential “buy-in” mentality that motivates
participation.
A representative household with income m chooses between consumption of a numeraire

x and electricity consumption y at price p y . The household’s utility maximization problem is
written as
(1)

max{x  f ( y)  h( y ) : x  p y y  m} ,
x, y

where f () is strictly increasing and strictly concave, h() is strictly increasing and convex, and

  {0,1} is an indicator variable for whether the household is concerned about its impact on
environmental quality.7 The setup implies that while households of either type benefit from
electricity consumption, only the type concerned with its own impact on environmental quality
experiences disutility from knowing its conventional electricity consumption contributes to
pollution emissions. The disutility may arise from knowledge about the impact of actual
emissions or from subjective assessments about the impact of one’s own emissions. The firstorder condition that defines the solution to (1), denoted ŷ , is
(2)

f ( yˆ )  p y  h( yˆ ) .

The solution for type   1 is illustrated in Figure 1 at the level of ŷ where the f () and
h()  py curves intersect. Other elements of the figure are described below. We now consider the

impact of introducing a green-electricity program, along with refinements on the motives for
participation.

3.1 The Availability of Green Electricity

7

The initial setup of our model is similar to that in Kotchen and Moore (2008); the only difference here is the
further simplifying assumption that preferences are quasi-linear in x .

7

Consider a green-electricity program with participation structured around voluntary purchases of
electricity g at price p g , where g is measured in the same units as y (i.e., kilowatt-hours,
kWhs). It is assumed that production of g does not generate emissions, and, following Kotchen
(2009), households of the type that are environmentally concerned care about the net effect on
emissions. We can thus write the utility maximization problem with the green-electricity option
as
(3)

max{x  f ( y)  h( y  g ) : x  p y y  p g g  m} .
x, y , g

Note that participation in the offset program is based on the amount of offsetting a household
chooses to do, rather than on an all or nothing decision at 100 percent, which is the case under
study in Kotchen and Moore (2008).
Assuming an interior solution for y , but allowing the possibility for g  0 , we have the
following first-order (Kuhn-Tucker) conditions that define the solution to (3):
(4a)

f ( y)  p y  h( y  g )  0 ,

(4b)

g  0 and  p g  h( y  g )  0 and g[ p g  h( y  g )]  0 .

Letting { ~y , g~} denote the solution, we can make several useful observations. Condition (4b)
implies that g~  0 if and only if p g  h( yˆ ) . In words, if the price of green electricity exceeds
the marginal disutility of emissions at the level of electricity demand without the offset option,
then the household will choose not to offset any of its emissions. Clearly, this will always be the
case for households of type   0 or if the price of green electricity is sufficiently high, and in
y  g~)  p , which implies that
both cases ~y  yˆ . If g~  0 , however, then it must hold that h( ~
g

if a household offsets at all, it does so all the way to the point where the marginal disutility from
net emissions equals the marginal cost of offsetting, i.e., the price of green electricity. This
condition is illustrated at the level y˜ in Figure 1. Moreover, offsetting will be less than (equal to)
100 percent of electricity consumption if and only if h(0)  () p g .8 The case of less than 100

8

According to the model, households will never offset more than 100 percent of their emissions from electricity
consumption. Such behavior would be possible, however, if the model were expanded to allow additional benefits to
households of offset purchases, such as those often associated with warm-glow (Andreoni 1990) or status (Harbaugh
1998).

8

percent is illustrated with y˜  g˜  0 in Figure 1. The alternative case (not shown) would require
the intercept of h(0)  py to lie above py  pg .
Let us for the moment add one feature to the model that is useful to motivate part of our
empirical analysis. Among households of type   1, assume the direct benefit of electricity
consumption is f ( y ) , where   0 is simply a weight that allows heterogeneity of electricity

demand before green electricity is available. Using (2) it is easy to verify that dyˆ / d  0 ; that is,
without the green-electricity option, demand for conventional electricity is increasing in  .
From this, it follows that satisfying the nonparticipant condition of p g  h( yˆ ) is more difficult
with a larger  . In other words, the model predicts that, among households concerned about
environmental quality, those with greater observed conventional-electricity consumption are
more likely to enroll in the green-electricity program. A further empirical prediction is that such
higher consumption households are expected to purchase more green electricity. This can be
y / d  dg~ / d  0 . For simplicity hereafter, however,
shown using (4a) and (4b) to verify that d~
we continue to analyze the model as if   1 .
Further observations, which are important for our empirical analysis, are based on a
comparison of electricity consumption before and after the green-electricity option is available,
assuming a household participates. We have already shown that participation requires
pg  h( yˆ ) , where   1, and implies pg  h( y˜  g˜ ) . Substituting the latter condition into (4a)

implies that conventional electricity consumption upon a household’s participation must satisfy
f (y)  py  pg , which corresponds with the quantity y˜ in Figure 1. It is straightforward to verify

using the figure that participating households will always (weakly) increase their conventional
electricity consumption, that is, y˜  yˆ . It is also easy to verify using the figure that net
consumption will always (weakly) decrease, that is, y˜  g˜  yˆ . Combining these results, we find
that voluntary participation in the green-electricity program may be associated with an increase
in electricity consumption, but the increase will be less than the amount of green electricity
purchased.

3.2 The Buy-In Mentality
We now consider the possibility that when households choose to participate in the greenelectricity program, they care not about their overall net emissions, but rather, about simply

9

“buying in.” Our approach builds on Rose-Ackerman’s (1982) notion regarding motives for
charitable giving. The idea is that if a “donor’s gift to a particular charity is at least equal to some
minimum z , the donor believes that he or she has ‘bought in’ to the entire range of services
provided by the charity” (p. 195). With respect to purchases of green electricity out of concern
for the environment, the idea is that if some minimum amount of emissions is offset, a household
may feel it has done its part, and concern is no longer focused on actual net emissions. More
formally, disutility from emissions no longer occurs conditional upon reaching the buy-in
minimum.
We can modify the setup of our model to account for a buy-in mentality and to
investigate its implications. Assume there is an exogenously given minimum threshold for the
purchase of green electricity g  z . Based on this, the preference parameter  now takes the
form
(5)

1 if g  z
0 if g  z.

 ( g; z)  

That is, a concerned household cares about the environmental implications of its own electricity
consumption unless it buys into the green-electricity program, in which case it no longer feels
any “guilt.” With this modification, the household utility maximization problem becomes
(6)

max{x  f ( y )   ( g ; z )h( y  g ) : x  p y y  p g g  m , g  0 or g  z} .
x, y, g

Let us denote the solution(s) { y , g } . Clearly, the amount of green electricity purchased will take
on only one of two values, g  0 or g  z . One complete solution to the problem is thus {yˆ ,0} ,
which is simply the solution to problem (1) above. The other solution is { y , z} , where y solves

f ( y)  p y , as illustrated in Figure 1. Note that y  yˆ , and it follows that conditional on
buying-in to the program households will always increase conventional electricity consumption.
Moreover, the increase will be greater than that which would arise if participation were not
motivated with a buy-in mentality.
To determine which of the two possible buy-in solutions will arise, consider indirect
utility in both cases:
(7a)

Vg 0  m  p y yˆ  f ( yˆ )  h( yˆ )

(7b)

Vg  z  m  py y  f (y )  pg z

10

It follows that a household will buy-in to the offset program if and only if Vg  z  Vg 0 , which can
be rearranged to imply the following inequality:
(8)

[ f ( y )  p y y ]  [ f ( yˆ )  p y yˆ ]  p g z  h( yˆ ) .

Because the left-hand side is strictly positive and  h( yˆ )  0 , there exists a threshold buy-in
expenditure, denoted   p g z , that makes the household indifferent between the two possible
solutions.9 Accordingly, if p g z is less than (greater than)  , the household will (will not) buy
into the offset program. Note, here again, that if we consider direct benefits from electricity
consumption to take the form f ( y ) , then satisfying (8) is only easier, implying that households
with greater conventional-electricity consumption are more likely to participate in the greenelectricity program, even if they do so to simply buy in.
Condition (8) is also useful to investigate the different possibilities for the change in net
consumption—i.e., y  z versus yˆ —when participation is motivated with a buy-in. By
definition, the net effect will be positive (neutral, negative) when z  (,)y  yˆ , and it is easy to
verify that all cases are possible. We can see that satisfying the inequality in (8) is possible for
any value of z because pg can vary without changes in y or yˆ . Hence, even if the buy-in
quantity is exceedingly high, participation is still possible if the price of green electricity is
sufficiently low. In this case, the net effect can be positive. But, of course, if the buy-in quantity
is very low, participation is also possible as long as the price of green electricity is not too high.
It follows, in contrast to the previous version of the model where the net effect is always
positive, that the net effect on electricity consumption—and therefore emissions—can be
positive or negative when green electricity purchases are motivated with a buy-in mentality.

4

Empirical Setting and Data Collection

Memphis Light, Gas and Water (MLGW) is the largest three-service municipal utility company
in the United States, serving more than 430,000 customers in Shelby County, Tennessee. MLGW
purchases all of its electricity from the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), which has
historically generated power using a mix of coal, natural gas, fuel oil, nuclear plants, and
hydroelectric dams. Since April 2000, however, the TVA has added to its power mix electricity
9

In this knife-edged case, and only this case, the solution to maximization problem (6) is not unique.

11

generated through solar power, wind power, and methane gas. TVA’s development of these
alternative energy sources is funded in part by the Green Power Switch (GPS) program, which is
the voluntary green-electricity program under study in this paper.
The GPS program is a partnership between TVA and several electricity distributors,
including MLGW, that allows customers to voluntarily increase the amount of electricity
generated from solar energy, wind energy, and methane gas. Households that voluntarily enroll
in the program agree to pay an additional amount on each month’s energy bill. The exact amount
added to the bill depends on how many blocks of green electricity a household chooses to
purchase. Each block costs $4 per month and covers the approximate cost of producing 150
kilowatt-hours (kWhs) of green electricity. Participating households must purchase at least one
monthly block, but there is no limit to how many blocks a household can purchase. The vast
majority of participating households purchase between one and five blocks, as we will show, and
this translates into additional charges between $48 and $240 per year. Enrollment in the program
does not change the type of electricity delivered to a household—the electricity consumed by
GPS participants comes from the same fuel mix as that for non-participants—but money
contributed to the GPS program provides funding for additional investment in green-electricity
capacity.
MLGW initiated the GPS program in April 2005, and enrollment has increased steadily
over time. Figure 2 shows the trends for new enrollment, cancelations, and active enrollment
between the second quarter of 2005 and the fourth quarter of 2008. The initial pulse of
enrollment was spurred in part by an advertising campaign accompanied with direct-mail reply
cards and bill inserts when the program was first rolled out. Based on information provided by
MLGW, we know that households responding to reply cards and bill inserts accounted for 141 of
the 299 total enrollments in 2005. Beyond the initial advertising campaign, the GPS program has
been promoted continually on the websites of both MLGW and TVA, and customers can enroll
in the program directly through these websites. Web-based sign-ups are the most common way
to enroll, accounting for 619 of the 885 households enrolled at the end of 2008. Other ways to
sign-up include over the telephone, emails to MLGW staff, and enrollment at environmentally
based community events and trade shows. Figure 2 shows a steady increase in enrollment and
exceedingly few cancelations.

12

Our empirical analysis is based primarily on two sets of data that we obtained from
MLGW. The first contains information about household participation in the GPS program,
including when each household enrolled and how many blocks it purchased. If a household
dropped out of the program or changed how many blocks it purchased, that information is also
included, as well as the date any change occurred. The second dataset contains billing data on
electricity consumption for all 910 households that ever participated in the GPS program and a
sample of 30,012 non-participating households.10 These data begin in May 2003, which is two
years before the start of the GPS program, and continue through December 2008. For every
observation, we have both a premise identification number and a customer identification
number.11 Hence, if a customer switches locations during the course of the sample, the billing
record at the new location is treated as a belonging to a new household. Similarly, if more than
one customer occupies a premise during the sample period, we treat each customer’s tenure as a
separate household. It follows that the maximum number of monthly observations for a
household is 68, but there are fewer observations for households that established service after
May 2003 or that terminated service before December 2008.
We merge these two datasets together using each household’s unique identification
number. With the merged dataset, we then generate several variables that are central to our
analysis. Participant is a time-constant dummy variable for whether a household ever enrolled in
the GPS program, and Blocks is a time-constant variable for the number of blocks that a
household purchased. If a household ever changed its level of participation, Blocks indicates the
maximum ever purchased; and in the case of non-participating households, Blocks equals zero.12

Enrolled is a time-varying dummy variable indicating whether a household was actively enrolled
in the GPS program in any given month (i.e., billing cycle). Finally, kWh/day is a time-varying

10

Ideally the sample of nonparticipating households would be truly random; however, MLGW programmers used
the following procedure to draw the sample. Selected households are those with an address such that the second
letter of the street name is “a” and the 4th digit of the address is “3”, “5” or “9.” Fortunately, for purposes of our
analysis, the selection procedure does not appear to have any strong location biases. For example, the relationship
between the population of a zip code and the number of households in our sample from that zip code has a strong
positive correlation of 0.74. Throughout the paper we thus treat this sample as if it were randomly drawn.
11
As mentioned previously, names and street addresses were excluded from all records to ensure the anonymity of
MLGW’s customers.
12
A total of 56 households changed their level of participation during the sample period. Nineteen households
moved from one level of active participation to another, with 14 increasing blocks and 4 decreasing blocks. A total
of 37 households dropped out of the program after having participated.

13

variable for the amount of electricity consumed in each month, derived by dividing electricity
consumption in each billing cycle by the number of days in the corresponding billing cycle.
In addition to these MLGW data, all households were matched to zip-code level
demographic data from the 2000 U.S. Census and election data from the 2000 presidential
election.13 There are 35 different zip codes in the sample. Variables obtained from the Census
include median household income, proportion with educational attainment of at least a college
degree, share of households with families consisting of two people or more, population density
(people per square kilometer), and race (proportion white and black). The electoral data include
variables on the proportion of votes cast for George W. Bush, Albert Gore, and Ralph Nader in
the 2000 U.S. Presidential Election.
The complete dataset includes 779,037 monthly observations; however, some
observations were dropped in the process of cleaning and preparing the dataset for analysis. We
drop the first billing observation on record for each household because the closing data of the
previous billing cycle is not observed, meaning that we cannot calculate the number of days in
the first billing cycle to generate kWh/day (31,102 observations, or 4.0 percent). We drop
observations with a billing period shorter than 26 days or longer than 36 days; these are
considered irregular because meters are routinely read every 31 days (36,879 additional
observations, or 4.7 percent). If the last observation for a household occurs before the end of our
sample period, we drop this observation because electricity consumption may be abnormal
during the month in which the account is cancelled (16,495 additional observations, or 2.1
percent). If the first observation for a household occurs after the start of our sample period, we
drop the 2nd through 6th billing record because households typically experience a period of partial
occupancy when first moving in (72,417 additional observations, or 9.3 percent). Finally, we
drop all records for which electricity consumption is recorded as missing, negative, or zero (346,
8, and 3,922 observations, respectively, or collectively less than 1 percent). The final set of panel
data used in our analysis includes 617,958 monthly observations and 20,205 households, 885 of
which are participating households.

13

Precinct level data from the 2000 Tennessee Federal Election was downloaded from the Federal Elections Project
(Lublin and Voss, 2001) and converted to zip-code level data using GIS software and Tennessee’s zip code
tabulation area (ZCTA) shape file and voting district shape file from the U.S. Census Cartographic Boundary Files.
These shape files are available at http://www.census.gov/geo/www/cob/. To convert the data from precinct to zip
code level data, each precinct was linked to the zip code where its centroid is located.

14

Table 1 reports summary statistics on the demographic and electoral data for the crosssection of 20,205 households. Note that these data are essentially zip-code level data weighted
according the number of households in our sample within each zip code. Median household
income is approximately $45,400 per year, 27 percent of the adults within the zip codes have
obtained at least a college degree, the proportion of white residents is 54 percent, roughly 69
percent of the households are families with two or more residents, and the mean population
density is 906 persons per square kilometer. In terms of electoral preferences in the 2000
presidential election, 42 percent voted for Bush, 56 percent voted for Gore, and just over 1
percent voted for Nader. Transitioning to the data that we observe at the household level, the
final row of Table 1 includes summary statistics for mean kWh/day, which is based on MLGW
monthly billing data averaged within households and then between households. We find that
mean electricity consumption is approximately 40 kWh/day, or 1,200 kWh/month.
Table 2 reports the frequency distribution of the GPS participation levels (i.e., Blocks)
among the 910 households that ever participated in the program. Nearly half (45 percent) of all
households purchase only one block, and it is worth mentioning that this fact is itself consistent
with the existence of a buy-in effect. Not surprisingly, as the number of blocks increases, there
tends to be fewer households participating. One clear exception, however, is the spike at 5,
which is likely due to the layout of the website sign-up form that solicits levels of enrolment up
to five blocks, beyond which households must enter an “other” category and fill in their desired
level. Overall, the average level of participation among participants is 2.3 blocks at a cost of
$9.20 per month, or $110.40 per year.

5

Empirical Analysis

We now turn to the empirical analysis with a focus on three primary questions: What explains
the extensive and intensive margins of participation in the Green Power Switch (GPS) program?
How does a household’s participation affect its conventional-electricity consumption? And what
is the net effect on environmental quality?

5.1 The Participation Decision
The conceptual framework developed in Section 2 is built around that idea that households may
choose to participate in the GPS program in order to offset emissions from their conventional-

15

electricity consumption. If the offset motivation does in fact exist, it is reasonable to expect,

ceteris paribus, that households with greater electricity consumption are more likely to
participate in the GPS program. To evaluate whether this pattern holds in the data, we begin with
estimation of a cross-sectional probit model in which we regress the dummy variable for each
household’s participation decision, Participant, on its average electricity consumption along with
the corresponding demographic and electoral data at the zip-code level. For this model, and all
other cross-sectional models, we use kWh/day as an explanatory variable that is averaged over
only those months when households are not participants in the GPS program. This avoids the
potential endogeneity, which we investigate later, of electricity consumption changing due to
having participated in the GPS program.14 For all cross-sectional models we cluster standard
errors at the zip-code level to account for potential spatial correlation of the errors and also for
the unit upon which the demographic and electoral variables vary.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 report the estimated marginal effects of two probit
models. In the first we include kWh/day (divided by 10 to ease interpretation), and in the second
we include an additional quadratic term for kWh/day to allow a more flexible functional form.
We find significant differences between participants and nonparticipants in the sample.15 Based
on the model in column (1), we find that an increase of 1 kwh/day on average increases the
probability by 2.3 percent that a household participated the GPS program. This result, which
occurs after controlling for the demographic and electoral variables at the zip-code level, is
consistent with a simple comparison of means: kWh/day is significantly greater for participants
than nonparticipants (49.6 versus 39.6, t = 10.52, p < 0.01). According to the model in column
14

Though the results are not reported here, we also carryout the cross-sectional analysis using two alternative
constructions of average electricity consumption. Our procedure of using only electricity consumption in months
prior to participation implies that 81 participant observations are not included in the models because they do not
have at least six months of data prior to having participated in the GPS program. If, however, we simply take
average electricity consumption using all months, and therefore include these 81 additional observations, the results
are very similar to those reported in Table 3. Another alternative that we try is to use a detrended kwh/day that
accounts for potential bias due to having different months over which averages are taken for participants and
nonparticipants. But again, the results are very similar to those reported in Table 3.
15
We report and discuss unweighted results throughout the paper; however, we also estimate specifications in which
each observation is weighted to account for the different sampling probabilities of participating households (Pr =1)
and non-participating households (Pr = 0.05). The primary difference between the weighted and unweighted
regressions is that the weighted estimation produces coefficients that are substantially smaller in models where the
left-hand side variable includes participants and nonparticipants. There is no difference in terms of which
coefficients are statistically significant. Coefficients in columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 are unaffected by weighting
because the sample is limited to participants only. All coefficients reported in Tables 4 and 5, which present the
fixed effects estimates discussed later in the paper, are identical or extremely similar in both the weighted and
unweighted estimates.

16

(2) the quadratic term is statistically significant, and allowing this more flexible functional form
increases the magnitude of the estimate such that an increase of 1 kWh/day on average increases
the probability by 3.6 percent that a household has participated in the GPS program. Among the
zip-code level variables, only the share of votes for Ralph Nader is statistically significant. While
the magnitude is small, households from zip codes with a greater share of votes for Nader are
more likely to be participants in the GPS program.
Turning now to the intensive margin of participation, we estimate a truncated regression
model in which the level of participation, Blocks, is regressed on the same covariates.16 We find
that greater conventional electricity consumption is associated, in a statistically significant way,
with the purchase of more blocks in the GPS program. According to the linear specification in
column (3), an increase of 1 kWh/day is associated with participants purchasing approximately
one-half more of a 150 kWh block of green electricity. The non-linear specification in column
(4), however, suggests that the marginal effect of kWh/day on the number of blocks purchased is
increasing and concave. One may interpret this result as evidence that the positive marginal
propensity to offset emissions diminishes with higher levels of electricity consumption. Among
the zip-code level variables, a notable result is that for median household income, we find some
evidence that income is negatively associated with the number of offsets purchased. Though it
would be better to have data on income at the household level, this result even with zip-code
level data is important because it provides evidence against the alternative explanation that both
conventional electricity consumption and GPS blocks are normal goods, which could possibly
explain the positive correlation. Instead, we have attempted to control for income and, if
anything, find that it is negatively associated with the number of GPS blocks purchased. Hence
the pattern of results supports the notion that the intensive margin of GPS participation is
motivated, at least is part, by the desire for households to offset their own emission from
electricity consumption.
The other results in Table 3 are for models that combine the extensive and intensive
margins into one estimator. The tobit models in columns (5) and (6) essentially combine the
probit and truncated models into one (Greene 2002), and, not surprisingly, the qualitative results
are very similar. Most importantly, kWh/day continues to have a positive and statistically
16

The truncated regression models are based on the sample of all participating households, with the exception of
those households that did not have a billing cycle on record prior to their enrollment in the GPS program. This
sample consists of 801 observations.

17

significant effect on participation when both the extensive and intensive margins are considered
simultaneously. Finally, we estimate the negative binomial models in columns (7) and (8)
primarily as a robustness check. Count data models are useful for our application because of the
preponderance of zeros, along with the high number of counts at a low numbers of blocks, which
then taper off relatively quickly. Even with the different functional form assumption of the
negative binomial model, we again find that participation in the GPS program increases, but at a
decreasing rate, with a household’s level of conventional electricity consumption. Moreover,
household income, at least when measured at the zip-code level, does not have a statistically
significant effect, but the vote share going to the Green Party’s Ralph Nader does have a positive
and statistically significant effect on participation, which is consistent with results of the
previous models.

5.2 The Behavioral Response to Participation
We now consider the question of whether or not participation in the GPS program affects
household electricity consumption. A prediction of the conceptual framework developed in
Section 3 is that conditional on participation in the GPS program, a household will (weakly)
increase its electricity consumption. Moreover, if participation is motivated with a buy-in
mentality, the model predicts that the increase in electricity consumption will be even greater.
We begin testing the effect of GPS participation electricity consumption using fixedeffects models that compare changes in the electricity consumption of participants before and
after GPS enrollment to changes in the electricity consumption of nonparticipants over the same
period. Our basic specification is
(9)

ln( kWh / day it )   Enrolled it  δM it  vi   it

where, as defined previously, kWh / dayit is average daily electricity consumption for household
i in billing cycle t ; Enrolledit is a time-varying dummy variable indicating whether household
i is participating in the GPS program in billing cycle t ; M it is a vector of month-year variables

throughout the sample period for the share of days in household i ’s billing cycle t that falls in
each month (sixty-seven in total);17 vi is a household-specific intercept; and  it is a normally

17

Note that if billing cycles aligned perfectly with calendar months, the month-year variables would be simply
month-year fixed effects. The advantage of our approach is that we more accurately attribute electricity consumption

18

distributed error term. In all estimates, we cluster standard errors at the household level, which
makes statistical inference robust to potential serial correlation of residential electricity
consumption.
The coefficient of primary interest is  , as it provides an estimate, based on a comparison
between participating and nonparticipating households, of how electricity consumption changes
upon participation in the GPS program. While specification (9) estimates the average effect of all
participants regardless of the number of blocks that a household purchases, we later relax this
assumption when testing for evidence of the buy-in effect. It is important to recognize that the
empirical model controls for all time-invariant differences between households, but it does not
control for time-varying differences. Hence the key identification assumption in our baseline
empirical strategy is that in the absence of GPS participation, the trend in electricity consumption
would have been the same in both participating and nonparticipating households. This is the
“common trends” assumption that is required in both fixed-effects and difference-in-differences
research designs (Meyer, 1995).
While the common trends assumption cannot be tested formally, we can examine the
existence and direction of potential bias using different subsets of the data. To address the
potential concern that participating and nonparticipating households may have different trends in
electricity consumption, we estimate a model identical to specification (9) but that includes only
participating households. This model takes advantage of a different identification strategy based
on variation in the timing of participation among participating households only.
Another potential source of bias, however, is that the timing of GPS enrollment is
endogenous. Suppose, for example, that a household experiences a change in personal ideology
and decides to take personal steps to conserve energy. The household might simultaneously
decide to enroll in the GPS program while also making behavioral changes at home to reduce
energy consumption. Under such a scenario, the endogeneity would cause negative bias in the
estimate of  . To address this possibility, we estimate another version of specification (9) that
includes all nonparticipating households and only participating households that joined the GPS
program in 2005, the year the program first began. These households comprise 35 percent of the
participating households. For such initial joiners of the GPS program, it is reasonable to assume
to the time periods in which common shocks actually took place. We did, however, estimate models in which we
simply use month-year fixed effects based on the end of a household’s billing cycle and the magnitude of coefficient
estimates are nearly identical and levels of statistical significance are unchanged.

19

that participation was caused by the (exogenous) introduction of the program rather than a
simultaneous change in personal ideology.
Table 4 reports the estimates of  in specification (9) for all three identification
strategies: full sample, participants only, and initial joiners with nonparticipants. The point
estimate in the full sample model of 0.003 implies that enrollment in the GPS program leads to
0.03-percent increase in household electricity consumption, but not only is the effect small, it is
also not different from zero with any meaningful degree of statistical significance. Despite the
entirely different estimation strategy of the participant only model, the coefficient is very similar
at 0.006 and also not statistically distinguishable from zero. Finally, when considering only the
initial joiners and nonparticipants the coefficient increases to 0.008 but is still not statistically
significant. Together, these models provide no evidence that household electricity consumption
changes upon participation in the GPS program, at least when participation at all levels of the
intensive margin are considered jointly.
We now test for evidence of the buy-in effect by relaxing the assumption that the
behavioral response to participation in the GPS program is uniform across all levels of the
intensive margin. Specifically, we test for differential responses between households that
purchase one block (i.e., the minimum level) and those that purchase more than one block. Our
approach is to simply expand the empirical specification to
(10)

ln( kWh / day it )  1 Enrollment [1]it   2 Enrollment [  1]it  δM it  vi   it

where the only difference is that we estimate separate  s for participating households that
purchase one block and households that purchase more than one block. In effect, we estimate
different behavioral responses for those participating in a way consistent with the buy-in effect
and those that are not. Again, we estimate specification (10) with a fixed-effects model, cluster
standard errors at the household level, and employ all three of the identification strategies.18
Table 5 reports the three different estimates of 1 and  2 , and we find differences
between them. Consistent with the theoretical model, we find that, on average, households
participating in the GPS program at the minimum level increase their electricity consumption
after participating. The magnitude is such that they increase consumption by approximately 2.5
percent, and the result is all three models is statistically significant (at the 90-percent level with a
18

We also estimated models in which we test for differences between other levels of participation, but we do not
report the results because we found no statistically significant differences.

20

two-tailed test, or the 95-percent level with a one-tailed test). In contrast, we find no evidence
that households purchasing more than one block change their electricity consumption, which is
consistent with our previous results. In fact, the point estimate in all three models, though not
statistically different from zero, is negative. Additionally, tests of whether ˆ1  ˆ2 are rejected in
all three cases with p-values of .037, .054, and .086 for columns (1), (2), and (3), respectively.
Hence we interpret these results as providing evidence of the buy-in effect for participation in the
GPS program. Not only do those purchasing the minimum amount of green electricity increase
their electricity consumption; their behavioral response differs from other participating
households that purchase more than one block. What is more, a striking feature of the results is
how robust the estimates are across the three distinct identification strategies. In particular, the
control group for comparison is different in columns (1) and (2) of Table 5, yet the results remain
very similar.

5.3 Net Consumption and Environmental Quality
Households voluntarily purchase green electricity as a more environmentally friendly alternative
to conventional electricity. But if participation in a green-electricity program prompts an increase
in electricity demand, the impact on net generation of conventional electricity, and therefore
environmental quality, is unclear.
Referring back to the theoretical model, let us first consider participating households that
seek to avoid disutility from their own emissions, but are not motivated with a buy-in mentality.
We predict that despite a potential increase in electricity demand, net generation of conventional
electricity for these households will not decrease, while net emissions will. Consistent with this
prediction, we find no significant change in electricity demand for households that participate
beyond the minimum threshold. In other words, we find no behavioral response to participation
for these households. Among them, the average level of participation is 3.4 blocks, which
translates into a green-electricity capacity of 510 kwh/month, or 6,120 kwh/year. To get a sense
for the environmental impact, we use the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s published
emission rates for the Tennessee Valley Authority (eGrid 2010). Focusing on the three primary
pollutants of sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide, and carbon dioxide, we find that the average (nonbuy-in) household offsetting 6,120 kwh/year of conventional electricity with emission-free

21

green-electricity reduces their own annual emissions by 8,129 lbs of CO2, 35 lbs of SO2, and 15
lbs of NOX. This translates into a 43-percent reduction in a household’s emissions.
Calculating the effect for households that participate because of a buy-in effect requires
taking account of the behavioral response. As predicted by the theory and confirmed with the
empirical results, the behavioral response of increased electricity demand is larger for those
households that appear to take a buy-in approach to the GPS program. Among the participating
households that purchased only one block, or equivalently, 150 kwh/month of green-electricity
capacity, household electricity consumption increased 2.5 percent on average after participation.
The increase in consumption, however, remains less than the purchased capacity of green
electricity, which implies that net consumption of conventional electricity declines, and
emissions decline despite the increase in electricity demand. This follows because a 2.5 percent
increase in electricity demand is 30 kwh/month, compared to the 150 kwh/month of greenelectricity capacity. In effect, with the buy-in effect, 20 percent of the green-electricity emission
reductions are offset by increased electricity consumption. Overall, for these households, the
average net reduction of their own annual emissions is 1,913 lbs of CO2, 8 lbs of SO2, and 3 lbs
of NOX. This translates into a 10-pecrent reduction in a household’s emissions.

6

Summary and Conclusion

This paper investigates why households engage in pro-environmental behavior and whether such
behaviors are in fact beneficial for the environment. We develop a theory of voluntary provision
of an environmental public good that is motivated by the desire to offset other behavior that is
environmentally harmful. We apply the theory to a setting in which households may purchase
green electricity in order to mitigate disutility associated with pollution emissions generated
through their own consumption of conventional electricity. We consider cases in which a
household purchases green electricity because it cares about its actual level of emissions or
because it simply wants to buy-in to the program. In both cases, the model predicts that, ceteris

paribus, households with higher electricity consumption are more likely to purchase green
electricity. Moreover, in the case where households care about the actual level of emissions, the
model predicts that high-consumption households are likely to purchase more green electricity.
The model also generates testable predictions about the expected behavioral response to
participation in the green-electricity program. Because the purchase of green electricity affords

22

participating households a cost effective way to offset concerns about their own emissions, the
model predicts that participating households will increase their electricity consumption; and the
increase is expected to be larger for households that simply buy-in to the program.
The empirical results provide evidence in support of the offset and buy-in motives for
participation in a green-electricity program. We find that households with greater electricity
consumption are in fact more likely to participate in the green-electricity program and to
participate at a higher level. Regarding the behavioral response, we find that when participating
households at all levels are considered together, there is no statistically significant change in
electricity consumption after participation. If, however, we consider separately the participating
households that enroll at the minimum level—i.e., households most likely exhibiting a buy-in
mentality—then we do find a statistically significant behavioral response. These households
increase electricity consumption 2.5 percent after enrolling in the green-electricity program.
Notably, this result is robust to identification strategies based on before-after differences between
participants and nonparticipants, and between the timing of enrollment among participants only.
The fact that electricity consumption increases for some households that purchase green
electricity raises the question of whether the net effect on emissions is positive or negative for
the environment. We find that the behavioral response of increased electricity consumption
remains less than the minimum capacity of green electricity that a household must purchase.
Hence the net effect is a reduction in pollution emissions. This may not always be the case,
however, and our results underscore the importance of taking the behavioral response into
account when designing and evaluating the effectiveness of green-electricity programs.
Fortunately existing green-electricity certification programs appear to recognize this need and
address it with minimum purchase requirements. The Green-E national standards for certification
in the United States, for example, requires that capacity based green-electricity programs selling
block products, as in the program that we study here, must require a minimum block purchase of
100 kwh/month. Our results suggest that this minimum purchase is large enough to ensure that
the behavioral response is not sufficiently large that green-electricity programs become a
counterproductive means for reducing emissions.
While the theoretical and empirical results of this study have clear implications for the
evaluation of green-electricity programs, they also contribute to the understanding of green
consumer behavior more generally. The supposed environmental benefits of green goods and

23

services are often questioned for reasons beyond the credibility of marketing claims. As
discussed previously, arguments are frequently made that the availability of green options, and
the numerous government programs that subsidize their consumption, are problematic from an
environmental standpoint because they may simply promote greater consumption. The
arguments are perhaps most salient in the context of carbon offsets where critics emphasize
concerns about moral licensing, whereby carbon offsets are indulgences used to justify even
greater emissions. The problem with these claims, however, is that empirical evidence based on
observable and quantifiable behavior is generally missing. Our results thus contribute to the
debate, as we find real evidence for a behavioral response consistent with greater consumption—
but it is not large enough to reverse the intended environmental benefits. A question we leave to
future research, however, is how green consumer behavior interacts with other dimensions of
behavior and concern. Perhaps one of the most interesting relationships to examine is the
interaction between green-consumer behavior and public support for mandatory environmental
policies, which could be either complements or substitutes.

24

References

Andreoni, J. 1988. Privately provided public goods in a large economy: the limits of altruism.
Journal of Public Economics, 35:7–73.
Andreoni, J. 1990. Impure altruism and donations to public goods: a theory of warm-glow
giving. Economic Journal, 100:464–77.
Bergstrom, T. C., Blume, L. E. and Varian, H. R. 1986. On the private provision of public goods.
Journal of Public Economics, 29:25–49.
Champ, P.A. and R.C. Bishop. 2001. Donation payment mechanisms and contingent valuation:
an empirical study of hypothetical bias. Environmental and Resource Economics. 19:
383-402.
Clark, C., M. J. Kotchen, and M. R. Moore 2003. Internal and external influences on proenvironmental behavior: participation in a green electricity program. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 23:237-46
Conte, M. N. and M. J. Kotchen 2010. Explaining the price of voluntary carbon offsets. Climate
Change Economics, 1:93-111.
Dietz, T., G.T. Gardner, J. Gilligan, P.C. Stern, and M.P. Vandenbergh, 2009. Household
actions can provide a behavioral wedge to rapidly reduce U.S. carbon emissions.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106:18452-18456.
DellaVigna, S., J.A. List, and U. Malmendier. 2009. Testing for altruism and social pressure in
charitable giving. NBER Working Paper No. 15629.
eGrid 2010. The U.S. EPA’s Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database. Online at:
http://cfpub.epa.gov/egridweb/ (accessed June 1, 2010).
Ecosystem Marketplace & New Carbon Finance. 2009. Fortifying the Foundation: State of the
Voluntary Carbon Markets 2009. Online at:
http://www.ecosystemmarketplace.com/documents/cms_documents/StateOfTheVoluntar
yCarbonMarkets_2009.pdf (accessed June 1, 2010).
Goett, A. A., K. Hudson, and K. E. Train. 2000. Customers' choice among retail energy
suppliers: The willingness-to-pay for service attributes. Energy Journal 21:1-28.
Greene W. H. 2002. Econometric Analysis, 5th Edition, Prentice-Hall, NJ.
Harhaugh, W. T. 1998. The prestige motive for making charitable transfers. American Economic
Review, 88:277-282.

25

Jacobsen, G. D. 2010. The Al Gore effect: an inconvenient truth and voluntary carbon offsets.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, forthcoming.
Lublin, D. and S. Voss 2001. "Federal Elections Project." American University, Washington, DC
and the University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.
Kotchen, M. J. 2006. Green markets and private provision of public goods. Journal of Political
Economy, 114:816-834.
Kotchen, M. J. 2009. Voluntary provision of public goods for bads: a theory of environmental
offsets. Economic Journal, 119: 883-899.
Kotchen, M. J., and M. R. Moore. 2007. Private provision of environmental public goods:
Household participation in green-electricity programs. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 53:1-16.
Kotchen, M. J., and M. R. Moore. 2008. Conservation: From voluntary restraint to a voluntary
price premium. Environmental & Resource Economics 40:195-215.
Mazar, N. and C. Zhong. 2010. Do green products makes up better people? Psychological
Science, 21:494-498.
Monin, B. and D. T. Miller 2001. Moral credentials and the expression of prejudice. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81:33-43.
Meyer, B. D. 1995. Natural and quasi-experiments in economics. Journal of Business &
Economic Statistics 13:151-161.
Mintel International Group Ltd. 2009. Mintel finds fewer Americans interested in going
“green” during recession. Online at:
http://www.mintel.com/press-centre/press-releases/325/mintel-finds-fewer-americansinterested-in-going-green-during-recession (accessed June 1, 2010).
Oberholzer-Gee, F. Your contribution counts: an empirical analysis of the decision to support
green electricity, in: E.W. Orts, K. Deketelaere (Eds.), Environmental Contracts:
Comparative approaches to regulatory innovation in the United States and Europe,
Kwuler Law International, London, 2001.
Reiss, P. and M. White. 2008. What changes energy consumption? Prices and public pressure.
Rand Journal of Economics 39:636-663.
REN21. 2009. Renewables Global Status Report: 2009 Update. Paris: REN 21 Secretariat.
Roe, B., M. F. Teisl, A. Levy, and M. Russell. 2001. US consumers' willingness to pay for green
electricity. Energy Policy 29:917-925.

26

Rose, S. K., J. Clark, G. L. Poe, D. Rondeau, and W. D. Schulze. 2002. The private provision of
public goods: tests of a provision point mechanism for funding green power programs.
Resource and Energy Economics 24:131-155.
Rose-Ackerman, S. 1982. Charitable giving and “excessive” fundraising. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 97:193-212.
Vandenbergh, M. and A. Steinemann. 2007. The carbon-neutral individual, New York University
Law Review 82:1673-1745.

27

New Enrollment

Cancellations

2008q4

2008q3

2008q2

2008q1

2007q4

2007q3

2007q2

2007q1

2006q4

2006q3

2006q2

2006q1

2005q4

2005q3

1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2005q2

Households

Figure 1: Relative electricity consumption for type   1 with and without
the green electricity program

Active Enrollment

Figure 2: New enrollment, cancellations, and active enrollment in MLGW’s
Green Power Swith program

28

Table 1: Summary statistics
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min.
Max.
Median income ($1,000s)
45.377
18.529
10.734
116.200
Bachelor's degree (1=yes)
0.270
0.155
0.045
0.658
Race white (1=yes)
0.544
0.309
0.013
0.941
Family household (1=yes)
0.686
0.112
0.270
0.911
Population density (#/km2)
905.636 524.727
33.292
2027.226
Vote Bush (1=yes)
0.421
0.241
0.013
0.758
Vote Gore (1=yes)
0.564
0.243
0.220
0.981
Vote Nader (1=yes)
0.012
0.007
0.001
0.038
kWh/day
40.023
26.508
0.030
741.795
Notes: Summary statistics are based on 20,205 households. Demographic data
are from the 2000 U.S. Census. Electoral data are from the Federal Elections
Project. Electricity consumption data are from Memphis Light, Gas, & Water.

Table 2: Frequency of Green Power Switch enrollment levels
Annual
Proportion
Contribution
of participants
(per household)
1
395
$48
0.45
2
263
$96
0.30
3
81
$144
0.09
4
40
$192
0.05
5
101
$240
0.11
6
5
$288
0.01
7
2
$336
0.00
8
7
$384
0.01
9
1
$432
0.00
10
8
$480
0.01
11
1
$528
0.00
12
2
$576
0.00
15
2
$720
0.00
20
1
$960
0.00
30
1
$1,440
0.00
Average # of Blocks: 2.3 ($9.20/month or $110.40/year)
Notes: This table displays how many households have ever enrolled at
each number of blocks. There is a total of 910 households. For 24
households that changed their enrollment levels, this table reports the
household’s greatest level of enrollment.
# of
Blocks

# of Households

29

Table 3: Marginal effects from cross-sectional models of the extensive and intensive margins of Green Power Switch participation
Probit
KWh/day
(kWh/day)2
Median income ($1,000s)
Bachelor's degree (1=yes)
Vote Gore (1=yes)
Vote Nader (1=yes)
Population density (#/km2)
Race white (1=yes)
Family household (1=yes)

(1)
0.0023***
(0.0007)
-0.0001
(0.0006)
0.0661
(0.0596)
0.0557
(0.0824)
2.3504***
(0.7047)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0415
(0.0660)
-0.0046
(0.0625)

(2)
0.0038***
(0.0011)
-0.0001**
(0.0000)
0.0001
(0.0006)
0.0687
(0.0591)
0.0578
(0.0809)
2.3279***
(0.7033)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0429
(0.0648)
-0.0035
(0.0621)

Truncated
(3)
0.0533***
(0.0173)
--0.0048
(0.0061)
0.3148
(1.0114)
-1.0117
(1.1629)
-1.7788
(11.6345)
0.0003
(0.0002)
-0.8681
(0.8141)
0.0627
(0.7368)

(4)
0.1774***
(0.0512)
-0.0039***
(0.0013)
-0.0093*
(0.0056)
0.3823
(0.9902)
-0.4217
(1.1325)
-5.4937
(11.4648)
0.0003*
(0.0002)
-0.2735
(0.8395)
0.3754
(0.6772)

Tobit
(5)
0.0058***
(0.0018)
-0.0001
(0.0014)
0.1603
(0.1365)
0.1090
(0.1896)
5.3862***
(1.6453)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0836
(0.1523)
-0.0036
(0.1414)

(6)
0.0100***
(0.0028)
-0.0002**
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0014)
0.1670
(0.1348)
0.1147
(0.1849)
5.2956***
(1.6332)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0876
(0.1486)
0.0005
(0.1399)

Negative binomial
(7)
(8)
0.1423***
0.2010***
(0.0270)
(0.0341)
--0.0038***
(0.0008)
-0.0047
-0.0052
(0.0221)
(0.0222)
2.2759
2.2880
(2.1130)
(2.1162)
0.0863
0.2410
(3.0131)
(3.0335)
87.7194*** 87.2393***
(30.2631)
(30.5049)
0.0000
0.0000
(0.0003)
(0.0003)
0.5215
0.6434
(2.4394)
(2.4589)
-0.0878
-0.0748
(2.0994)
(2.1102)

Observations
20,121
20,121
801
801
20,121
20,121
20,121
20,121
R-squared
Log likelihood
-3018.50
-3013.49
-1469.46
-1461.95
-4500.28
4493.18
-4422.80
-4418.55
Notes: All coefficients are marginal effects, which are reported at the means for the nonlinear models. KWh/day is divided by ten in all
regressions to ease interpretation of the coefficients. Standard errors clustered at the zip-code level are reported in parentheses. One, two, and
three asterisk(s) indicate significance at the 90-, 95-, and 99-percent levels, respectively.

Table 4: Fixed-effects models of the effect of Green Power
Switch participation on household electricity consumption
(1)

Enrolled in GPS

Full Sample
0.003
(0.009)

(2)
Participants
only
0.006
(0.009)

(3)
Initial joiners and
nonparticipants
0.008
(0.011)

Observations
617,958
42,646
592,563
R-squared
0.387
0.539
0.381
Notes: Dependent variable is ln(kwh/day). Household fixed effects are
included in all regressions along with month-year variables for each
billing cycle. Standard errors clustered at the household level are
reported in parentheses. One, two, and three asterisk(s) indicate
significance at the 90-, 95-, and 99-percent levels, respectively.

Table 5: Fixed-effects models of the effect of Green Power Switch
participation at different levels on household electricity consumption

One block
More than 1 block

(1)
Full
Sample
0.023*
(0.013)
-0.012
(0.011)

(2)
Participants
only
0.025*
(0.013)
-0.007
(0.012)

(3)
Initial joiners and
nonparticipants
0.027*
(0.015)
-0.010
(0.016)

Observations
617,958
42,646
592,563
R-squared
0.387
0.539
0.381
Notes: Dependent variable is ln(kwh/day). Household fixed effects are
included in all regressions along with month-year variables for each billing
cycle. Standard errors clustered at the household level are reported in
parentheses. One, two, and three asterisk(s) indicate significance at the 90-,
95-, and 99-percent levels, respectively.

