                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     BETTING AGAINST BETA

                                            Andrea Frazzini
                                           Lasse H. Pedersen

                                         Working Paper 16601
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16601


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2010




We thank Cliff Asness, Aaron Brown, John Campbell, Kent Daniel, Gene Fama, Nicolae Garleanu,
John Heaton (discussant), Michael Katz, Owen Lamont, Michael Mendelson, Matt Richardson, Tuomo
Vuolteenaho and Robert Whitelaw for helpful comments and discussions as well as seminar participants
at Columbia University, New York University, Yale University, Emory University, University of Chicago
Booth, Kellogg School of Management, Harvard University, NBER Behavioral Economics 2010, and
the 2010 Annual Management Conference at University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The
authors are affiliated with AQR Capital Management, a global asset management firm that may apply
some of the principles discussed in this research in some of its investment products. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Betting Against Beta
Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 16601
December 2010
JEL No. E43,G1,G12,G14

                                                ABSTRACT

We present a model in which some investors are prohibited from using leverage and other investors’
leverage is limited by margin requirements. The former investors bid up high-beta assets while the
latter agents trade to profit from this, but must de-lever when they hit their margin constraints. We
test the model’s predictions within U.S. equities, across 20 global equity markets, for Treasury bonds,
corporate bonds, and futures. Consistent with the model, we find in each asset class that a betting-against-beta
(BAB) factor which is long a leveraged portfolio of low-beta assets and short a portfolio of high-beta
assets produces significant risk-adjusted returns. When funding constraints tighten, betas are compressed
towards one, and the return of the BAB factor is low.


Andrea Frazzini
AQR Capital Management, LLC
Two Greenwich Plaza, 3rd Floor
Greenwich, CT 06830
andrea.frazzini@aqr.com

Lasse H. Pedersen
Copenhagen Business School
Solbjerg Plads 3, A5
DK-2000 Frederiksberg
DENMARK
and NYU
and also NBER
lpederse@stern.nyu.edu
A basic premise of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) is that all agents invest
in the portfolio with the highest expected excess return per unit of risk (Sharpe
ratio), and lever or de-lever it to suit their risk preferences. However, many investors
— such as individuals, pension funds, and mutual funds — are constrained in the
leverage they can take, and therefore over-weight risky securities instead of using
leverage. For instance, many mutual fund families offer balanced funds where the
“normal” fund may invest 40% in long-term bonds and 60% in stocks, whereas as
the “aggressive” fund invests 10% in bonds and 90% in stocks. If the “normal” fund
is efficient, then an investor could leverage it and achieve the same expected return
at a lower volatility rather than tilting to a large 90% allocation to stocks. The
demand for exchange-traded funds (ETFs) with leverage built in presents further
evidence that many investors cannot use leverage directly.
       This behavior of tilting towards high-beta assets suggests that risky high-beta
assets require lower risk-adjusted returns than low-beta assets, which require
leverage. Consistently, the security market line for U.S. stocks is too flat relative to
the CAPM (Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972)) and is better explained by the
CAPM with restricted borrowing than the standard CAPM (Black (1972, 1993),
Brennan (1971), see Mehrling (2005) for an excellent historical perspective). Several
additional questions arise: how can an unconstrained arbitrageur exploit this effect —
i.e., how do you bet against beta — and what is the magnitude of this anomaly
relative to the size, value, and momentum effects? Is betting against beta rewarded
in other countries and asset classes? How does the return premium vary over time
and in the cross section?
       We address these questions by considering a dynamic model of leverage
constraints and by presenting consistent empirical evidence from 20 global stock
markets, Treasury bond markets, credit markets, and futures markets.
       Our model features several types of agents. Some agents cannot use leverage
and, therefore, over-weight high-beta assets, causing those assets to offer lower
returns. Other agents can use leverage, but face margin constraints. They under-
weight (or short-sell) high-beta assets and buy low-beta assets that they lever up.
The model implies a flatter security market line (as in Black (1972)), where the slope




            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 2
depends on the tightness (i.e., Lagrange multiplier) of the funding constraints on
average across agents.
       One way to illustrate the asset pricing effect of the funding friction is to
consider the returns on market-neutral betting against beta (BAB) factors. A BAB
factor is long a portfolio of low-beta assets, leveraged to a beta of 1, and short a
portfolio of high-beta assets, de-leveraged to a beta of 1. For instance, the BAB
factor for U.S. stocks achieves a zero beta by being long $1.5 of low-beta stocks,
short $0.7 of high-beta stocks, with offsetting positions in the risk-free asset to make
it zero-cost.1 Our model predicts that BAB factors have positive average return, and
that the return is increasing in the ex ante tightness of constraints and in the spread
in betas between high- and low-beta securities.
       When the leveraged agents hit their margin constraint, they must de-lever,
and, therefore, the model predicts that the BAB factor has negative returns during
times of tightening funding liquidity constraints. Further, the model predicts that
the betas of securities in the cross section are compressed towards 1 when funding
liquidity risk rises.     Our model thus extends Black (1972)’s central insight by
considering a broader set of constraints and deriving the dynamic time-series and
cross-sectional properties arising from the equilibrium interaction between agents
with different constraints.
       Consistent with the model’s prediction, we find significant returns to betting
against beta within each of the major asset classes globally. We show that betting-
against-beta factors produce negative returns when credit constraints are more likely
to be bindings and we also document the model-implied beta compression during
times of illiquidity.
       To perform these empirical tests, we first consider portfolios sorted by beta
within each asset class. We find that alphas and Sharpe ratios are almost
monotonically declining in beta in each asset class. This provides broad evidence
that the flatness of the security market line is not isolated to the U.S. stock market,


1
 While we consider a variety of BAB factors within a number of markets, one notable example is the
zero-covariance portfolio introduced by Black (1972), and studied for U.S. stocks by Black, Jensen,
and Scholes (1972), Kandel (1984), Shanken (1985), Polk, Thompson, and Vuolteenaho (2006), and
others.



              Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 3
but a pervasive global phenomenon. Hence, this pattern of required returns is likely
driven by a common economic cause, and our funding-constraint model provides one
such unified explanation.
      We construct BAB factors within the U.S. stock market, and within each of
the 19 other developed MSCI stock markets. The U.S. BAB factor realizes a Sharpe
ratio of 0.75 between 1926 and 2009. To put this factor return in perspective, note
that this is about twice the Sharpe ratio of the value effect over the same period and
40% higher than the Sharpe ratio of momentum. It has a highly significant risk-
adjusted returns accounting for its realized exposure to market, value, size,
momentum, and liquidity factors (i.e., significant 1, 3, 4, and 5-factor alphas), and
realizes a significant positive return in each of the four 20-year sub-periods between
1926 and 2009. We find similar results in our sample of global equities: combining
stocks in each of the non-US countries produces a BAB factor with returns about as
strong as the U.S. BAB factor.
      We show that BAB returns are consistent across countries, time, within
deciles sorted by size, within deciles sorted by idiosyncratic risk, and robust to a
number of specifications. These consistent results suggest that coincidence or data-
mining are unlikely explanations. However, if leverage aversion is the underlying
driver and is a general phenomenon as in our model, then the effect should also exist
in other markets.
      We examine BAB factors in other major asset classes. For U.S. Treasuries,
the BAB factor is long a leveraged portfolio of low-beta — that is, short maturity —
bonds, and short a de-leveraged portfolio of long-dated bonds. This portfolio
produces highly significant risk-adjusted returns with a Sharpe ratio of 0.85. This
profitability of shorting long-term bonds may seem in contrast to the most well-
known “term premium” in fixed income markets. There is no paradox, however. The
term premium means that investors are compensated on average for holding long-
term bonds rather than T-bills due to the need for maturity transformation. The
term premium exits at all horizons, though: Investors are compensated for holding 1-
year bonds over T-bills as well as they are compensated for holding 10-year bonds.
Our finding is that the compensation per unit of risk is in fact larger for the 1-year




            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 4
bond than for the 10-year bond. Hence, a portfolio that has a leveraged long position
in 1-year (and other short term) bonds, and a short position in long-term bonds
produces positive returns. This is consistent with our model in which some investors
are leverage constrained in their bond exposure and, therefore, require lower risk-
adjusted returns for long-term bonds that give more “bang for the buck”. Indeed,
short-term bonds require a tremendous leverage to achieve similar risk or return as
long-term bonds. These results complement those of Fama (1986) and Duffee (2010),
who also consider Sharpe ratios across maturities implied by standard term structure
models.
        We find similar evidence in credit markets: a leveraged portfolio of high-rated
corporate bonds outperforms a de-leveraged portfolio of low-rated bonds. Similarly,
using a BAB factor based on corporate bond indices by maturity produces high risk-
adjusted returns.
        We test the model’s prediction that the cross-sectional dispersion of betas is
lower during times of high funding liquidity risk, which we proxy by the TED spread
empirically. Consistent with the beta-compression prediction, we find that the
dispersion of betas is significantly lower when the TED spread is high, and this
result holds across a number of specifications. Further, we also find evidence
consistent with the model’s prediction that the BAB factor realizes a positive market
beta when liquidity risk is high.
        Lastly, we test the model’s time-series predictions that the BAB factor should
realize a high return when lagged illiquidity is high, when contemporaneous liquidity
improves, and when there is a large spread between the ex ante beta of the long side
of the portfolio and the short side of the portfolio. Consistent with the model, we
find that high contemporaneous TED spreads predicts BAB returns negatively, and
the ex ante beta spread predicts BAB returns positively. The lagged TED spread
predicts returns negatively which is inconsistent with the model if a high TED
spread means a high tightness of investors’ funding constraints. It could be
consistent with the model if a high TED spread means that investors funding
constraints are tightening, perhaps as their banks diminish credit availability over
time.




             Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 5
       Our results shed new light on the relation between risk and expected returns.
This central issue in financial economics has naturally received much attention. The
standard CAPM beta cannot explain the cross-section of unconditional stock returns
(Fama and French (1992)) or conditional stock returns (Lewellen and Nagel (2006)).
Stocks with high beta have been found to deliver low risk-adjusted returns (Black,
Jensen, and Scholes (1972), Baker, Bradley, and Wurgler (2010)) so the constrained-
borrowing CAPM has a better fit (Gibbons (1982), Kandel (1984), Shanken (1985)).
Stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility have realized low returns (Ang, Hodrick,
Xing, Zhang (2006, 2009)),2 but we find that the beta effect holds even controlling
for idiosyncratic risk. Theoretically, asset pricing models with benchmarked
managers (Brennan (1993)) or constraints imply more general CAPM-like relations
(Hindy (1995), Cuoco (1997)), in particular the margin-CAPM implies that high-
margin assets have higher required returns, especially during times of funding
illiquidity (Garleanu and Pedersen (2009), Ashcraft, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2010)).
Garleanu and Pedersen (2009) find empirically that deviations of the Law of One
Price arises when high-margin assets become cheaper than low-margin assets, and
Ashcraft, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2010) find the prices increase when central bank
lending facilities lower margins. Further, funding liquidity risk is linked to market
liquidity risk (Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2010)),
which also affects required returns (Acharya and Pedersen (2005)). We complement
the literature by deriving new cross-sectional and time-series predictions in a simple
dynamic model that captures both leverage and margin constraints, and by testing
its implications across broad cross-section of securities across all the major asset
classes.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I lays out the theory,
Section II describes our data and empirical methodology, Sections III-V test the
theory’s cross-sectional and time series predictions across asset classes, and Section
VI concludes. Appendix A contains all proofs and Appendix B provides a number of
additional empirical results and robustness tests.


2
 This effect disappears when controlling for the maximum daily return over the past month (Bali,
Cakici, and Whitelaw (2010)) and other measures of idiosyncratic volatility (Fu (2009)).



              Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 6
    I. Theory

      We consider an overlapping-generations (OLG) economy in which agents
i=1,...,I   are born each period and live for two periods. Agents trade securities
s=1,...,S, where security s has x *i shares outstanding. Each time period t, young
agents choose a portfolio of shares x=(x1,...,xS)’, investing the rest of their wealth Wi
at the risk-free return rf, to maximize their utility:


                                                          i
              max x '( Et  Pt 1   (1  r f ) Pt )         x ' t x           (1)
                                                          2


where Pt is the vector of prices at time t, Ωt is the variance-covariance matrix of
Pt+1, and γi is agent i’s risk aversion. Agent i is subject to the following portfolio
constraint:



              mti  x s Pt s  Wt i                                               (2)
                   s




This constraint says that some multiple mi of the total dollars invested — the sum of
the number of shares xs times their prices Ps — must be less than the agent’s wealth.
        The investment constraint depends on the agent i. For instance, some agents
simply cannot use leverage, which is captured by mi=1 (as Black (1972) assumes).
Other agents may not only be precluded from using leverage, but also need to have
some of their wealth in cash, which is captured by mi greater than 1. For instance,
mi = 1/(1-0.20)=1.25 represents an agent who must hold 20% of her wealth in cash.
        Other agents yet may be able to use leverage, but face margin constraints.
For instance, if an agent faces a margin requirement of 50%, then his mi is 0.50 since
this means that he can invest at most in assets worth twice his wealth. A smaller
margin requirement mi naturally means that the agent can take larger positions. We
note that our formulation assumes for simplicity that all securities have the same
margin requirement. This may be true when comparing securities within the same



               Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 7
asset class (e.g. stocks) as we do empirically. Garleanu and Pedersen (2009) and
Ashcraft, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2010) consider assets with different margin
requirements     and               show      theoretically        and   empirically   that    higher       margin
requirements are associated with higher required returns (Margin CAPM).
       We are interested in the properties of the competitive equilibrium in which
the total demand equals the supply:



            x
             i
                   i
                        x*                                                                    (3)




To derive equilibrium, consider the first order condition for agent i:


            0  Et  Pt 1   (1  r f ) Pt   i x i  ti Pt                               (4)



where ψi is the Lagrange multiplier of the portfolio constraint. This gives the optimal
position


            xi 
                       1
                          i                                   
                                1 Et  Pt 1   1  r f   ti Pt                           (5)




The equilibrium condition now follows from summing over these positions:


            x* 
                       1
                       
                                                               
                                1 Et  Pt 1   1  r f  t Pt                             (6)




                                                                                                            i
where the aggregate risk aversion γ is defined by 1/ γ = Σi 1/ γi , and  t                                 is
                                                                                                       i   i t
                                                                                         
the weighted average Lagrange multiplier. (The coefficients                                    sum to 1 by
                                                                                         i
definition of the aggregate risk aversion  .) This gives the equilibrium price:




             Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 8
                     Et  Pt 1   x *
              Pt                                                                       (7)
                       1  r f  t


Translating this into the return of any security rti1  Pt i1 / Pt i  1 , the return on the

                                                                                             
market rt M1 , and using the usual expression for beta,  ts  covt rt s1 , rt M1 / vart rt M1 , we

get the following results. (All proofs are in Appendix A.)


Proposition 1.
(i) The equilibrium required return for any security s is:


                  
              Et rt s1  r f  t   ts t                                            (8)



where the risk premium is t  Et  rt M1   r f  t , and  t is the average Lagrange

multiplier, measuring the tightness of funding constraints.
(ii) A security’s alpha with respect to the market is  ts   t (1  ts ) . Alpha decreases

in the security’s market beta, ts .
(iii) For a diversified efficient portfolio, the Sharpe ratio is highest for an efficient
portfolio with beta less than 1 and decreases in ts for higher betas and increases for
lower betas.


As in Black’s CAPM with restricted borrowing (in which mi  1 for all agents), the
required return is a constant plus beta times a risk premium. Our expression shows
explicitly how risk premia are affected by the tightness of agents’ portfolio
constraints, as measured by the average Lagrange multiplier  t . Indeed, tighter

portfolio constraints (i.e., a larger  t ) flatten the security market line by increasing

the intercept and decreasing the slope t .
        Whereas the standard CAPM implies that the intercept of the security
market line is rf, here the intercept is increased by the weighted average of the




               Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 9
agents’ Lagrange multipliers. You may wonder why zero-beta assets require returns
in excess of the risk free rate? The reason is that tying up your capital in such assets
prevents you from making profitable trades that you would like to pursue but
cannot if you are constrained. Further, if unconstrained agents buy a lot of these
securities, then, from their perspective, this risk is no longer idiosyncratic since
additional exposure to such assets would increase the risk of their portfolio. Hence,
in equilibrium even zero-beta risky assets must offer higher returns than the risk-free
rate. (Assets that have zero covariance to Markowitz’s (1952) “tangency portfolio”
held by an unconstrained agents do earn the risk free rate, on the other hand, but
the tangency portfolio is not the market portfolio in this equilibrium.)
         The portfolio constraints further imply a lower slope t .of the security market
line, that is, a lower compensation for a marginal increase in systematic risk. This is
because constrained agents need this access to high un-leveraged returns and
therefore are willing to accept less high returns for high-beta assets.
         We next consider the properties of a factor that goes long low-beta assets and
short high-beta assets. For this, let wL be the relative portfolio weights a portfolio of

low-beta assets with return rt L1  wL ' rt 1 and consider similarly a portfolio of high-

beta assets with return rt H1 . The betas of these portfolios are denoted  tL and  tH ,

where tL  tH . We then construct a betting-against-beta (BAB) factor as:



                  1 
               rt BAB
                         1
                             L   r L
                                   t 1   rf 
                                                   1
                                                       H   r H
                                                             t 1   rf           (9)
                             t                         t




This portfolio is market neutral, that is, has a beta of zero: the long side has been
leveraged to a beta of 1, and the short side has been de-leveraged to a beta of 1.
Further, the BAB factor provides the excess return on a zero-cost portfolio like HML
and SMB, since it is a difference between excess returns. The difference is that BAB
is not dollar neutral in terms of only the risky securities since this would not produce
a beta of zero.3 The model has several predictions regarding the BAB factor:

3
    A natural BAB factor is the zero-covariance portfolio of Black (1972) and Black, Jensen, and



               Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 10
Proposition 2.
(i) The expected excess return of the zero-cost BAB factor is positive:


                               tH  tL
                
             Et r     BAB
                    t 1       L H  t  0                                     (10)
                                  t  t




                                            tH  tL
and increasing in the beta spread                     and the funding tightness  t .
                                             tL tH

(ii) A tighter portfolio constraint, that is, an increase in mtk for some of k, leads to a
contemporaneous loss for the BAB factor


             rt BAB
                     0                                                            (11)
              mtk


and an increase in its future required return:


                    
             Et rt BAB
                    1        0                                                  (12)
                 m     k
                        t




The first part of the proposition says that a market-neutral portfolio that is long
leveraged low-beta securities and short higher-beta securities should earn a positive
expected return on average. The size of the expected return depends on the spread in
betas and the how binding portfolio constraints are in the market, as captured by
the average of the Lagrange multipliers,  t .
        The second part of the proposition considers the effect of a shock to the
portfolio constraints (or margin requirements), mk, which can be interpreted as a


Scholes (1972). We consider a broader class of BAB portfolios since we empirically consider a variety
of BAB portfolios within various asset classes that are subsets of all securities (e.g., stocks in a
particular size group). Therefore, our construction achieves market neutrality by leveraging (and de-
leveraging) the long and short sides rather than adding the market itself as Black, Jensen, and
Scholes (1972) do.



              Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 11
worsening of funding liquidity, a liquidity crisis in the extreme. Such a funding
liquidity shock results in losses for the BAB factor as its required return increases.
This happens as agents may need to de-lever their bets against beta or stretch even
further to buy the high-beta assets. This shows that the BAB factor is exposed to
funding liquidity risk — it loses when portfolio constraints become more binding.
        Further, the market return tends to be low during such liquidity crises.
Indeed, a higher mk increases the required return of the market and reduces the
contemporaneous market return. Hence, while the BAB factor is market neutral on
average, liquidity shocks can lead to correlation between BAB and the market.
Another way of saying this is that low-beta securities fare poorly during times of
increased illiquidity relative to their betas, while high-beta securities fare less poorly
than their betas would suggest (“beta compression”):4,5


Proposition 3.
                                                                                  Pt s
The percentage price sensitivity with respect to funding shocks                         /  t is the same
                                                                                   Pt s
for all securities s. A higher independent variance of funding shocks compresses log-
return betas of all securities towards 1, and the beta of the BAB factor increases if
this is unanticipated.


        In addition to the asset-pricing predictions that we have derived, funding
constraints naturally also affect agents’ portfolio choices. In particular, the more
constrained investors tilt towards riskier securities in equilibrium, whereas less
constrained agents tilt towards safer securities with higher reward per unit of risk.
To see this, we write next period’s security values as



4
  Garleanu and Pedersen (2009) finds a complementary result, studying securities with identical
fundamental risk, but different margin requirements. They find theoretically and empirically that
such assets have similar betas when liquidity is good, but, when funding liquidity risk rises, the high-
margin securities have larger betas as their high margins make them more funding sensitive. Here, we
study securities with different fundamental risk, but the same margin requirements so, in this case,
higher funding liquidity risk means that betas are compressed towards one.
5
  We state the result for log-returns, but the appendix shows how the result approximately holds for geometric
returns.



               Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 12
                                              e
             Pt 1  Et Pt 1  b Pt M1  Et Pt M1                             (13)



where b is a vector of market exposures and e is a vector of noise that is
uncorrelated with the market. With this, we have the following natural result for the
agents’ positions:


Proposition 4.
Unconstrained agents hold risk free securities and a portfolio of risky securities that
has a beta less than 1; constrained agents hold portfolios of securities with higher
betas. If securities s and k are identical expect that s has a larger market exposure
than k, b s  b k , then any constrained agent j with greater than average Lagrange

multiplier,  t j   t , holds more shares of s than k, while the reverse is true for any

agent with  t j   t .


We next turn to the empirical evidence for Propositions 1-3. We leave a formal test
of Proposition 4 for future research, although we discuss some suggestive evidence in
the conclusion.




   II. Data and Methodology

      The data in this study are collected from several sources. The sample of U.S.
and global stocks includes 50,826 stocks covering 20 countries, and the summary
statistics for stocks are reported in Table I. Stock return data are from the union of
the CRSP tape and the Xpressfeed Global database. Our U.S. equity data include all
available common stocks on CRSP between January 1926 and December 2009. Betas
are computed with respect to the CRSP value weighted market index. The global
equity data include all available common stocks on the Xpressfeed Global daily
security file for 19 markets belonging to the MSCI developed universe between
January 1984 and December 2009. We assign individual issues to their corresponding
markets based on the location of the primary exchange. Betas are computed with



              Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 13
respect to the corresponding MSCI local market index6. All returns are in USD and
excess returns are above the US Treasury bill rate. We consider alphas with respect
to the market and US factor returns based on size (SMB), book-to-market (HML),
momentum (UMD), and liquidity risk.7
      We also consider a variety of other assets and Table II contains the list
instruments and the corresponding data availability ranges. We obtain U.S.
Treasury bond data from the CRSP US Treasury Database. Our analysis focuses on
monthly returns (in excess of the 1-month Treasury bill) on the Fama Bond
portfolios for maturities ranging from 1 to 10 years between January 1952 and
December 2009. Returns are an equal-weighted average of the unadjusted holding
period return for each bond in the portfolios. Only non-callable, non-flower notes and
bonds are included in the portfolios. Betas are computed with respect to an equally
weighted portfolio of all bonds in the database.
      We collect aggregate corporate bond index returns from Barclays Capital’s
Bond.Hub database.8 Our analysis focused on monthly returns (in excess of the 1-
month Treasury bill) on 4 aggregate US credit indices with maturity ranging from
one to ten years and nine investment grade and high yield corporate bond portfolios
with credit risk ranging from AAA to Ca-D and “Distressed”9. The data cover the
period between January 1973 and December 2009 although the data availability
varies depending on the individual bond series. Betas are computed with respect to
an equally weighted portfolio of all bonds in the database.
        We also study futures and forwards on country equity indexes, country bond
indexes, foreign exchange, and commodities. Return data are drawn from the
internal pricing data maintained by AQR Capital Management LLC. The data is
collected from a variety of sources and contains daily returns on futures, forwards or
swaps contracts in excess of the relevant financing rate. The type of contract for
each asset depends on availability or the relative liquidity of different instruments.

6
  Our results are robust to the choice of benchmark (local vs. global). We report these tests in the
Appendix.
7
  SMB, HML, UMD are from Ken French’s website and the liquidity risk factor is from WRDS. For
global equities our results are robust to the choice of risk adjustment (local factors vs. global factors
constructed using the same methodology). We report these tests in the Appendix.
8
  The data can be downloaded at https://live.barcap.com
9
  The distress index was provided to us by Credit Suisse.



              Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 14
Prior to expiration positions are rolled over into next most liquid contract. The
rolling date’s convention differs across contracts and depends on the relative
liquidity of different maturities. The data cover the period between 1963 and 2009,
although the data availability varies depending on the asset class. For more details
on the computation of returns and data sources see Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen
(2010), Appendix A. For equity indexes, country bonds and currencies, betas are
computed with respect to a GDP-weighted portfolio, and, for commodities, betas are
computed with respect to a diversified portfolio that gives equal risk weight across
commodities.
       Finally, we use the TED spread as a proxy for time periods where credit
constraint are more likely to be binding (as Garleanu and Pedersen (2009) and
others). The TED spread is defined as the difference between the three-month
EuroDollar LIBOR rate on the three-month U.S. Treasuries rate. Our TED data run
from December 1984 to December 2009.


Estimating Betas
       We estimate pre-ranking betas from rolling regressions of excess returns on
excess market returns. Whenever possible we use daily data rather than monthly
since the accuracy of covariance estimation improves with the sample frequency (see
Merton (1980)). If daily data is available we use 1-year rolling windows and require
at least 200 observations. If we only have access to monthly data we use rolling 3-
year windows and require at least 12 observations10. Following Dimson (1979) and
Fama and French (1992) we estimate betas as the sum of the slopes in a regression
of the asset’s excess return of the current and prior market excess returns:



                                                      
                                          K
            rt  rt   f
                           ˆ   ˆk rt M k  rt f k  ˆ
                                      k 0
                                                                                (14)
                               K
            ˆ TS            
                              k 0
                                     ˆ
                                      k




10
  Daily returns are not available for our sample of US Treasury bonds, US corporate bonds and US
credit indices.




             Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 15
The additional lagged terms capture the effects of non-synchronous trading. We
include lags up to K = 5 trading days. When the sample frequency is monthly, we
include a single lag. Finally, in order to reduce the influence of outliers, we follow
Vasicek (1973) and Elton, Gruber, Brown, and Goetzmann (2003) and shrink the
beta estimated using the time-series ( iTS ) towards the cross-sectional mean (  XS )


               ˆi  wi ˆiTS  (1  wi ) ˆ XS                                                  (15)




For simplicity, rather than having asset-specific and time-varying shrinkage factors
as in Vasicek (1973), we set w = 0.5 and  XS =1 for all periods and across all assets,
but our results are very similar either way.11
         We note that our choice of the shrinkage factor does not affect how securities
are sorted into portfolios since the common shrinkage does not change the ranks of
security betas.12 The amount of shrinkage does affect the choice of the hedge ratio in
constructing zero-beta portfolios since it determines the relative size of the long and
the short side necessary to keep the hedge portfolios beta-neutral at formation. To
account for the fact that hedge ratios can be noisy, our inference is focused on
realized abnormal returns so that any mismatch between ex ante and realized betas
is picked up by the realized loadings in the factor regression. Our results are robust
to alternative beta estimation procedures as we report in the Appendix.


Constructing Betting-Against-Beta Factors
         We construct simple portfolios that are long low beta securities and short
high beta securities, hereafter “BAB” factors. To construct each BAB factor, all


11
   The Vasicek (1973) Bayesian shrinkage factor is given by wi  1   i2,TS / ( i2,TS   XS
                                                                                            2
                                                                                               ) where  i2,TS is the
variance of the estimated beta for security i, and  XS2
                                                           is the cross-sectional variance of betas. This
estimator places more weight on the historical times series estimate when the estimate has a lower
variance or there is large dispersion of betas in the cross section. Pooling across all stocks, in our US
equity data, the shrinkage factor w has a mean (median) of 0.51 (0.49).
12
   Using alternative rolling window, lag length, different shrinkage factors or using Scholes and
Williams (1977) trade only beta s does not alter our main results. We report these robustness checks
in the Appendix.



                Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 16
securities in an asset class (or within a country for global equities) are ranked in
ascending order on the basis of their estimated beta. The ranked stocks are assigned
to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Securities are weighted by the
ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios
are rescaled to have a beta of one at portfolio formation. The BAB is the zero-cost
zero-beta portfolio (9) that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta
portfolio. For example, on average the U.S. stock BAB factor is long $1.5 worth of
low-beta stocks (financed by shorting $1.5 of risk free securities) and short $0.7
worth of high-beta stocks (with $0.7 earning the risk-free rate).




  III. Betting Against Beta in Each Asset Class

Cross section of stock returns

       We now test how the required premium varies in the cross-section of beta-
sorted securities (Proposition 1) and the hypothesis that long/short BAB factors
have positive average returns (Proposition 2). Table III reports our tests for U.S.
stocks. We consider 10 beta-sorted portfolios and report their average returns,
alphas, market betas, volatilities, and Sharpe ratios. The average returns of the
different beta portfolios are similar, which is the well-known flat security market
line. Hence, consistent with Proposition 1 and with Black (1972), alphas decline
almost monotonically from low-beta to high-beta portfolios. Indeed, alphas decline
both when estimated relative to a 1-, 3-, 4-, and 5-factor model. Also, Sharpe ratios
decline monotonically from low-beta to high-beta portfolios. As we discuss in detail
below, declining alphas and Sharpe ratios across beta sorted portfolios is a general
phenomenon across asset classes. As a overview of these results, the Sharpe ratios of
all the beta-sorted portfolios considered in this paper are plotted in Figure B1 in the
Appendix.
       The rightmost column of Table III reports returns of the betting-against-beta
(BAB) factor of Equation (9), that is, a portfolio that is long a levered basket of
low-beta stocks and short a de-levered basket of high-beta stocks such as to keep the
portfolio beta-neutral. Consistent with Proposition 2, the BAB factor delivers a high



            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 17
average return and a high alpha. Specifically, the BAB factor has Fama and French
(1993) abnormal returns of 0.69% per month (t-statistic = 6.55). Additionally
adjusting returns for Carhart’s (1997) momentum-factor, the BAB portfolio earns
abnormal returns of 0.55% per month (t-statistic = 5.12). Last, we adjust returns
using a 5-factor model by adding the traded liquidity factor by Pastor and
Stambaugh (2003), yielding an abnormal BAB return of 0.46% per month (t-statistic
= 2.93) 13. We note that while the alpha of the long-short portfolio is consistent
across regressions, the choice of risk adjustment influences the relative alpha
contribution of the long and short sides of the portfolio. Figure B2 in the Appendix
plots the annual abnormal returns of the BAB stock portfolio.
       Our results for U.S. stocks show how the security market line has continued
to be flat for another four decades after Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972). More
interestingly, we next consider beta-sorted portfolios for global stocks and later turn
to altogether different asset classes. We use all 19 MSCI developed countries except
the U.S. (to keep the results separate from the U.S. results above), and we do this in
two ways: We consider global portfolios where all global stocks are pooled together
(Table IV), and we consider results separately for each country (Table V). The
global portfolio is country neutral that is stocks are assignee to low (high) beta
basket within each country.14
       The results for our pooled sample of global equities in Table IV mimic the
U.S. results: Alphas and Sharpe ratios of the beta-sorted portfolios decline (although
not perfectly monotonically) with betas, and the BAB factor earns risk-adjusted
returns between 0.42% and 0.71% per month depending on the choice of risk
adjustment with t-statistics ranging from 2.22 to 3.72.
       Table V shows the performance of the BAB factor within each individual
country. The BAB delivers positive Sharpe ratios in 18 of the 19 MSCI developed
countries and positive 4-factor alphas in 16 out of 19, displaying a strikingly
consistent pattern across equity markets. The BAB returns are statistically


13
   Note that Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factor is available on WRDS only between 1968
and 2008 thus cutting about 50% of our observations.
14
   We keep the global portfolio country neutral since we report results for equity indices BAB
separately in table IX.



             Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 18
significantly positive in 9 countries. Of course, the small number of stocks in our
sample in many of the countries (with some countries having only a few dozen
securities traded) makes it difficult to reject the null hypothesis of zero return in
each individual factor. Figure B3 in the Appendix plots the annual abnormal returns
of the BAB global portfolio.
       Tables B1 and B2 in the Appendix report factor loadings. On average, the
U.S. BAB factor invests $1.52 long ($1.58 for Global BAB) and $0.71 short ($0.84
for Global BAB). The larger long investment is meant to make the BAB factor
market neutral since the long stocks have smaller betas. The U.S. BAB factor
realizes a small positive market loading, indicating that our ex-ante beta are
measured with noise. The other factor loadings indicates that, relative to high-beta
stocks, low-beta stocks are likely to be smaller, have higher book-to-market ratios,
and have higher return over the prior 12 months, although none of the loadings can
explain the large and significant abnormal returns.
       The Appendix reports further tests and additional robustness checks. We
report results using different window lengths (1, 3, 5 years) to estimate betas,
different benchmark (local, global), different estimation methods (OLS, Scholes and
Williams (1977)) and different risk adjustment (local risk factors, global risk factors).
We split the sample by size and time periods, we control for idiosyncratic volatility
(both level and changes) and report results for alternative definition of the risk free
rate. All the results tell a consistent story: equity beta-neutral portfolios that bet
against betas earn significant risk-adjusted returns.


Treasury Bonds
       Table VI reports results for US Treasury bonds. As before, we report average
excess returns of bond portfolios formed by sorting on beta in the previous month. In
the cross section of Treasury bonds, ranking on betas with respect to an aggregate
Treasury bond index is empirically equivalent to ranking on duration or maturity.
Therefore, in Table VI one can think of the term “beta,” “duration,” or “maturity”
in an interchangeable fashion. The rightmost column reports returns of the BAB
factor. Abnormal returns are computed with respect to a one-factor model: alpha is




            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 19
the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return on an equally weighted
Treasury bond excess market return.
         The results show that the phenomenon of a flat security market line is not
limited to the cross section of stock returns. Indeed, consistent with Proposition 1,
alphas     decline     monotonically      with    beta.   Likewise,    Sharpe     ratios   decline
monotonically from 0.73 for low-beta (short maturity) bonds to 0.27 for high-beta
(long maturity) bonds. Further, the bond BAB portfolio delivers abnormal returns of
0.16% per month (t-statistic = 6.37) with a large annual Sharpe ratio of 0.85. Figure
B4 in the Appendix plots the annual time series of returns.
         Since the idea that funding constraints have a significant effect on the term
structure of interest may be surprising, let us illustrate the economic mechanism
that may be at work. Suppose an agent, e.g., a pension fund, has $1 to allocate to
Treasuries with a target excess return on 1.65% per year. One way to achieve this
return target is to invest $1 in a portfolio of 10-year bonds as seen in Table VI. If
instead the agent invests in 1-year Treasuries then he would need to invest $4.76 if
all maturities had the same Sharpe ratio. This is because 10-year Treasures are 4.76
times more volatile than 1-year Treasuries. Hence, the agent would need to borrow
an additional $3.76 to lever his investment in 1-year bonds. If the agent has leverage
limits (or prefers lower leverage), then he would strictly prefer the 10-year Treasuries
in this case.
         According to our theory, the 1-year Treasuries therefore must offer higher
returns and higher Sharpe ratios, flattening the security market line for bonds. This
is the case empirically. Empirically, the return target can be achieved with by
investing $2.7 in 1-year bonds. While a constrained investor may still prefer an un-
leveraged investment in 10-year bonds, unconstrained investors now prefer the
leveraged low-beta bonds, and the market can clear.
         While the severity of leverage constraints varies across market participants, it
appears plausible that a 2.7 to 1 leverage (on this part of the portfolio) makes a
difference for some large investors such as pension funds.


Credit



                Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 20
        We next test our model using several credit portfolios. In Table VII, the test
assets are monthly excess returns of corporate bond indexes with maturity ranging
from 1 to 10 years. Table VII panel A shows that the credit BAB portfolio delivers
abnormal returns of 0.13% per month (t-statistic = 4.91) with a large annual Sharpe
ratio of 0.88. Further, alphas and Sharpe ratios decline monotonically, with Sharpe
ratios ranging from 0.79 to 0.64 from low beta (short maturity) to high beta (long
maturity bonds).
        Panel B of Table VII reports results for portfolio of US credit indices where
we try to isolate the credit component by hedging away the interest rate risk. Given
the results on Treasuries in Table VI we are interested in testing a pure credit
version of the BAB portfolio. Each calendar month we run 1-year rolling regressions
of excess bond returns on excess return on Barclay’s US government bond index. We
construct test assets by going long the corporate bond index and hedging this
position by shorting the appropriate amount of the government bond index:
rtCDS  rt f  (rt  rt f )  ˆt 1 (rtUSGOV  rt f ) , where ˆt 1 is the slope coefficient estimated in
an expanding regression using data up to month t-1. One interpretation of this
returns series is that it approximately mimics the returns on a Credit Default Swap
(CDS). We compute market returns by taking equally weighted average of these
hedged returns, and compute betas and BAB portfolios as before. Abnormal returns
are computed with respect to a two factor model: alpha is the intercept in a
regression of monthly excess return on the equally weighted average pseudo-CDS
excess return and the monthly return on the (un-hedged) BAB factor for US credit
indices in the rightmost column of Table VII panel B. The addition of the un-hedged
BAB factor on the right hand side is an extra check to test a pure credit version of
the BAB portfolio.
        The results in Panel B of Table VII tell the same story as Panel A: the CDS
BAB portfolio delivers significant returns of 0.08% per month (t-statistics = 3.65)
and Sharpe ratios decline monotonically from low beta to high beta assets. Figure B5
in the Appendix plots the annual time series of returns.
        Last, in Table VIII we report results where the test assets are credit indexes
sorted by rating, ranging from AAA to Ca-D and Distressed. Consistent with all our



              Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 21
previous results, we find large abnormal returns of the BAB portfolios (0.56% per
month with a t-statistics = 4.02), and declining alphas and Sharpe ratios across beta
sorted portfolios. Figure B6 in the Appendix plots the annual time series of returns.


Equity indexes, country bond indexes, foreign exchange and commodities
      Table IX reports results for equity indexes, country bond indexes, foreign
exchange and commodities. The BAB portfolio delivers positive return in each of the
four asset classes, with annualized Sharpe ratio ranging from 0.22 to 0.51. The
magnitude of returns is large, but the BAB portfolios in these assets are much more
volatile and, as a result, we are only able to reject the null hypothesis of zero
average return for global equity indexes. We can, however, reject the null hypothesis
of zero returns for combination portfolios than include all or some combination of
the four asset classes, taking advantage of diversification. We construct a simple
equally weighted BAB portfolio. To account for different volatility across the four
asset classes, in month t we rescale each return series to 10% annualized volatility
using rolling 3-year estimate up to moth t-1 and then equally weight the return
series and their respective market benchmark. This corresponds to a simple
implementable portfolio that targets 10% BAB volatility in each asset classes. We
report results for an All futures combo including all four asset classes and a Country
Selection combo including only Equity indices, Country Bonds and Foreign
Exchange. The BAB All Futures and Country Selection deliver abnormal return of
0.52% and 0.71% per month (t-statistics = 4.50 and 4.42). Figure B7 in the
Appendix plots the annual time series of returns.
      To summarize, the results in Table III–IX strongly support the predictions
that alphas decline with beta and BAB factors earn positive excess returns in each
asset class. Figure A1 illustrate the remarkably consistent pattern of declining
Sharpe ratios in each asset class. Clearly, the flat security market line, documented
by Black, Jensen, Scholes (1972) for U.S. stocks, is a pervasive phenomenon that we
find across markets and asset classes. Putting all the BAB factors together produces
a large and significant abnormal return of 0.77% per month (t-statistics of 8.8) as
seen in Table IX panel B.




            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 22
       This evidence is consistent with of a model in which some investors are
prohibited from using leverage and other investors’ leverage is limited by margin
requirements, generating positive average return of factors that are long a leveraged
portfolio of low-beta assets and short a portfolio of high-beta assets. To further
examine this explanation of what appears to be a pervasive phenomenon, we next
turn to tests the cross-sectional time-series predictions of the model.




  IV. Beta Compression

       In this section, we tests Proposition 3 that betas are compressed towards 1
during times with shocks to funding constraints. This model prediction generates
two testable hypotheses. The first is a direct prediction on the cross-sectional of
betas: the cross-sectional dispersion in betas should be lower when individual credit
constraints are more likely to be binding. The second is a prediction on the
conditional market betas of BAB portfolios: although beta neutral at portfolio
formation (and on average), a BAB factor should tend to realize positive market
exposure when individual credit constraints are more likely to be binding. We
present results for both predictions in Table X.
       We use the TED spread as a proxy of funding liquidity conditions. Our tests
rely on the assumption that high levels of TED spread (or, similarly, high levels of
TED spread volatility) correspond to times when investors are more likely to face
shocks to their funding conditions. Since we expect that funding shocks affect the
overall market return, we confirm that the monthly correlation between the TED
spread (either level or 1-month changes) and the CRSP value weighted index is
negative, around -25%.
       We test the model’s predictions about the dispersion in betas using our
samples of US and Global equities which have the largest cross sections of securities.
The sample runs from December 1984 (the first available date for the TED spread)
to 2009.
       Table X, Panel A shows the cross-sectional dispersion in betas in different
time periods sorted by likelihood of binding credit constraints for U.S. stocks. Panel



            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 23
B shows the same for global stocks. Each calendar month we compute cross-sectional
standard deviation, mean absolute deviation and inter-quintile range in betas for all
stocks in the universe. We assign the TED spread into three groups (low, medium,
and high) based on full sample breakpoints (top and bottom 1/3) and regress the
times series of the cross-sectional dispersion measure on the full set of dummies
(without intercept). Table X shows that, consistent with Proposition 3, the cross-
sectional dispersion in betas is lower when credit constraints are more likely to be
biding. The average cross-sectional standard deviation of US equity betas in periods
of low spreads is 0.47 while the dispersion shrinks to 0.35 in tight credit environment
and the difference is highly statistical significant (t-statistics = -10.72). The tests
based on the other dispersion measures and the global data all tell a consistent story:
the cross-sectional dispersion in beta shrink at times where credit is more likely to be
rationed.
       Panel C and D reports conditional market betas of the BAB portfolios based
on the credit environment for, respectively, U.S. and global stocks. We run factor
regression and allow loadings on the market portfolio to vary as function of the
realized TED spread. The dependent variable is the monthly return of the BAB
portfolio. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns of the market portfolio,
Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor.
Market betas are allowed to vary across TED spread regimes (low, neutral and high)
using the full set of TED dummies. We are interested in testing the hypothesis that

ˆhigh
  MKT
        ˆlow
            MKT
                where ˆhigh
                        MKT
                             ( ˆlow
                                  MKT
                                      ) is the conditional market beta in times when credit

constraints are more (less) likely to be binding. Panel B reports loading on the
market factor corresponding to different time periods sorted by the credit
environment. We include the full set of explanatory variables in the regression but
only report the market loading. The results are consistent with Proposition 3:
although the BAB factor is both ex ante and ex post market neutral on average, the
conditional market loading on the BAB factor is function of the credit environment.
Indeed, recall from Table III that the realized average market loading is an
insignificant 0.03, while Table X shows that when credit is more likely to be
rationed, the BAB-factor beta rises to 0.30. The rightmost column shows that



            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 24
variation in realized between tight and relaxed credit environment is large (0.51),
and we are safely able to reject the null that ˆhigh
                                                 MKT
                                                       ˆlow
                                                           MKT
                                                               (t-statistics 3.64).

Controlling for 3 or 4 factors does not alter the results, although loadings on the
other factors absorb some the difference. The results for our sample of global equities
are similar as shown and panel D.
       To summarize, the results in Table X support the prediction of our model
that there is beta compression in times of funding liquidity risk. This can be
understood in two ways. First, more discount-rate volatility that affects all securities
the same way compresses beta. A deeper explanation is that, as funding conditions
get worse, all prices tend to go down, but high-beta assets do not drop as much as
their ex-ante beta suggests because the securities market line flattens at such times,
providing support for high-beta assets. Conversely, the flattening of the security
market line makes low-beta assets drop more than their ex-ante betas suggest.




  V. Time Series Tests

       In this section, we test Proposition 2’s predictions for the time-series of the
BAB returns. When funding constraints become more binding (e.g., because margin
requirements rise), the required BAB premium increases and the realized BAB
returns becomes negative.
       We take this prediction to the data using the TED spread as a proxy of
funding conditions as in Section IV. Figure 2 shows the realized return on the U.S.
BAB factor and the (negated) TED spread. We plot 3-years rolling average of both
variables. The figure shows that the BAB returns tend to be lower in periods of high
TED spread, consistent with Proposition 2.
       We next test the hypothesis in a regression framework for each of the BAB
factors across asset classes, as reported in Table XI. The first column simply
regresses the U.S. BAB factor on the contemporaneous level of the TED spread.
Consistent with Proposition 2, we find a negative and significant relation, confirming
the relation that is visually clear in Figure 2. Column (2) has a similar result when
controlling for a number of control variables.



            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 25
       The control variables are the market returns, the 1-month lagged BAB
return, the ex-ante Beta Spread, the Short Volatility Returns, and Inflation. The
Beta Spread is equal to (  S   L ) /  S  L and measures the beta difference between
the long and short side of the BAB portfolios. The Short Volatility Returns is the
return on a portfolio that is short closest-to-the-money, next-to-expire straddles on
the S&P500 index, and measures short to aggregate volatility. Inflation is equal to
the 1-year US CPI inflation rate, lagged 1 month.
       In columns (3) and (4), we decompose the TED spread into its level and
change: The Change in TED Spread is equal to TED in month t minus the median
spread over the past 3 years while Lagged TED Spread is the median spread over
the past 3 years. We see that both the lagged level and contemporaneous change in
the TED spread are negatively related to the BAB returns. If the TED spread
measures that agents’ funding constraint (given by  in the model) are tight, then
the model predicts a negative coefficient for the change in TED and a positive
coefficient for the lagged level. Hence, the coefficient for the lagged level is not
consistent with the model under this interpretation of the TED spread. If, instead, a
high TED spread indicates that agents’ funding constraints are worsening, then the
results could be consistent with the model. Under this interpretation, a high TED
spread could indicate that banks are credit constrained and that banks over time
tighten other investors’ credit constraints, thus leading to a deterioration of BAB
returns over time, if this is not fully priced in.
       Columns (5)-(8) of Table XI reports panel regressions for global stock BAB
factors, and columns (9)-(12) for all the BAB factors. These regressions include fixed
effect and standard errors are clustered by date. We consistently find a negative
relationship between BAB returns and the TED spread.
       In addition to the TED spread, the ex ante Beta Spread, (  S   L ) /  S  L , is of
interest since Proposition 2 predicts that the ex ante beta spread should predict
BAB returns positively. Consistent with the model, Table XI shows that the
estimated coefficient for the Beta Spread is positive in all six regressions where it is
included, and statistically significant in three regressions that control for the lagged
TED spread.



             Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 26
       We see that the inflation rate is not a significant predictor. Hence, our results
do not appear to be driven by money illusion (as studied by Cohen, Polk, and
Vuolteenaho (2005)).
       To ensure that these panel-regression estimates are not driven by a few asset
classes, we also run a separate regression for each BAB factor on the TED spread.
Figure 3 plots the t-statistics of the slope estimate on the TED spread. Although we
are not always able to reject the null of no effect for each individual factor, the
slopes estimates display a consistent pattern: we find negative coefficients in 16 out
of the 19 asset classes, with Credit and Treasuries being the exceptions. Obviously
the exceptions could be just noise, but positive returns to BAB portfolios during
liquidity crises (i.e., high TED periods) could possibly be related to “flight to
quality” in which some investors switch towards assets that are closer to money-
market instruments, or related to central banks cutting short-term yields to
counteract liquidity crises. Table A7 in the Appendix provides more details on the
BAB returns in different environments.




  VI. Conclusion

     All real-world investors face funding constraints such as leverage constraints
and margin requirements, and these constraints influence investors’ required returns
across securities and over time. Consistent with the idea that investors prefer un-
leveraged risky assets to leveraged safe assets, which goes back to Black (1972), we
find empirically that portfolios of high-beta assets have lower alphas and Sharpe
ratios than low-beta assets. The security market line is not only flat for U.S. equities
(as reported by Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972)), but we also find this flatness for
18 of 19 global equity markets, in Treasury markets, for corporate bonds sorted by
maturity and by rating, and in futures markets. We show how this deviation from
the standard CAPM can be captured using betting-against-beta factors, which may
also be useful as control variables in future research. The return of the BAB factor
rivals that of standard asset pricing factors such as value, momentum, and size in
terms of economic magnitude, statistical significance, and robustness across time



            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 27
periods, sub-samples of stocks, and global asset classes.
       Extending the Black (1972) model, we consider the implications of funding
constraints for cross-sectional and time-series asset returns: We show that increased
funding liquidity risk compresses betas in the cross section of securities towards 1,
leading to an increased beta for the BAB factor, and we find consistent evidence
empirically. In the time series, we show that increased funding illiquidity should lead
to losses for the BAB factor, and we find consistent evidence in all the asset classes
that we study except Treasuries and credit.
       Our model also has implications for agents’ portfolio selection (Proposition 4).
While we leave rigorous tests of these predictions for future research, we conclude
with some suggestive ideas consistent with the model’s predictions. Our model
predicts that agents with access to leverage buy low-beta securities and lever them
up. One such group of agents is private equity (PE) funds involved in leveraged
buyouts (LBOs). Our model predicts that the stocks bought by PE firms have a
lower beta than 1 before they buy them. Further, when the private equity firm sells
the firm back to the public, the model predicts that the beta has increased. Also,
banks have relatively easy access to leverage (e.g., through their depositors) so the
model predicts that banks own leveraged positions in securities with low-beta.
Indeed, anecdotal evidence suggests that banks hold leveraged portfolios of high-
rated bonds, e.g. mortgage bonds. Further, shadow banks such as special investment
vehicles (SIVs) had in some cases infinitely leveraged portfolios of short-dated high-
rated fixed-income securities. Conversely, the model predicts that investors that are
particularly restricted by constraints buy high-beta assets. For instance, mutual
funds may be biased to holding high-beta stocks because of their limited leveraged
(Karceski (2002)).




            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 28
References


Acharya, V. V., and L. H. Pedersen (2005), “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk,"
Journal of Financial Economics, 77, 375-410.


Ang, A., R. Hodrick, Y. Xing, X. Zhang (2006), “The Cross-Section of Volatility and
Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 61, pp. 259-299.


— (2009), “High Idiosyncratic Volatility and Low Returns: International and Further
U.S. Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 91, pp. 1-23.


Ashcraft, A., N.      Garleanu, and L.H. Pedersen (2010), “Two Monetary Tools:
Interest Rates and Haircuts,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, forthcoming.


Baker, M., B. Bradley, and J. Wurgler (2010), “Benchmarks as Limits to Arbitrage:
Understanding the Low Volatility Anomaly,” working paper, Harvard.


Black, F. (1972), “Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing,” Journal of
business, 45, 3, pp. 444-455.


— (1992), “Beta and Return,” The Journal of Portfolio Management, 20, pp. 8-18.


Black, F., M.C. Jensen, and M. Scholes (1972), “The Capital Asset Pricing Model:
Some Empirical Tests.” In Michael C. Jensen (ed.), Studies in the Theory of Capital
Markets, New York, pp. 79-121.


Brennan, M.J., (1971), “Capital market equilibrium with divergent borrowing and
lending rates.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 6, 1197-1205.


Brennan, M.J. (1993), “Agency and Asset Pricing.” University of California, Los
Angeles, working paper.




             Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 29
Brunnermeier, M. and L.H. Pedersen (2009), “Market Liquidity and Funding
Liquidity,” The Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2201-2238.


Carhart, M. (1997), "On persistence in mutual fund performance", Journal of
Finance 52, 57—82.


Cohen, R.B., C. Polk, and T. Vuolteenaho (2005), “Money Illusion in the Stock
Market: The Modigliani-Cohn Hypothesis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120:2, 639-668.


Cuoco, D. (1997), “Optimal consumption and equilibrium prices with portfolio
constraints and stochastic income," Journal of Economic Theory, 72(1), 33-73.


Dimson, E. (1979), “Risk Measurement when Shares are Subject to Infrequent
Trading,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7, 197—226.


Duffee, G. (2010), “Sharpe Ratios in Term Structure Models,” Johns Hopkins
University, working paper.


Elton, E.G., M.J. Gruber, S. J. Brown and W. Goetzmannn: "Modern Portfolio
Theory and Investment", Wiley: New jersey.


Fama, E.F. (1984), “The Information in the Term Structure,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 13, 509-528.


Fama, E.F. (1986), “Term Premiums and Default Premiums in Money Markets,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 17, 175-196.


Fama, E.F. and French, K.R. (1992), “The cross-section of expected stock returns,”
Journal of Finance, 47, 2, pp. 427-465.




            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 30
Fama, E.F. and French, K.R. (1993), "Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds", Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3—56.


Fama, E.F. and French, K.R. (1996), "Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing
Anomalies", Journal of Finance 51, 55-84.


Fu, F. (2009), “Idiosyncratic risk and the cross-section of expected stock returns,”
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 91:1, 24-37.


Garleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen (2009), “Margin-Based Asset Pricing and
Deviations from the Law of One Price," UC Berkeley and NYU, working paper.


Gibbons, M. (1982), “Multivariate tests of financial models: A new approach,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 10, 3-27.


Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos (2002), “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with
Financially Constrained Arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 361—407.


Hindy, A. (1995), “Viable Prices in Financial Markets with Solvency Constraints,"
Journal of Mathematical Economics, 24(2), 105-135.


Kandel, S. (1984), “The likelihood ratio test statistic of mean-variance efficiency
without a riskless asset,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13, pp. 575-592.


Karceski, J. (2002), “Returns-Chasing Behavior, Mutual Funds, and Beta’s Death,”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 37:4, 559-594.


Lewellen, J. and Nagel, S. (2006), “The conditional CAPM does not explain asset-
pricing anomalies,” Journal of Financial Economics, 82(2), pp. 289–314.




            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 31
Markowitz, H.M. (1952), “Portfolio Selection,” The Journal of Finance, 7, 77-91.


Mehrling, P. (2005), “Fischer Black and the Revolutionary Idea of Finance,” Wiley:
New Jersey.


Merton R. C. (1980), "On estimating the expected return on the market: An
exploratory investigation" , Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323{361.


Moskowitz, T., Y.H. Ooi, and L.H. Pedersen (2010), “Time Series Momentum,”
University of Chicago and NYU working paper.


Pastor, L , and R. Stambaugh. (2003), "Liquidity risk and expected stock returns",
Journal of Political Economy 111, 642—685.


Polk, C., S. Thompson, and T. Vuolteenaho (2006), “Cross-sectional forecasts of the
equity premium,” Journal of Financial Economics, 81, 101-141.


Scholes, M., and J. Williams (1977), “Estimating Betas from Nonsynchronous Data"
Journal of Financial Economics ,5 ,309-327.


Shanken, J. (1985), “Multivariate tests of the zero-beta CAPM,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 14,. 327-348.


Vasicek, O. A. (1973), “A Note on using Cross-sectional Information in Bayesian
Estimation on Security Beta’s,” The Journal of Finance, 28(5), 1233—1239.




              Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Page 32
                                          Appendix A: Proofs


Proof of Proposition 1. Rearranging the equilibrium-price Equation (7) yields


                                         1
                
            Et rt s1  r f   t  
                                        Pt s
                                             es ' x *

                                         1
                      r f  t  
                                        Pt s
                                                    
                                             covt Pt s 1 , Pt 1 ' x *          (A1)


                                                         
                      r f   t   covt rt s1 , rt M1 Pt ' x *


where es is a vector with a 1 in row s and zeros elsewhere. Multiplying this equation
by the market portfolio weights ws  x *i Pt s /  j x * j Pt j and summing over s gives



                                               
            Et rt M1  r f   t   vart rt M1 Pt ' x *                        (A2)



that is,


                              t
             Pt ' x* 
                                
                                                                                  (A3)
                          vart rt M1


Inserting this into (A1) gives the first result in the proposition. The second result
follows from writing the expected return as:


                                                      
            Et rt s1  r f   t 1  ts   ts Et rt M1  r f                 (A4)



and noting that the first term is (Jensen’s) alpha. Turning to the third result
regarding efficient portfolios, the Sharpe ratio increases in beta until the tangency
portfolio is reached, and decreases thereafter. Hence, the last result follows from the
fact that the tangency portfolio has a beta less than 1. This is true because the
market portfolio is an average of the tangency portfolio (held by unconstrained




      Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix A - Page A1
agents) and riskier portfolios (held by constrained agents) so the market portfolio is
riskier than the tangency portfolio. Hence, the tangency portfolio must have a lower
expected return and beta (strictly lower iff some agents are constrained).⁬


Proof of Proposition 2. The expected return of the BAB factor is:



                 
             Et rt BAB
                   1              1
                                        t
                                          L    E  r   r   1  E  r   r 
                                                   t
                                                          L
                                                        t 1
                                                                   f

                                                                                t
                                                                                 H       t
                                                                                               H
                                                                                             t 1
                                                                                                        f



                                     1                                 1
                                 
                                         L      t     tL t         H      t    tH t          (A5)
                                         t                                 t

                                    tH  tL
                                             
                                     tL  tH t


       Consider next a change in mtk . Note first that this does not change the betas.
This is because Equation (7) shows that the change in Lagrange multipliers scale all
the prices (up or down) by the same proportion. Hence, Equation (12) in the
proposition follows if we can show that  t increases in mk since this lead to:


                     
             Et rt BAB
                    1                     t
                                               H
                                                  tL  t
                                                            0                                              (A6)
                  mtk                        tL tH mtk


Further, since prices move opposite required returns, Equation (11) then follows. To
see that an increase in mtk increases  t , we first note that the constrained agents’

asset expenditure decreases with a higher mtk . Indeed, summing the portfolio
constraint across constrained agents (where is holds with equality) gives


                                                                      1 i
                 
             i constrained
                                 x
                                 s
                                         i,s
                                               Pt s           
                                                        i constrained m
                                                                        i
                                                                          Wt                                (A7)


Since increasing mk decreases the right-hand side, the left-hand side must also
decrease. That is, the total market value of shares owned by constrained agents
decreases.



      Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix A - Page A2
            Next, the constrained agents’ expenditure is decreasing in  so  must
increase:


                                                                        Pt i         x i   
                        
                                            Pt ' x i         
                                                          i constrained  
                                                                             ' x  Pt '
                                                                                        
                                                                                               0                 (A8)
                             i constrained                                                     


                                                                                                Pt i
To see the last inequality, note first that clearly                                                ' x  0 since all the prices
                                                                                                
decrease by the same proportion (seen in Equation (7)) and the initial expenditure is
positive. The second term is also negative since


                         i                  Et  Pt 1   x *   1 1                                        E  P   x * 
               Pt '
                       
                          x               
                                                 1  r 
                                                                   '                                                    
                                                                                    Et  Pt 1   1  r f   ti t t 1 f        
                                                                                                                  1  r 
                                                         f                      i
i constrained                 i constrained                                                                                       
                                  E  P   x *   1                            1                  E  P   x *
                               t t 1 f                 '                                              
                                                                                         1  r f   ti t t 1 f
                                  1  r                         i constrained                      1  r 
                                                                                      i


                                  E  P   x *   1 1                                      E  P   x *
                               t t 1 f                 '                                
                                                                            q 1  r f   t t 1 f    
                                  1  r                                                      1  r 

                                              1  q 1  r 
                                               1
                                                          f
                                                                             
                               
                                  1  r f     1  r f 
                                                               Et  Pt 1   x * ' 1  Et  Pt 1   x *
                               0

                                                                                                                   i       
where we have defined q                                    
                                                      i constrained 
                                                                      i
                                                                         1 and used that                 
                                                                                                     i constrained 
                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                          i  i 
                                                                                                                           i 


since  i  0 for unconstrained agents. This completes the proof.⁬


Proof of Proposition 3. Using the Equation (7) for the price, the sensitivity of with
respect to funding shocks can be calculated as

                        Pt s                 1
                              /  t                                                                             (A9)
                         Pt s
                                         1  r  t
                                              f




which is the same for all securities s.



          Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix A - Page A3
          Intuitively, shocks that affect all securities the same way compress betas
towards one. This is seen most easily using long returns:


             rt s ,log  log Pt s  log Pt s 1

                                                                     
                                                                                            (A10)
                      log Et Pt s 1  x *  log 1  r f  t  log Pt s 1



Hence, a higher variance of log 1  r f  t                      increases all co-variances and variances

by the same amount, thus pushing betas — the ratio of covariance to market variance
— towards one.
          Further, if betas are compressed towards 1 after the formation of the BAB
portfolio, then BAB will realize a positive beta as its long-side is more levered than
its short side.
          The result is seen approximately as follows when returns are computed as
ratios:


                  Pt i          1      Et  Pt i1   ti x *
             rt  i  1 
               i
                                                                1                          (A11)
                 Pt 1    1  r f  t            Pt i1


First, we decompose returns into two parts:

             rti  xt zti  1                                                               (A12)
where
                           1                    1     
              xt                 / E                
                     1  r f  t          1  r  t 
                                     t  1        f

                                                                                            (A13)
                         
              zt  Et 1 
               i                1
                                              i
                                                       
                                       Et Pt 1  t x *
                                                       i

                                      
                          1  r  t 
                                f
                                                Pt i1


When x is independent of z, the covariance between and security i and the market
M can be written as:




        Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix A - Page A4
covt 1 (rti , rt M )  covt 1 ( x z i , x z M )
                                                          
                     Et 1 x 2 z i z M  Et 1 x z i Et 1 x z M                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                 (A14)
                     vart 1 ( x)   Et 1 ( x)  Et 1 z i z M   Et 1 ( x)  Et 1 z i Et 1 z M
                                                                2                               2




                                                       
                     vart 1 ( x) Et 1 z i z M   Et 1 ( x)  covt 1 ( z i , z M )
                                                                            2




and, hence, beta is

                            covt 1 (rti , rt M )
                 ti1 
                              vart 1 (rt M )
                                                               
                                                                                                               (A15)
                            vart 1 ( x) Et 1 z i z M   Et 1 ( x)  covt 1 ( z i , z M )
                                                                                2

                        
                                                                   
                                vart 1 ( x) Et 1 ( z M ) 2   Et 1 ( x)  vart 1 ( z M )
                                                                                    2




A higher variance of x pushes beta towards Et 1 z i z M / Et 1 ( z M ) 2                                which is close to

1 since the z’s are effectively ratios of prices.⁬


Proof of Proposition 4. To see the first part of the proposition, we first note that an
unconstrained investor holds the tangency portfolio, which has a beta less than 1 in
equilibrium with funding constraints, and the constrained investors hold riskier
portfolios of risky assets, as discussed in the proof of Proposition 1.
          To see the second part of the proposition, note that given the equilibrium
prices, the optimal portfolio is:


                           1                                 E  P   x * 
                 xi 
                           i                           
                          1  Et  Pt 1   1  r f   ti t t 1 f      
                                                                 1  r  t 
                                                                                
                                                                                                              (A16)
                       1  r f  ti              t  ti 1 1
                      i                 x  *                    Et  Pt 1 
                       1  r f  t            1  r f  t  i


The first term shows that each agent holds some (positive) weight in the market
portfolio x* and the second term shows how he tilts his portfolio away from the
market. The direction of the tilt depends on whether the agent’s Lagrange multiplier
 ti is smaller or larger than the weighted average of all the agents’ Lagrange


        Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix A - Page A5
multipliers  t . A less constrained agent tilts towards the portfolio  1 Et  Pt 1 

(measured in shares), while a more constrained agent tilts away from this portfolio.
Given the expression (13), we can write the variance-covariance matrix as


                M2 bb '                                                                                   (A17)



                                                     
where Σ=var(e) and  M2  var Pt M1 . Using the Matrix Inversion Lemma (the

Sherman—Morrison—Woodbury formula), the tilt portfolio can be written as:


                                                        1         
                        
              1 Et Pt 1    1   1bb '  1 2         1  t
                                                    M  b ' b 
                                                                     E Pt 1           
                             
                                                                           1
                                              
                             1 Et Pt 1   1bb '  1 Et Pt 1 2        
                                                                      M  b '  1b
                                                                                                               (A18)


                                              
                                     1 Et Pt 1  y 1b



                          
where y  b '  1 Et Pt 1 /  M2  b '  1b                  is a scalar and         b   b
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                s
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                               k
                                                                                                                     since b s  b k

and s and k have the rows and columns in  implying that                                                 
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                               s,s
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                              s ,k
                                                                                                                                     . So

everything else equal, a higher b leads to a lower weight in the tilt portfolio.
        Finally, we note that security s also has a higher return beta than k since
                      Pt M cov( Pt i1 , Pt M1 )       Pt M i
              ti                                          b
                                      
                                                                                                               (A19)
                          Pt i var Pt M1               Pt i

and a higher bi means a lower price:

              Pt 
               i          
                      Et Pt i1    x *i
                                                        
                                                                  
                                                            Et Pt i1    x *i  bi b ' x *  M2
                                                                                                               (A20)
                                                                              
                       1  r   i  ti
                               f
                                                                     1  r   i  ti
                                                                            f

                               i                                            i 

⁬




       Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix A - Page A6
            Appendix B: Additional Empirical Results and Robustness Tests


Tables B1 to B7 and Figures B1 to B7 contain additional empirical results and
robustness tests.


 -   Table B1 reports returns of BAB portfolio in US and global equities using different
     window lengths (1, 3, 5 years), different benchmark (local, global), different
     methods to estimate betas (OLS, Scholes and Williams (1977)) and different risk
     adjustment (local risk factors, global risk factors). Global risk factors are
     constructed as in Fama and French (1996) using our global sample.


 -   Table B2 reports returns and factor loadings of US and Global BAB portfolios


 -   Table B3 and B4 report returns of US and Global BAB portfolios controlling for
     idiosyncratic volatility. Idiosyncratic volatility is defined as the standard deviation
     of the residuals in the rolling regression used to estimated betas. We use
     conditional sorts: at the beginning of each calendar month stocks are ranked in
     ascending order on the basis of their idiosyncratic volatility and assigned to one of
     10 groups from low to high volatility. Within each volatility deciles, we assign
     stocks to low and high beta portfolios and compute BAB returns. We report two
     sets of results: controlling for the level of idiosyncratic volatility and the 1-month
     change in the same measure.


 -   Table B5 reports returns of US and Global BAB portfolios controlling for size. Size
     is defined as the market value of equity (in USD). We use conditional sorts: at the
     beginning of each calendar month stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis
     of their market value of equity and assigned to one of 10 groups from small to
     large based on NSYE breakpoints. Within each size deciles, we assign stocks to low
     and high beta portfolios and compute BAB returns.




       Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B1
-   Table B6 reports returns of US and Global BAB portfolios in different sample
    periods.


-   Table B7 reports returns of US and Global BAB portfolios using alternative
    assumption for risk free rates.


-   Table B8 reports returns of US Treasury Bonds portfolios using alternative
    assumption for risk free rates. Table B8 also reports results for BAB factors
    constructed using 2-year and 30-year Treasury bonds and the corresponding 1-year
    and 30-year Treasury bond futures over the same sample period. Using futures-
    based portfolio avoids the need of an assumption about the risk free rate since
    futures returns are constructed as changes in the futures contract price. We use 2-
    year and 30-year futures since in our data they are the contract with the longest
    available sample period.


-   Table B9 reports returns of BAB portfolios for all asset classes in different time
    periods sorted by likelihood of binding credit constraints. At the beginning of each
    calendar month, we rescale each return series to 10% annualized volatility using
    rolling 3-year estimate up to moth t-1. We assign the Ted spread into three groups
    (low, neutral and high) based on full sample breakpoints (top and bottom 1/3) and
    report returns for each time period.


-   Figure B1 plot the Sharpe ratio (annualized) of beta-sorted portfolios for all the
    asset classes.


-   Figures B2 to B7 reports calendar time returns of the BAB portfolios.




      Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B2
                                                                    Table B1
                              US and Global equities. Robustness: Alternative Betas Estimation and Risk Adjustment

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of BAB portfolios for different beta estimation methods and different risk-adjustment. At the beginning of each calendar month within
each country stocks are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both
portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table
includes all available common stocks on the CRSP database, and all available common stocks on the Compustat Xpressfeed Global database for the 19 markets in listed table I. “Beta
with respect to” is the index used to compute rolling betas. “Universe” is the sample universe (US or Global). “Method” is the estimation method used to calculate betas. We use either
OLS or the Scholes and Williams (1997) trade-based beta (“SW”). “Risk Factors” is the risk adjustment used to compute alphas. We use either US-based factors (US) or the
corresponding global version (Global) constructed using the same methodology. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the
monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor (either US or Global). Returns and alphas are in USD and are expressed in
monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold. $ Long (Short) is the average dollar value of the long (short)
position. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized.



 Beta with respect to       Universe     Method       Risk        Estimation      Lagged         Excess       t-stat      4-factor    t(alpha)    $Short     $Long      Volatility       SR
                                                      Factors     window          terms          Return      Excess          alpha
                                                                  (year)                                     Return

 CRSP - VW index            US           OLS          US                1         1 Week            0.71        6.76          0.55        5.12       0.71       1.52          11.5     0.75
 CRSP - VW index            US           OLS          US                3         1 Week            0.43        4.75          0.43        4.96       0.73       1.36           9.6     0.53
 CRSP - VW index            US           OLS          US                5         1 Week            0.37        4.04          0.42        5.01       0.76       1.29           9.8     0.46
 CRSP - VW index            US           SW           US                1                           0.56        6.13          0.42        4.48       0.73       1.36          10.0     0.67


 Local market index         Global       OLS          US                1         1 Week            0.72        3.79          0.45        2.47       0.86       1.51          10.9     0.79
 Local market index         Global       OLS          Global            1         1 Week            0.72        3.79          0.49        2.67       0.86       1.51          10.9     0.79
 Global market index        Global       OLS          US                1         1 Week            1.06        4.08          0.59        2.40       0.87       1.78          15.5     0.82
 CRSP - VW index            Global       OLS          US                1         1 Week            0.81        3.07          0.39        1.57       0.98       1.81          15.3     0.64




                                       Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B3
                                                   Table B2
                                     US and Global Equities. Factor Loadings

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns and factor loadings. At the beginning of each calendar month all stocks are
assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are
rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The zero-beta factor
is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table includes all available
common stocks on the CRSP database, and all available common stocks on the Compustat Xpressfeed Global database for
the 19 markets in listed table I. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are
the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor. Returns and
alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is
indicated in bold. Beta (ex ante) is the average estimated beta at portfolio formation. $ Long (Short) is the average dollar
value of the long (short) position.

                       Excess          Alpha         MKT           SMB           HML          UMD          $ Short       $ Long
                       Return

 Panel A: US - all stocks
 High Beta                0.97          0.01          1.30          1.11          0.23         -0.23
 Low beta                 0.93          0.33          0.67          0.60          0.26         -0.05
 L/S                      0.71          0.55          0.02          0.13          0.10          0.11          0.71          1.52
 t-statistics             3.03          0.09         86.35         47.40         10.25        -13.47
                          5.44          6.11         64.04         37.17         16.47         -4.39
                          6.76          5.12          1.13          3.99          3.14          4.39
 Panel B: US - above NYSE median ME

 High Beta                0.76         -0.15          1.41          0.62          0.05         -0.14
 Low beta                 0.65          0.14          0.69          0.17          0.15          0.02
 L/S                      0.30          0.28         -0.12         -0.20          0.13          0.13          0.73          1.35
 t-statistics             2.59         -2.15        105.40         29.85          2.34         -8.83
                          4.69          2.79         71.48         11.62         10.12          1.55
                          2.78          2.69         -6.03         -6.47          4.29          5.63
 Panel C: Global- all stocks
 High Beta                0.19         -0.26          1.02          0.37          0.20         -0.21
 Low beta                 0.47          0.05          0.61          0.28          0.36         -0.01
 L/S                      0.90          0.59          0.18          0.13          0.38          0.17          0.84          1.58

 t-statistics           0.44      -0.91              15.05          4.17          2.06         -3.59
                        1.71       0.24              12.07          4.18          4.93         -0.16
                        4.39       3.00               4.00          2.23          5.74          4.38
 Panel D: Global, above 90% ME by country

 High Beta                0.34         -0.21          1.10          0.31          0.23         -0.11
 Low beta                 0.46          0.04          0.61          0.16          0.33          0.04
 L/S                      0.60          0.44         -0.03         -0.03          0.30          0.15          0.86          1.41
 t-statistics             0.82         -0.77         17.19          3.69          2.52         -1.92
                          1.80          0.21         12.56          2.55          4.76          0.94
                          3.20          2.48         -0.75         -0.48          4.93          4.07




            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B4
                                              Table B3
                           US Equities. Robustness: Idiosyncratic Volatility.

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of BAB portfolios with conditional sort on idiosyncratic volatility. At the
beginning of each calendar month stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their idiosyncratic volatility and
assign to one of 10 groups. Idiosyncratic volatility is defined as the standard deviation of the residuals in the rolling
regression used to estimated betas. Panel A reports results for conditional sorts based on the level of idiosyncratic volatility
at portfolio formation. Panel B report results based on the 1-month changes in the same measure. At the beginning of each
calendar month, within each volatility deciles stocks are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks
are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to
have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The zero-beta factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and
shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table includes all available common stocks on the CRSP database between 1926 and
2009. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from
Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor. Returns and alphas are in monthly
percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold. $ Long
(Short) is the average dollar value of the long (short) position. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized.

 Panel A:              Excess     T(Excess       4-factor alpha     T(alpha)      $Short      $Long       Volatility       SR
 Control for           Return      Return)
 Idiosyncratic
 volatility

 Low - volatility         0.22         2.04                0.29         2.94        1.02        1.65            11.6     0.22
 P -2                     0.37         3.60                0.38         3.82        0.91        1.51            11.3     0.40
 P -3                     0.50         4.88                0.44         4.46        0.86        1.46            11.1     0.54
 P -4                     0.40         3.66                0.32         3.07        0.82        1.42            11.9     0.40
 P -5                     0.42         3.83                0.30         2.82        0.79        1.40            11.8     0.42
 P -6                     0.48         4.45                0.35         3.30        0.76        1.39            11.8     0.49
 P -7                     0.58         5.18                0.36         3.32        0.73        1.38            12.2     0.57
 P -8                     0.74         5.49                0.41         3.41        0.70        1.37            14.6     0.61
 P -9                     0.94         5.33                0.50         3.51        0.67        1.39            19.3     0.59
 High volatility          1.81         5.25                1.16         3.98        0.63        1.61            37.6     0.58



 Panel B:              Excess     T(Excess       4-factor alpha     T(alpha)      $Short      $Long       Volatility       SR
 Control for           Return      Return)
 Idiosyncratic
 volatility changes

 Low - volatility         0.46         3.99                0.41         3.64        0.75        1.52            12.6     0.44
 P -2                     0.34         2.98                0.29         2.55        0.75        1.49            12.5     0.33
 P -3                     0.48         4.22                0.40         3.43        0.74        1.48            12.5     0.47
 P -4                     0.59         5.18                0.48         4.26        0.73        1.47            12.3     0.57
 P -5                     0.54         4.63                0.46         3.89        0.72        1.47            12.6     0.51
 P -6                     0.64         4.70                0.44         3.26        0.71        1.47            14.7     0.52
 P -7                     0.60         4.72                0.47         3.56        0.70        1.49            13.8     0.52
 P -8                     0.97         6.25                0.77         4.97        0.69        1.51            16.8     0.69
 P -9                     1.16         5.82                0.93         4.80        0.68        1.60            21.7     0.64
 High volatility          1.53         2.61                0.87         1.48        0.68        1.92            63.6     0.29




           Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B5
                                             Table B4
                        Global Equities. Robustness: Idiosyncratic Volatility.

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of BAB portfolios with conditional sort on idiosyncratic volatility. At the
beginning of each calendar month stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their idiosyncratic volatility and assign
to one of 10 groups. Idiosyncratic volatility is defined as the standard deviation of the residuals in the rolling regression used
to estimated betas. Panel A reports results for conditional sorts based on the level of idiosyncratic volatility at portfolio
formation. Panel B report results based on the 1-month changes in the same measure. Within each volatility deciles stocks are
assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are
rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a
zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table includes all available
common stocks on the CRSP database, and all available common stocks on the Compustat Xpressfeed Global database for
the 19 markets in listed table I. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are
the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor. Returns and
alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is
indicated in bold. $ Long (Short) is the average dollar value of the long (short) position. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are
annualized.

 Panel A:               Excess    T(Excess        4-factor alpha     T(alpha)      $Short      $Long       Volatility       SR
 Control for            Return     Return)
 Idiosyncratic
 volatility

 Low - volatility         0.30         1.85                0.31          2.16        1.06        1.56            8.7       0.41
 P -2                     0.32         1.97                0.28          1.81        1.01        1.48            8.7       0.44
 P -3                     0.17         1.03                0.11          0.70        0.98        1.45            8.6       0.23
 P -4                     0.35         1.96                0.22          1.28        0.95        1.43            9.5       0.44
 P -5                     0.38         2.21                0.33          1.92        0.92        1.41            9.1       0.49
 P -6                     0.36         1.79                0.27          1.32        0.90        1.39           10.7       0.40
 P -7                     0.24         1.10                0.07          0.32        0.87        1.37           11.9       0.25
 P -8                     0.05         0.21               -0.03         -0.10        0.84        1.37           12.6       0.05
 P -9                    -0.07        -0.23               -0.22         -0.78        0.81        1.36           15.1      -0.05
 High volatility         -0.33        -0.93               -0.46         -1.30        0.77        1.41           18.9      -0.21



 Panel B:               Excess    T(Excess        4-factor alpha     T(alpha)      $Short      $Long       Volatility       SR
 Control for            Return     Return)
 Idiosyncratic
 volatility changes

 Low - volatility         0.47         2.40                0.37          1.96        0.93        1.49           10.5       0.54
 P -2                     0.22         1.03                0.06          0.29        0.92        1.48           11.3       0.23
 P -3                     0.43         2.10                0.46          2.28        0.92        1.46           11.0       0.47
 P -4                     0.45         2.21                0.42          2.07        0.91        1.45           10.9       0.50
 P -5                     0.40         2.03                0.30          1.58        0.90        1.44           10.6       0.45
 P -6                     0.60         2.96                0.45          2.30        0.89        1.44           10.8       0.66
 P -7                     0.58         2.79                0.39          1.90        0.88        1.44           11.2       0.62
 P -8                     0.44         1.77                0.22          0.90        0.87        1.44           13.2       0.40
 P -9                     0.45         2.13                0.33          1.53        0.86        1.44           11.4       0.48
 High volatility         -0.02        -0.06               -0.09         -0.31        0.84        1.46           14.2      -0.01




           Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B6
                                                    Table B5
                                     US and Global Equities. Robustness: Size

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of BAB portfolios with conditional sort on size. At the beginning of each
calendar month stocks are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their market value of equity (in USD) at the end of the
previous month. Stocks are assigned to one of 10 groups based on NYSE breakpoints. Within each size deciles and within
each country stocks are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas
and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation.
The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table
includes all available common stocks on the CRSP database, and all available common stocks on the Compustat Xpressfeed
Global database for the 19 markets in listed table I. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The
explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997)
momentum factor. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5%
statistical significance is indicated in bold. $ Long (Short) is the average dollar value of the long (short) position. Volatilities
and Sharpe ratios are annualized.



 Panel A: US               Excess    T(Excess      4-factor     T(alpha)       $Short       $Long      Volatility             SR
                           Return     Return)        alpha
 Small - ME                  1.91         5.65         1.32         4.57         0.69        1.77           36.8            0.62
 ME -2                       0.86         5.40         0.43         2.99         0.69        1.47           17.3            0.60
 ME -3                       0.64         5.64         0.40         3.56         0.69        1.40           12.4            0.62
 ME -4                       0.55         4.98         0.41         3.66         0.69        1.37           12.1            0.55
 ME -5                       0.47         4.22         0.34         2.97         0.70        1.35           12.2            0.46
 ME -6                       0.39         3.13         0.28         2.21         0.71        1.35           13.5            0.35
 ME -7                       0.32         2.59         0.29         2.35         0.72        1.34           13.6            0.29
 ME -8                       0.38         2.95         0.38         3.13         0.74        1.33           13.9            0.33
 ME -9                       0.29         2.25         0.29         2.37         0.77        1.33           13.9            0.25
 Large-ME                    0.13         1.01         0.15         1.24         0.81        1.33           13.5            0.11


 Panel B:              Excess       T(Excess      4-factor      T(alpha)        $Short        $Long      Volatility          SR
 Global                Return        Return)        alpha
 Small - ME              0.98           0.92          0.70         0.64          0.88          1.64           32.1          0.03
 ME -2                   0.92           2.19          0.69         1.60          0.90          1.54           24.0          0.46
 ME -3                   0.74           2.84          0.61         2.29          0.90          1.52           14.9          0.60
 ME -4                   0.63           2.84          0.40         1.82          0.89          1.49           12.6          0.60
 ME -5                   0.45           1.95          0.22         0.97          0.90          1.45           13.2          0.41
 ME -6                   0.73           3.35          0.48         2.25          0.90          1.45           12.5          0.71
 ME -7                   0.26           1.09          0.14         0.60          0.90          1.43           13.4          0.23
 ME -8                   0.62           2.83          0.45         2.05          0.88          1.36           12.5          0.60
 ME -9                   0.49           2.18          0.34         1.55          0.89          1.36           12.9          0.46
 Large-ME                0.35           1.64          0.27         1.38          0.88          1.29           12.0          0.34




            Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B7
                                                Table B6
                            US and Global Equities. Robustness: Sample Period

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of BAB portfolios. At the beginning of each calendar month within each
country stocks are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas and the
portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The
BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table includes all
available common stocks on the CRSP database, and all available common stocks on the Compustat Xpressfeed Global
database for the 19 markets in listed table I. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory
variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor.
Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical
significance is indicated in bold. $ Long (Short) is the average dollar value of the long (short) position. Volatilities and Sharpe
ratios are annualized.

                           Excess      T(Excess     4-factor   T(alpha)       $Short       $Long       Volatility          Excess
                           Return       Return)       alpha                                                                Return

 Panel A: US
 1926 - 1945                 0.55         2.36         0.49        2.18         0.72          1.29          12.0            0.55
 1946 - 1965                 0.56         5.43         0.56        4.88         0.79          1.35           5.6            1.22
 1966 - 1985                 0.80         5.02         0.57        3.73         0.72          1.31           8.6            1.12
 1986 - 2009                 0.90         3.26         0.33        1.39         0.69          1.42          16.1            0.67




                             Excess      T(Excess     4-factor alpha   T(alpha)      $Short     $Long        Volatility      SR
                             Return       Return)

 Panel B : Global
 1984 - 1994                    0.62         1.67              0.40         1.08       0.87          1.27           12.5    0.59
 1995 - 2000                    0.41         1.59              0.36         1.24       0.89          1.44            7.6    0.65
 2001 - 2009                    1.03         3.24              0.81         2.93       0.86          1.49           11.3    1.09




           Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B8
                                             Table B7
                   US and Global Equities. Robustness: Alternative Risk-Free Rates

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns of BAB portfolios. At the beginning of each calendar month within each country
stocks are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are
rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a zero-
cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table includes all available common stocks
on the CRSP database, and all available common stocks on the Compustat Xpressfeed Global database for the 19 markets in listed
table I. We report returns using different risk free rates sorted by their average spread over the Treasury bill. “T-bills” is the 1-
month Treasury bills. “Repo” is the overnight repo rate. “OIS” is the overnight indexed swap rate. “Fed Funds” is the effective
federal funds rate. “Libor” is the 1-month LIBOR rate. If the interest rate is not available over a date range, we use the 1-month
Treasury bills plus the average spread over the entire sample period. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess
return. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997)
momentum factor. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5%
statistical significance is indicated in bold. $ Long (Short) is the average dollar value of the long (short) position. Volatilities and
Sharpe ratios are annualized.

Rate                spread     Excess     T(Excess       4-factor      t(alpha)       $Long        $Short     Volatility          SR
                  (annual,     Return      Return)          alpha
                      Bps)
T-Bills                 0.0      0.71          6.76          0.67         6.30          1.52          0.71          11.5         0.75
Repo                   20.8      0.70          6.63          0.65         6.18          1.52          0.71          11.5         0.73
OIS                    26.1      0.70          6.60          0.65         6.16          1.52          0.71          11.5         0.73
Fed Funds              41.5      0.69          6.51          0.64         6.08          1.52          0.71          11.5         0.72
Libor                  63.8      0.67          6.38          0.63         5.95          1.52          0.71          11.5         0.70




           Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B9
                                            Table B8
                     US Treasury Bonds. Robustness: Alternative Risk-Free Rates

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are CRSP Monthly Treasury - Fama Bond Portfolios. Only non-
callable, non-flower notes and bonds are included in the portfolios. The portfolio returns are an equal weighted average of the
unadjusted holding period return for each bond in the portfolios in excess of the risk free rate. To construct the zero-beta BAB
factor, all bonds are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Bonds are weighted by the ranked betas and the
portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB
factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. We report returns using
different risk free rates sorted by their average spread over the Treasury bill. “T-bills” is the 1-month Treasury bills. “Repo” is the
overnight repo rate. “OIS” is the overnight indexed swap rate. “Fed Funds” is the effective federal funds rate. “Libor” is the 1-
month LIBOR rate. If the interest rate is not available over a date range, we use the 1-month Treasury bills plus the average spread
over the entire sample period. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variable is the
monthly return of an equally weighted bond market portfolio. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown
below the coefficient estimates and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized.
The top panel reports returns using cash bonds. The bottom panel report returns using 2-year and 30-years cash bonds and 2-year
and 30-year bonds futures.


 Rate                spread    Excess      T(Excess        Alpha       t(alpha)       $Long         $Short     Volatility         SR
                      (Bps)    Return       Return)

 T-Bills                0.0       0.16         6.37          0.16          6.27          3.14         0.59            2.3        0.85
 Repo                  20.5       0.12         4.62          0.12          4.52          3.14         0.59            2.4        0.61
 OIS                   25.5       0.11         4.28          0.11          4.21          3.14         0.59            2.3        0.57
 Fed Funds             41.2       0.08         2.99          0.08          2.89          3.14         0.59            2.4        0.40
 Libor                 63.3       0.03         1.29          0.03          1.22          3.14         0.59            2.4        0.17




BAB: 2-year and 30-year Treasury Bonds. 1991 to 2009
                                 Excess      T(Excess     4-factor      t(alpha)       $Long         $Short Volatility             SR
                                 Return       Return)        alpha

Futures                            0.24          2.90         0.24          2.99          3.56          0.58           4.4        0.67
Cash (using T-bills)               0.25          2.89         0.28          3.10          4.67          0.57           4.5        0.67




          Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B10
                                                    Table B9
                                            BAB Returns and Ted Spread

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are BAB factors, rescaled to 10% annual volatility.
To construct the BAB factor, all instruments are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta.
Instruments are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios
are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta
portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. At the beginning of each calendar month, we rescale each return series to
10% annualized volatility using rolling 3-year estimate up to moth t-1. We assign the Ted spread into three groups
(low, neutral and high) based on full sample breakpoints (top and bottom 1/3) and regress the times series of monthly
returns on the full set of dummies (without intercept). Returns are in monthly percent and 5% statistical significance is
indicated in bold.



                                                 P1              P2          P2                P3 - P1     t-statistics
                                            Low Ted                    High Ted

              AUS                                1.19         -0.14         -0.78                -1.97          -2.77
              AUT                                0.10         -0.07         -0.93                -1.03          -1.44
              BEL                                0.56          0.03          0.53                -0.02          -0.03
              CAN                                2.35          0.72         -0.18                -2.53          -3.59
              CHE                                0.91         -0.24          0.21                -0.70          -1.09
              DEU                                0.52          0.23         -0.51                -1.02          -1.64
              DNK                                1.35          0.15         -1.33                -2.68          -4.48
              ESP                                1.27          0.79         -0.19                -1.46          -2.23
              FIN                                0.60          0.16         -0.77                -1.37          -1.96
              FRA                                1.06          0.42         -0.75                -1.81          -2.73
              GBR                                1.33          0.34         -2.26                -3.59          -4.76
              HKG                                0.74          0.54         -0.44                -1.17          -1.65
              ITA                                0.84          1.12         -0.51                -1.35          -2.25
              JPN                               -0.34          0.22          0.00                 0.35           0.54
              NLD                                1.73         -0.05          0.00                -1.73          -2.76
              NOR                                0.22          0.49         -0.32                -0.53          -0.85
              NZL                                1.35         -0.04         -0.05                -1.40          -2.07
              SGP                                1.06          0.91         -0.67                -1.72          -2.68
              SWE                                0.88          1.34         -0.95                -1.83          -2.90
              Commodities                        0.09         -0.63          0.08                -0.01          -0.03
              Credit Indices                     1.17          1.16          0.96                -0.20          -0.38
              Credit - Corporate                -0.18          0.64          1.06                 1.24           2.41
              Credit - CDS                       0.35          0.85          0.64                 0.29           0.49
              Equity Indices                     0.57         -0.18          0.17                -0.40          -0.70
              Country Bonds                     -0.18          0.52          0.24                 0.43           0.66
              FX                                 0.37          0.01          0.02                -0.35          -0.66
              Global Stocks                      1.49          0.77         -0.58                -2.07          -3.79
              Treasury                           0.78          0.85          1.01                 0.23           0.44
              US Stocks                          2.30          0.56         -0.73                -3.03          -5.44

              Pooled*                            0.84          0.40         -0.11                -0.95          -8.29




          Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B11
                                                               Figure B1
                                                 Sharpe Ratios of Beta-Sorted Portfolios
This figure shows annual Sharpe Rations returns. The test assets are beta-sorted portfolios. At the beginning of each
calendar month instrument is ranked in ascending order on the basis of their estimated beta at the end of the previous
month. The ranked stocks are assigned to beta-sorted portfolios. This figure plots Sharpe rations from low beta (left) to
high beta (right). Sharpe ratios are annualized.

                     0.70                                                                                                 0.50
                                                US Stocks                                                                                                 Global Stocks
                                                                                                                          0.45
                     0.60
                                                                                                                          0.40
                     0.50                                                                                                 0.35




                                                                                                           Sharpe Ratio
      Sharpe Ratio




                     0.40                                                                                                 0.30
                                                                                                                          0.25
                     0.30                                                                                                 0.20
                     0.20                                                                                                 0.15
                                                                                                                          0.10
                     0.10
                                                                                                                          0.05
                     0.00                                                                                                 0.00
                             P1 P2       P3     P4     P5               P6     P7     P8      P9 P10                               P1 P2       P3    P4    P5                 P6   P7      P8     P9 P10
                            (low                                                                 (high                            (low                                                               (high
                            beta)                                                                beta)                            beta)                                                              beta)


                     0.80                                                                                                 0.90
                                                Treasury                                                                                             Credit Indices
                     0.70                                                                                                 0.80
                     0.60                                                                                                 0.70
                                                                                                                          0.60
     Sharpe Ratio




                     0.50
                                                                                                          Sharpe Ratio
                     0.40                                                                                                 0.50

                     0.30                                                                                                 0.40

                     0.20                                                                                                 0.30

                     0.10                                                                                                 0.20
                                                                                                                          0.10
                     0.00
                            1 to 12 13 to      25 to     37 to               49 to    61 to     > 120                     0.00
                            months 24           36        48                  60      120                                          1‐3 years        3‐5 year                  5‐10 years        7‐10 years


                     1.00                                                                                                 1.00
                                                 Credit ‐ CDS                                                                                         Credit ‐ Corporate
                     0.90
                                                                                                                          0.80
                     0.80
                     0.70                                                                                                 0.60
    Sharpe Ratio




                     0.60
                                                                                                          Sharpe Ratio




                     0.50                                                                                                 0.40
                     0.40
                                                                                                                          0.20
                     0.30
                     0.20                                                                                                 0.00
                     0.10
                                                                                                                          ‐0.20
                     0.00
                             1‐3 years        3‐5 year                  5‐10 years      7‐10 years
                                                                                                                          ‐0.40


                     0.60     Equity Indices                            0.50                                              0.80     Country Bonds                               0.60
                                                                                            Commodities                                                                                            FX
                     0.50                                                                                                 0.70
                                                                        0.40                                                                                                   0.50
                                                                                                                          0.60
     Sharpe Ratio




                                                         Sharpe Ratio




                                                                                                                                                               Sharpe Ratio
                                                                                                          Sharpe Ratio




                     0.40                                                                                                                                                      0.40
                                                                        0.30                                              0.50
                     0.30                                                                                                 0.40                                                 0.30
                                                                        0.20                                              0.30
                     0.20                                                                                                                                                      0.20
                                                                        0.10                                              0.20
                     0.10                                                                                                                                                      0.10
                                                                                                                          0.10
                     0.00                                               0.00                                              0.00                                                 0.00
                             Low     High                                            Low        High                              Low    High                                           Low         High
                             beta    beta                                            beta       beta                              beta   beta                                           beta        beta




                       Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B12
                                                                                                                                                  Figure B2
                                                                                                                                                 US Equities
This figures shows calendar-time annual abnormal returns. At the beginning of each calendar month all stocks are assigned
to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced
every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a zero-cost
portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This figure plots the annualized intercept in a
regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993)
mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor. A separate factor regression is run for each calendar year.
Alphas are annualized.


             40%




             30%




             20%




             10%




             0%
                   1927
                          1929
                                 1931
                                        1933
                                               1935
                                                      1937
                                                             1939
                                                                    1941
                                                                           1943
                                                                                  1945
                                                                                         1947
                                                                                                1949
                                                                                                       1951
                                                                                                              1953
                                                                                                                     1955
                                                                                                                            1957
                                                                                                                                   1959
                                                                                                                                          1961
                                                                                                                                                 1963
                                                                                                                                                        1965
                                                                                                                                                               1967
                                                                                                                                                                      1969
                                                                                                                                                                             1971
                                                                                                                                                                                    1973
                                                                                                                                                                                           1975
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1985
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1987
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2009
            -10%




            -20%




            -30%




            -40%




          Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B13
                                                                         Figure B3
                                                                       Global Equities

This figures shows calendar-time annual abnormal returns. At the beginning of each calendar month all stocks are assigned to
one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every
calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The zero-beta factor is a zero-cost
portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This figure plots the annualized intercept in a
regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993)
mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor. A separate factor regression is run for each calendar year. Alphas
are annualized.


 35%


 30%


 25%


 20%


 15%


 10%


  5%


  0%
        1987

               1988

                      1989

                             1990

                                    1991

                                           1992

                                                  1993

                                                         1994

                                                                1995

                                                                        1996

                                                                               1997

                                                                                      1998

                                                                                             1999

                                                                                                    2000

                                                                                                           2001

                                                                                                                  2002

                                                                                                                         2003

                                                                                                                                2004

                                                                                                                                       2005

                                                                                                                                              2006

                                                                                                                                                     2007

                                                                                                                                                            2008

                                                                                                                                                                   2009
 -5%


-10%


-15%


-20%




           Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B14
                                                             Figure B4
                                                        US - Treasury Bonds
      This figures shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are CRSP Monthly Treasury - Fama Bond Portfolios. Only
      non-callable, non-flower notes and bonds are included in the portfolios. The portfolio returns are an equal weighted average of
      the unadjusted holding period return for each bond in the portfolios in excess of the risk free rate. To construct the zero-beta BAB
      factor, all bonds are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Bonds are weighted by the ranked betas and the
      portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB
      factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This figure shows annual
      returns.


12%



10%



8%



6%


4%



2%



0%
       1952
       1953
       1954
       1955
       1956
       1957
       1958
       1959
       1960
       1961
       1962
       1963
       1964
       1965
       1966
       1967
       1968
       1969
       1970
       1971
       1972
       1973
       1974
       1975
       1976
       1977
       1978
       1979
       1980
       1981
       1982
       1983
       1984
       1985
       1986
       1987
       1988
       1989
       1990
       1991
       1992
       1993
       1994
       1995
       1996
       1997
       1998
       1999
       2000
       2001
       2002
       2003
       2004
       2005
       2006
       2007
       2008
       2009
-2%



-4%



-6%




                Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B15
                                                                                                Figure B5
                                                                                             US Credit indices

 This figure shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are monthly returns on corporate bond indices with maturity
 ranging from 1 to 10 years in excess of the risk free rate. To construct the zero-beta factor, all bonds are assigned to one of two
 portfolios: low beta and high beta. Bonds are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar
 month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The zero-beta factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is
 long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This figure shows annual returns.

7%


6%


5%


4%


3%


2%


1%


0%
      1979

             1980

                     1981

                            1982

                                   1983

                                          1984

                                                 1985

                                                        1986

                                                               1987

                                                                      1988

                                                                             1989

                                                                                    1990

                                                                                           1991

                                                                                                  1992

                                                                                                         1993

                                                                                                                1994

                                                                                                                       1995

                                                                                                                              1996

                                                                                                                                     1997

                                                                                                                                            1998

                                                                                                                                                   1999

                                                                                                                                                          2000

                                                                                                                                                                 2001

                                                                                                                                                                        2002

                                                                                                                                                                               2003

                                                                                                                                                                                      2004

                                                                                                                                                                                             2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                           2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009
-1%


-2%


-3%




                    Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B16
                                                                                      Figure B6
                                                                                    US Corporate Bonds

This figure shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are monthly returns on corporate bond indices in excess of the risk free
rate. To construct the BAB factor, all bonds are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Bonds are weighted by the
ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio
formation. The zero-beta factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This figure
shows annual returns.

40%



30%



20%



10%



 0%
       1983

              1984

                     1985

                            1986

                                   1987

                                          1988

                                                 1989

                                                        1990

                                                               1991

                                                                      1992

                                                                             1993

                                                                                    1994

                                                                                           1995

                                                                                                  1996

                                                                                                         1997

                                                                                                                1998

                                                                                                                       1999

                                                                                                                              2000

                                                                                                                                     2001

                                                                                                                                            2002

                                                                                                                                                   2003

                                                                                                                                                          2004

                                                                                                                                                                 2005

                                                                                                                                                                        2006

                                                                                                                                                                               2007

                                                                                                                                                                                      2008

                                                                                                                                                                                             2009
-10%



-20%



-30%




                     Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B17
                                            Figure B7
                    Equity indices, Country Bonds, Foreign Exchange and Commodities
This figures shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are futures, forwards or swap returns in excess of the relevant
financing rate. To construct the BAB factor, all instruments are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Instruments are
weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at
portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This
figure shows annual returns of combo portfolios of all futures (Equity indices, Country Bonds, Foreign Exchange and Commodities)
with equal risk in each individual BAB and 10% ex ante volatility. To construct combo portfolios, at the beginning of each calendar
month, we rescale each return series to 10% annualized volatility using rolling 3-year estimate up to moth t-1 and then equally weight
the return series and their respective market benchmark

 40%




 30%




 20%




 10%




  0%
       1969
       1970
       1971
       1972
       1973
       1974
       1975
       1976
       1977
       1978
       1979
       1980
       1981
       1982
       1983
       1984
       1985
       1986
       1987
       1988
       1989
       1990
       1991
       1992
       1993
       1994
       1995
       1996
       1997
       1998
       1999
       2000
       2001
       2002
       2003
       2004
       2005
       2006
       2007
       2008
       2009
-10%




-20%




-30%




              Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Appendix B - Page B18
                                                     Table I
                                               Summary Statistics: Equities

This table shows summary statistics as of June of each year. The sample include all commons stocks on the CRSP daily
stock files ("shrcd" equal to 10 or 11) and Compustat Xpressfeed Global security files ("tcpi" equal to 0). "Mean ME" is
the average firm’s market value of equity, in billion USD. Means are pooled averages (firm-year) as of June of each year.

 Country           Local market index       Number of         Number of        Mean ME             Mean ME       Start   End
                                          stocks - total   stocks - mean   (firm , Billion   (market , Billion   Year    Year
                                                                                    USD)                USD)


 Australia         MSCI - Australia          2,643               841            0.55                460          1984    2009
 Austria           MSCI - Austria              197                84            0.72                 60          1984    2009
 Belgium           MSCI - Belgium              396               142            1.98                279          1984    2009
 Canada            MSCI - Canada             4,592             1,591            0.49                566          1984    2009
 Denmark           MSCI - Denmark              377               145            0.80                116          1984    2009
 Finland           MSCI - Finland              256               111            1.39                154          1984    2009
 France            MSCI - France             1,648               596            2.13              1,268          1984    2009
 Germany           MSCI - Germany            1,893               701            2.39              1,673          1984    2009
 Hong Kong         MSCI - Hong Kong          1,457               636            1.05                663          1984    2009
 Italy             MSCI - Italy                563               234            2.12                496          1984    2009
 Japan             MSCI - Japan              4,888             2,988            1.20              3,597          1984    2009
 Netherlands       MSCI - Netherlands          384               185            3.27                602          1984    2009
 New Zealand       MSCI - New Zealand          282               102            0.71                 72          1984    2009
 Norway            MSCI - Norway               587               162            0.73                117          1984    2009
 Singapore         MSCI - Singapore            914               362            0.59                214          1984    2009
 Spain             MSCI - Spain                371               152            2.62                398          1984    2009
 Sweden            MSCI - Sweden               844               254            1.30                329          1984    2009
 Switzerland       MSCI - Switzerland          508               218            2.89                627          1984    2009
 United Kingdom    MSCI - UK                 5,451             1,952            1.21              2,356          1984    2009
 United States     CRSP - VW index          22,575             3,045            0.92              2,803          1926    2009




                  Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 1
                                                      Table II
                                            Summary Statistics: Asset classes

This table reports the list of instruments included in our datasets and the corresponding date range. Freq indicates the frequency
(D = Daily, M = monthly)


 Asset class             instrument        Freq    Start   End        Asset class       Freq   instrument          Start     End
                                                   Year    Year                                                    Year      Year

 Equity Indices          Australia         D       1977    2009       Credit indices    M      1-3 years           1976      2009
                         Germany           D       1975    2009                         M      3-5 year            1976      2009
                         Canada            D       1975    2009                         M      5-10 years          1991      2009
                         Spain             D       1980    2009                         M      7-10 years          1988      2009
                         France            D       1975    2009
                         Hong Kong         D       1980    2009       Corporate bonds   M      Aaa                 1973      2009
                         Italy             D       1978    2009                         M      Aa                  1973      2009
                         Japan             D       1976    2009                         M      A                   1973      2009
                         Netherlands       D       1975    2009                         M      Baa                 1973      2009
                         Sweden            D       1980    2009                         M      Ba                  1983      2009
                         Switzerland       D       1975    2009                         M      B                   1983      2009
                         United Kingdom    D       1975    2009                         M      Caa                 1983      2009
                         United States     D       1965    2009                         M      Ca-D                1993      2009
                                                                                        M      CSFB                1986      2009


 Country Bonds           Australia         D       1986    2009       Commodities       D      Aluminum             1989     2009
                         Germany           D       1980    2009                         D      Brent Oil            1989     2009
                         Canada            D       1985    2009                         D      Cattle               1989     2009
                         Japan             D       1982    2009                         D      Cocoa                1984     2009
                         NW                D       1989    2009                         D      Coffee               1989     2009
                         Sweden            D       1987    2009                         D      Copper               1989     2009
                         Switzerland       D       1981    2009                         D      Corn                 1989     2009
                         United Kingdom    D       1980    2009                         D      Cotton               1989     2009
                         United States     D       1965    2009                         D      Crude                1989     2009
                                                                                        D      Feeder Cattle        1989     2009
 Foreign Exchange        Australia         D       1977    2009                         D      Gasoil               1989     2009
                         Germany           D       1975    2009                         D      Gold                 1989     2009
                         Canada            D       1975    2009                         D      Heating Oil          1989     2009
                         Japan             D       1976    2009                         D      Hogs                 1989     2009
                         Norway            D       1989    2009                         D      Lead                 1989     2009
                         New Zealand       D       1986    2009                         D      Natural Gas          1989     2009
                         Sweden            D       1987    2009                         D      Nickel               1984     2009
                         Switzerland       D       1975    2009                         D      Platinum             1989     2009
                         United Kingdom    D       1975    2009                         D      Silver               1989     2009
                                                                                        D      Soybeans             1989     2009
 US - Treasury bonds     0-1 years         M       1952    2009                         D      Soy Meal             1989     2009
                         1-2 years         M       1952    2009                         D      Soy Oil              1989     2009
                         2-3 years         M       1952    2009                         D      Sugar                1989     2009
                         3-4 years         M       1952    2009                         D      Tin                  1989     2009
                         4-5 years         M       1952    2009                         D      Unleaded             1989     2009
                         4-10 years        M       1952    2009                         D      Wheat                1989     2009
                         > 10 years        M       1952    2009                         D      Zinc                 1989     2009




                       Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 2
                                                                             Table III
                                                                US Equities. Returns, 1926 - 2009

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns. Column 1 to 10 report returns of beta-sorted portfolios: at the beginning of each calendar month stocks in each country
are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their estimated beta at the end of the previous month. The ranked stocks are assigned to one of ten deciles portfolios based
on NYSE breakpoints. All stocks are equally weighted within a given portfolio, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain equal weights. The rightmost
column reports returns of the zero-beta BAB factor. To construct BAB factor, all stocks are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are
weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB
factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table includes all available common stocks on the CRSP
database between 1926 and 2009. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and
French (1993) mimicking portfolios, Carhart (1997) momentum factor and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factor. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-
statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold. Beta (ex ante) is the average estimated beta at portfolio
formation. Beta (realized) is the realized loading on the market portfolio. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized.

                             P1            P2            P3            P4           P5           P6            P7           P8            P9         P10          BAB
                          (Low                                                                                                                      (high        Factor
                           beta)                                                                                                                    beta)

 Excess return             0.99          0.90          0.92          0.98        1.04          1.12         1.07          1.07         1.03          1.02          0.71
                            (5.90)       (5.24)        (4.88)        (4.76)       (4.56)       (4.52)        (4.08)       (3.71)       (3.32)        (2.77)         (6.76)

 CAPM alpha                0.54          0.39          0.35          0.35        0.34          0.37         0.26          0.19         0.09         -0.05          0.69
                            (5.22)       (4.70)        (4.23)        (4.00)       (3.55)       (3.41)        (2.45)       (1.54)       (0.65)       -(0.29)         (6.55)

 3-factor alpha            0.38          0.25          0.19          0.18        0.15          0.14         0.04         -0.07        -0.18         -0.36          0.66
                            (5.24)       (4.43)        (3.69)        (3.62)       (2.65)       (2.49)        (0.75)      -(1.06)       -(2.45)      -(3.10)         (6.28)

 4-factor alpha            0.42          0.32          0.24          0.24        0.24          0.25         0.17          0.12         0.04         -0.07          0.55
                            (5.66)       (5.67)        (4.55)        (4.63)       (4.20)       (4.58)        (3.00)       (1.98)       (0.61)       -(0.59)         (5.12)

 5-factor alpha*           0.23          0.23          0.17          0.16        0.16          0.20         0.22          0.06         0.11          0.01          0.46
                            (2.37)       (3.00)        (2.28)        (2.13)       (2.08)       (2.76)        (2.86)       (0.69)       (1.08)        (0.07)         (2.93)

 Beta (ex ante)            0.57          0.75          0.84          0.92        0.99          1.06         1.14          1.23         1.36          1.64          0.00
 Beta (realized)           0.75          0.86          0.97          1.07        1.18          1.28         1.37          1.50         1.60          1.82          0.03
 Volatility                18.2          18.7          20.6          22.4        24.7          27.0         28.4          31.5         33.8          40.0          11.5
 Sharpe Ratio              0.65          0.58          0.54          0.52        0.50          0.50         0.45          0.41         0.37          0.31          0.75

* Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factor only available between 1968 and 2008.




                                      Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 3
                                                                              Table IV
                                                                Global Equities. Returns, 1984 - 2009

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns. Column 1 to 10 report returns of beta-sorted portfolios: at the beginning of each calendar month stocks are ranked in
ascending order on the basis of their estimated beta at the end of the previous month. The ranked stocks are assigned to one of ten deciles portfolios. All stocks are
equally weighted within a given portfolio, and the portfolios are rebalanced every month to maintain equal weights. The rightmost column reports returns of the zero-
beta BAB factor. To construct the BAB factor, all stocks in each country are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the
ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a zero-
cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table includes all available common stocks on the Compustat Xpressfeed
Global database for the 19 markets listed table I. The sample period runs from 1984 to 2009. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The
explanatory variables are the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios, Carhart (1997) momentum factor and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003)
liquidity factor. All portfolios are computed from the perspective of a domestic US investor: returns are in USD and do not include any currency hedging. Risk free
rates and risk factor returns are US-based. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical
significance is indicated in bold. Beta (ex ante) is the average estimated beta at portfolio formation. Beta (realized) is the realized loading on the market portfolio.
Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized.

                             P1             P2           P3            P4           P5           P6           P7            P8           P9         P10         BAB
                          (Low                                                                                                                     (high       Factor
                           beta)                                                                                                                   beta)
 Excess return             0.55          0.44         0.23          0.27         0.23          0.28         0.18         0.18          0.06         0.01         0.72
                            (2.13)       (1.77)        (0.89)        (0.95)      (0.79)        (0.86)       (0.53)       (0.48)        (0.14)       (0.01)        (3.79)

 CAPM alpha                0.33          0.19        -0.04          -0.02       -0.09         -0.08        -0.20        -0.23         -0.41        -0.55         0.71
                            (1.46)       (0.94)       -(0.21)       -(0.10)      -(0.37)      -(0.33)      -(0.74)       -(0.80)      -(1.21)      -(1.30)        (3.72)

 3-factor alpha            0.16          0.08        -0.17          -0.16       -0.21         -0.20        -0.31        -0.34         -0.49        -0.61         0.60
                            (0.78)       (0.39)       -(0.83)       -(0.71)      -(0.92)      -(0.83)      -(1.17)       -(1.17)      -(1.49)      -(1.47)        (3.18)

 4-factor alpha            0.10          0.08        -0.15          -0.15       -0.19         -0.18        -0.23        -0.25         -0.38        -0.37         0.45
                            (0.46)       (0.41)       -(0.76)       -(0.67)      -(0.84)      -(0.73)      -(0.86)       -(0.85)      -(1.12)      -(0.88)        (2.47)

 5-factor alpha           -0.03          0.00        -0.32          -0.32       -0.39         -0.40        -0.47        -0.53         -0.71        -0.77         0.42
                           -(0.13)       -(0.01)      -(1.57)       -(1.35)      -(1.67)      -(1.57)      -(1.70)       -(1.75)      -(2.05)      -(1.80)        (2.22)

 Beta (ex ante)            0.50          0.65         0.73          0.80         0.87          0.93         1.00         1.08          1.19         1.44         0.00
 Beta (realized)           0.48          0.54         0.58          0.63         0.68          0.77         0.81         0.88          0.99         1.18         0.02
 Volatility                14.9          14.4         14.9          16.4         16.9          18.7         19.9         21.7          24.8         30.3         10.9
 Sharpe Ratio              0.44          0.37         0.19          0.20         0.17          0.18         0.11         0.10          0.03         0.00         0.79

* Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factor only available between 1968 and 2008.




                                      Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 4
                                                    Table V
                                Global Equities. Returns by Country, 1984 - 2009

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns. At the beginning of each calendar month all stocks in each country are
assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are
rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The zero-beta BAB
factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. This table includes all
available common stocks on the Compustat Xpressfeed Global database for the 19 markets in listed table I. The sample
period runs from 1984 to 2009. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variables are
the monthly returns from Fama and French (1993) mimicking portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor. All
portfolios are computed from the perspective of a domestic US investor: returns are in USD and do not include any currency
hedging. Risk free rates and factor returns are US-based. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, and 5% statistical
significance is indicated in bold. $ Long (Short) is the average dollar value of the long (short) position. Volatilities and
Sharpe ratios are annualized.


                         Excess     T(Excess       4-factor    T(alpha)       $Short       $Long      Volatility         SR
                         Return      Return)         alpha

 Australia                  0.79         0.66         0.15          0.12         0.80         1.62         63.8         0.15
 Austria                   -0.26        -0.58        -0.17         -0.37         0.96         1.61         22.8        -0.14
 Belgium                    0.57         1.53         0.52          1.37         0.95         1.65         16.4         0.42
 Canada                     1.66         4.10         1.07          2.78         0.80         1.85         23.1         0.86
 Switzerland                0.42         1.46         0.30          1.05         0.90         1.53         15.4         0.33
 Germany                    0.84         1.77         0.37          0.83         0.97         1.78         25.4         0.40
 Denmark                    0.95         2.65         0.79          2.18         0.87         1.50         19.3         0.59
 Spain                      0.99         3.08         0.76          2.41         0.87         1.52         17.1         0.70
 Finland                    0.65         1.07         0.46          0.79         0.96         1.56         31.6         0.25
 France                     0.98         2.55         0.66          1.82         0.90         1.66         20.5         0.57
 United Kingdom             0.23         0.54        -0.11         -0.25         0.89         1.68         23.2         0.12
 Hong Kong                  0.68         1.96         0.33          0.95         0.89         1.46         17.9         0.45
 Italy                      0.88         3.14         0.68          2.42         0.87         1.43         15.0         0.70
 Japan                      0.03         0.12        -0.03         -0.09         0.82         1.41         14.1         0.03
 Netherlands                1.09         3.72         0.94          3.23         0.86         1.54         15.7         0.83
 Norway                     0.27         0.69         0.08          0.20         0.82         1.37         20.6         0.15
 New Zealand                1.06         2.54         0.85          1.98         1.06         1.66         21.1         0.60
 Singapore                  0.74         2.75         0.48          1.73         0.79         1.32         14.0         0.64
 Sweden                     1.11         2.71         0.85          2.06         0.92         1.51         22.0         0.61




               Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 5
                                                     Table VI
                                       US Treasury Bonds. Returns, 1952 - 2009

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are CRSP Monthly Treasury - Fama Bond Portfolios. Only non-
callable, non-flower notes and bonds are included in the portfolios. The portfolio returns are an equal weighted average of the
unadjusted holding period return for each bond in the portfolios in excess of the risk free rate. To construct the zero-beta BAB
factor, all bonds are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Bonds are weighted by the ranked betas and the
portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB
factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. Alpha is the intercept in a
regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variable is the monthly return of an equally weighted bond market portfolio.
Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates and 5% statistical significance is
indicated in bold. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized.


                               P1             P2           P3           P4            P5             P6         P7*         BAB
                             (low                                                                              (high       Factor
                             beta)                                                                             beta)
 Maturity
                           1 to 12       13 to 24    25 to 36     37 to 48     49 to 60      61 to 120        > 120
 (months)
 Excess return                0.05          0.09         0.11         0.12          0.12           0.14         0.21         0.16
                              (5.57)        (3.77)       (3.17)       (2.82)        (2.30)         (2.17)       (1.90)        (6.37)

 Alpha                        0.03          0.03         0.02         0.01         -0.02          -0.03        -0.07         0.16
                              (5.87)        (3.42)       (2.21)       (1.10)       -(1.59)        -(2.66)      -(2.04)        (6.27)


 Beta (ex ante)               0.14          0.46         0.75         0.99          1.22           1.44         2.17         0.00
 Beta (realized)              0.17          0.49         0.77         0.99          1.17           1.43         2.06         0.02
 Volatility                   0.83          2.11         3.23         4.04          4.76           5.80         9.12         2.32
 Sharpe ratio                 0.73          0.50         0.42         0.37          0.30           0.29         0.27         0.85

 * Return missing from 196208 to 197112




                Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 6
                                                      Table VII
                                        US Credit indices. Returns, 1976 - 2009

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are monthly returns on corporate bond indices with
maturity ranging from 1 to 10 years in excess of the risk free rate. To construct the zero-beta factor, all bonds are assigned
to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Bonds are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced
every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The zero-beta factor is a zero-
cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of
monthly excess return. The explanatory variable is the monthly return of an equally weighted corporate bond market
portfolio. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates and 5%
statistical significance is indicated in bold. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized. Panel A shows results for
unhedged returns. Panel B shows results for return obtained by hedging the interest rate exposure. Each calendar month we
run 1-year rolling regressions of excess bond returns on excess return on Barclay’s US government bond index. We
construct test assets by going long the corporate bond index and hedging this position by shorting the appropriate amount
of the government bond index. We compute market returns by taking equally weighted average hedged returns.



                                     1-3 years            3-5 year         5-10 years         7-10 years                BAB
                                                                                                                       Factor
 Panel A: Unhedged Returns                                    0.21                0.32               0.33                0.12
                                           (4.64)             (4.01)              (2.76)             (2.96)               (4.91)


 Alpha                                     0.04               0.01               -0.05              -0.07                0.13
                                           (2.77)             (0.96)             -(4.01)            -(4.45)               (4.91)


 Beta (ex ante)                            0.60               0.85                1.39               1.52                0.00
 Beta (realized)                           0.62               0.85                1.37               1.48               -0.01

 Volatility                                2.73               3.66                5.91               6.13                1.70
 Sharpe ratio                              0.79               0.68                0.65               0.64                0.88
 Panel B: Hedged Returns                                      0.09                0.07               0.06                0.05
                                           (2.61)             (2.25)              (0.97)             (0.82)               (1.77)


 Alpha                                     0.04               0.04               -0.03              -0.04                0.08
                                           (3.62)             (3.23)             -(2.38)            -(2.16)               (3.33)


 Beta (ex ante)                            0.70               0.78                1.14               1.38                0.00
 Beta (realized)                           0.58               0.72                1.34               1.37               -0.34

 Volatility                                1.70               2.06                3.77               3.95                1.55
 Sharpe ratio                              0.62               0.53                0.23               0.19                0.42




                 Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 7
                                                      Table VIII
                                        US Corporate Bonds. Returns, 1973 - 2009

This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are monthly returns on corporate bond indices in excess of the risk free
rate. To construct the BAB factor, all bonds are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Bonds are weighted by the
ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio
formation. The zero-beta factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. Alpha is the
intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variable is the monthly return of an equally weighted corporate bond
market portfolio. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates and 5% statistical
significance is indicated in bold. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized.


                         Aaa           Aa           A        Baa         Ba           B       Caa       Ca-D           CSFB           BAB
                                                                                                                   Distressed        Factor

Excess return            0.26        0.27        0.27       0.31       0.43        0.33      0.21        0.70           -0.51          0.33
                         (4.48)      (4.08)      (3.64)     (3.99)     (3.88)      (2.31)     (0.90)      (1.18)        -(1.23)        (1.74)

Alpha                    0.23        0.21        0.19       0.21       0.26        0.10     -0.13        0.08           -1.10          0.56
                         (4.09)      (3.62)      (3.13)     (3.69)     (4.20)      (1.40)    -(0.95)      (0.26)        -(5.34)        (4.02)

Beta (ex ante)           0.67        0.70        0.72       0.77       0.89        1.01      1.25        1.74           1.66           0.00
Beta (realized)          0.13        0.24        0.33       0.40       0.69        0.95      1.39        2.77           2.49          -0.94

Volatility               3.62        4.11        4.63       4.84       6.79        8.93     14.26       29.15          24.16          11.47
Sharpe ratio             0.87        0.79        0.71       0.78       0.75        0.45      0.17        0.29          -0.25           0.34




                   Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 8
                                                              Table IX
                            Equity indices, Country Bonds, Foreign Exchange and Commodities. Return, 1965-2009
This table shows calendar-time portfolio returns. The test assets are futures, forwards or swap returns in excess of the relevant financing rate. To construct the BAB
factor, all instruments are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Instruments are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced
every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio
and shorts the high-beta portfolio. Alpha is the intercept in a regression of monthly excess return. The explanatory variable is the monthly return of the relevant market
portfolio. Panel A report results for equity indices, country bonds, foreign exchange and commodities. All Futures and Country Selection are combo portfolios with
equal risk in each individual BAB and 10% ex ante volatility. To construct combo portfolios, at the beginning of each calendar month, we rescale each return series to
10% annualized volatility using rolling 3-year estimate up to moth t-1 and then equally weight the return series and their respective market benchmark. Panel B reports
results for all the assets listed in table I and II. All Bonds and Credit includes US treasury bonds, US corporate bonds, US credit indices (hedged and unhedged) and
country bonds indices. All Equities included US stocks, all individual BAB country portfolios, a global stock BAB and equity indices. All Assets includes all the assets
listed in table I and II. All portfolios in panel B have equal risk in each individual BAB and 10% ex ante volatility. Returns and alphas are in monthly percent, t-
statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold. Volatilities and Sharpe ratios are annualized.



Panel A: Equity indices, country Bonds, Foreign                  Excess         T-stat       Alpha      T(alpha)       $Short        $Long     Volatility           SR
Exchange and Commodities                                         Return        Excess
                                                                               Return

Equity Indices                      EI                              0.78          2.90         0.69          2.56         0.93          1.47        18.46          0.51
Country Bonds                       CB                              0.08          0.99         0.05          0.57         0.95          1.69         4.47          0.22
Foreign Exchange                    FX                              0.20          1.45         0.23          1.78         0.61          1.61         7.72          0.31
Commodities                         COM                             0.42          1.44         0.53          1.85         0.78          1.56        22.65          0.22

All Futures*                        EI + CB + FX + COM              0.47          3.99         0.52          4.50                                    9.02          0.62
Country Selection*                  EI + CB + FX                    0.64          3.78         0.71          4.42                                   11.61          0.66

Panel B: All Assets

All Bonds and Credit*                                               0.73          6.00         0.72          5.88                                   11.06          0.79
All Equities*                                                       0.77          8.10         0.78          8.16                                   10.31          0.89
All Assets*                                                         0.71          8.60         0.73          8.84                                    8.95          0.95

* Equal risk, 10% ex ante volatility




                                        Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 9
                                                             Table X
                                                         Beta compression
This table report results of cross-sectional and time-series tests of beta compression. Panel a (B) reports the cross-
sectional dispersion of betas in US (global) stocks. The data run from December 1984 (first available date for the
TED spread) to December 2009. Each calendar month we compute cross sectional standard deviation, mean
absolute deviation and inter-quintile range in betas for all stocks in the universe. All reports the simple means of
the dispersion measures. P1 to P3 report coefficients on a regression of the dispersion measure on a series of TED
spread dummies. We assign the TED spread into three groups (low, neutral and high) based on full sample
breakpoints (top and bottom 1/3) and regress the times series of the cross sectional dispersion measure on the full
set of dummies (without intercept). Panel C (D) reports conditional market betas of the BAB US (global) portfolio
based on the TED spread level. The dependent variable is the monthly return of the BAB portfolios. The
explanatory variables are the monthly returns of the market portfolio, Fama and French (1993) mimicking
portfolios and Carhart (1997) momentum factor. Market betas are allowed to vary across TED spread regimes
(low, neutral and high) using the full set of TED dummies. Panel B reports loading on the market factor
corresponding to different TED spread regimes. All regressions include the full set of explanatory variables but
only the market loading is reported. T-statistics are shown below the coefficient estimates, and 5% statistical
significance is indicated in bold.



                    Panel A                                                Panel B
                    Cross-Sectional Beta Dispersion - US                   Cross sectional Beta Dispersion - Global

                                        Mean                                                        Mean
                     Standard                            Inter-quintile        Standard                             Inter-quintile
                                     Absolute                                                    Absolute
                     deviation                                  Range          deviation                                   Range
                                     Deviation                                                   Deviation
  All                      0.42             0.33                  0.67               0.27              0.21                  0.44

  P1 (low TED)             0.47             0.36                  0.74               0.29              0.23                  0.46
  P2                       0.43             0.34                  0.69               0.27              0.21                  0.43
  P3 (high TED)            0.35             0.28                  0.58               0.25              0.20                  0.42

  P3 minus P1           -0.11               -0.08                -0.16               -0.04             -0.03                -0.04
  t-statistics         -10.72              -10.48               -10.04               -7.31             -6.59                -5.07




                  Panel C: Conditional Market Loading - US                 Panel D: Conditional Market Loading - Global


                      P1           P2               P3          P3 - P1         P1             P2              P3         P3 - P1
                  (Low TED)                  (High TED)                     (Low TED)                   (High TED)


 CAPM                -0.21         0.10         0.30                0.51       -0.33          -0.01        0.19              0.51
                    -(1.77)       (1.04)       (3.99)             (3.64)      -(3.96)        -(0.17)      (3.33)           (5.15)

 Control             -0.07         0.38         0.33                0.41       -0.29          0.09         0.19              0.49
 for 3 Factors      -(0.66)       (4.14)       (4.84)             (3.24)      -(3.57)        (1.09)       (3.46)           (5.00)

 Control             0.06          0.42         0.36                0.31       -0.19          0.11         0.23              0.41
 for 4 Factors      (0.50)        (4.55)       (5.34)             (2.46)      -(2.16)        (1.37)       (4.09)           (4.24)




           Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 10
                                                                                    Table XI
                                                                                Regression Results
This table shows results from time series (pooled) regressions. The left-hand side is the month t return on the BAB factors. To construct the BAB portfolios, all instruments are
 assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Instruments are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are
 rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. The explanatory
 variables include the TED spread (level and changes) and a series of controls. TED Spread is the TED spread at the end of month t. "Change in TED Spread" is equal to Ted
 spread at the end of month t minus the median spread over the past 3 years. “Lagged TED Spread” is the median Ted spread over the past 3 years. “Long Volatility Returns" is the
 month t return on a portfolio that shorts at-the-money straddles on the S&P500 index. To construct the short volatility portfolio, on index options expiration dates we write the
 next-to-expire closest-to-maturity straddle on the S&P500 index and hold it to maturity. “Beta Spread” is defined as (HBeta- LBeta) / (HBeta* LBeta) where HBeta (LBeta) are the
 betas of the short (long) leg of the BAB portfolio at portfolio formation. "Market Return": is the monthly return of the relevant market portfolio. Inflation is equal to the 1-year US
 CPI inflation rate, lagged 1 month. This table includes all the available BAB portfolios. The data run from December 1984 (first available date for the TED spread) to December
 2009. Column 1 to 4 report results for US stocks. Columns 5 to 8 reports results for global equities. In these regressions we use each individual country BAB factors as well as a
 global sticks BAB factor. Columns 9 to 12 reports results for all assets in our data. Asset fixed effects are include where indicated, t-statistics are shown below the coefficient
 estimates and 5% statistical significance is indicated in bold. When multiple assets are included in the regressions standard errors are clustered by date.

                                               US - Stocks                                      Global Stocks - pooled                               All Assets - pooled

                                    (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)             (5)          (6)         (7)        (8)              (9)        (10)        (11)         (12)

  TED Spread                     -0.036      -0.023                                  -0.022        -0.017                                  -0.014      -0.012
                                 -(6.17)      -(3.26)                                 -(5.02)      -(3.67)                                 -(5.30)     -(4.03)

  Change in TED Spread                                   -0.033      -0.020                                   -0.021      -0.017                                   -0.014      -0.012
                                                         -(5.23)      -(2.77)                                  -(4.84)    -(3.66)                                  -(5.04)      -(3.88)

  Lagged TED Spread                                      -0.046      -0.041                                   -0.030      -0.020                                   -0.018      -0.015
                                                         -(4.48)      -(3.28)                                  -(3.92)    -(2.21)                                  -(3.98)      -(3.21)


  Short Volatility Returns                    0.295                   0.297                        -0.045                 -0.045                       -0.067                  -0.068
                                              (0.29)                  (3.43)                       -(0.04)                -(0.65)                      -(0.07)                  -(1.43)

  Beta Spread                                 0.018                   0.019                         0.025                 0.024                         0.010                   0.010
                                              (0.02)                  (2.67)                        (0.02)                 (2.49)                       (0.01)                  (3.54)

  Market return                              -0.027                  -0.019                         0.008                 0.008                         0.003                   0.003
                                              -(0.03)                 -(0.31)                       (0.01)                 (0.19)                       (0.00)                  (0.08)

  Lagged Beta return                          0.186                   0.171                         0.060                 0.060                         0.073                   0.072
                                              (0.19)                  (2.84)                        (0.06)                 (1.14)                       (0.07)                  (1.50)

  Inflation                                   0.002                   0.174                        -0.017                 -0.018                        0.028                   0.035
                                              (0.00)                  (0.70)                       -(0.02)                -(0.15)                       (0.03)                  (0.43)


  Asset Fixed Effects               No           No          No          No             Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes              Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
  Num of observations
                                   295         264         294         264            4,393         4,367      4,393      4,367             7,271       7,021       7,264       7,021
  Adjusted R2                    11.2%       20.5%       11.3%       21.2%            1.5%          2.3%       1.5%       2.3%              1.0%        1.9%        1.0%        1.9%




                                           Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Tables - Page 11
                                                                            Figure 1
                                                                   BAB Sharpe Ratios by Asset Class

This figures shows annualized Sharpe ratios of BAB factors across asset classes. To construct the BAB
factor, all instruments are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Instruments are
weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are
rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation. The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the
low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. Sharpe ratios are annualized.

  1




0.8




0.6




0.4




0.2




  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Commodities
                               BEL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Treasuries
                                                             ESP




                                                                                                                                                            Credit Indices




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Equity Indices
                                                 DEU

                                                       DNK




                                                                                      HKG
                                                                                GBR




                                                                                                                    NZL



                                                                                                                                SWE

                                                                                                                                      Global Stocks (all)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Country Bonds
                   AUS




                                                                                            ITA

                                                                                                  JPN




                                                                                                                          SGP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Foreign Echange
                         AUT
       US stocks




                                     CAN




                                                                    FIN

                                                                          FRA




                                                                                                              NOR
                                           CHE




                                                                                                        NLD




                                                                                                                                                                             Corporate Bonds

                                                                                                                                                                                               Credit Hedged (CDS)
-0.2




                           Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Figures - Page 1
                                                                                                                                     Figure 2
                                                                                                                           US Stocks BAB and TED Spread

This figures shows annualized 3-year return of the US stocks BAB factor (left scale) and 3-year (negative)
average rolling TED spread (right scale) . At the beginning of each calendar month all stocks are assigned
to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Stocks are weighted by the ranked betas and the portfolios
are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio formation.
The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio.


                          50%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.00%




                          40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.20%


                          30%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.40%
                          20%
BAB return (annualized)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Minus Ted spread
                          10%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.60%




                           0%
                                 05/01/87

                                            05/01/88

                                                       05/01/89

                                                                  05/01/90

                                                                             05/01/91

                                                                                          05/01/92

                                                                                                     05/01/93

                                                                                                                05/01/94

                                                                                                                            05/01/95

                                                                                                                                       05/01/96

                                                                                                                                                  05/01/97

                                                                                                                                                             05/01/98

                                                                                                                                                                        05/01/99

                                                                                                                                                                                   05/01/00

                                                                                                                                                                                              05/01/01

                                                                                                                                                                                                         05/01/02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    05/01/03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               05/01/04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          05/01/05

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     05/01/06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                05/01/07

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           05/01/08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      05/01/09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.80%


                          -10%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1.00%
                          -20%




                          -30%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1.20%
                                                                                        US Stocks BAB Return (3-year rolling average)                                              minus Ted spread (3-year rolling average)




                                                       Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Figures - Page 2
                                                                Figure 3
                                          Regression Results: BAB Return on TED, T-statistics.
This figure shows results from time series regressions. The left-hand side is the month t return on the BAB factors. To construct the
BAB portfolios, all instruments are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Instruments are weighted by the
ranked betas and the portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of 1 at portfolio
formation. The BAB factor is a zero-cost portfolio that is long the low-beta portfolio and shorts the high-beta portfolio. The
explanatory variable is the Ted spread at the end of month t. A separate regression is run for each BAB portfolio. This figure report
t-statistics for each regression




                                                                                                                                                             Credit - Corporate
 6.00




                                                                                                                                                                                  Credit - CDS
 4.00




 2.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Treasury
                                                                                          JPN



 0.00
                        BEL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Country Bonds
                                                                                                                              Commodities
        AUS AUS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FX
                                                                                                                                            Credit Indices
                  AUT




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Equity Indices
                                    CHE




                                                      ESP




-2.00
                                                                  FRA
                                                            FIN




                                                                                                      NOR
                                                                                                NLD
                                          DEU




                                                                                    ITA
                                                                              HKG
                                                DNK




                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                  SGP
                                                                                                            NZL




-4.00
                                                                        GBR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Global Stocks
                              CAN




-6.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  US Stocks
-8.00




                        Betting Against Beta - Andrea Frazzini and Lasse H. Pedersen — Figures - Page 3
