                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    PREFERENCE HETEROGENEITY AND OPTIMAL CAPITAL INCOME TAXATION

                                           Mikhail Golosov
                                           Maxim Troshkin
                                           Aleh Tsyvinski
                                          Matthew Weinzierl

                                        Working Paper 16619
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16619


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




Golosov: Yale and NES; Troshkin: University of Minnesota and Minneapolis FRB; Tsyvinski: Yale
and NES; Weinzierl: Harvard Business School and NBER. Golosov and Tsyvinski thank the NSF
for support and EIEF for hospitality. We thank Doug Bernheim, Richard Blundell, V.V. Chari, Alex
Gelber, Jon Heathcote, Caroline Hoxby, Erik Hurst, Larry Jones, Emir Kamenica, Louis Kaplow, Jakub
Kastl, Henrik Kleven, Greg Mankiw, Ellen McGrattan, Kevin Murphy, Chris Phelan, Luigi Pistaferri,
Jim Poterba, Canice Prendergast, Jesse Shapiro, Ali Shourideh, Jon Skinner, Johannes Spinnewijn,
Kjetil Storesletten, and Rob Williams for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Mikhail Golosov, Maxim Troshkin, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Matthew Weinzierl. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Preference Heterogeneity and Optimal Capital Income Taxation
Mikhail Golosov, Maxim Troshkin, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Matthew Weinzierl
NBER Working Paper No. 16619
December 2010
JEL No. E6,E62,H2,H21

                                               ABSTRACT

We examine a prominent justification for capital income taxation: goods preferred by those with high
ability ought to be taxed. In an environment where commodity taxes are allowed to be nonlinear functions
of income and consumption, we derive an analytical expression that reveals the forces determining
optimal commodity taxation. We then calibrate the model to evidence on the relationship between
skills and preferences and extensively examine the quantitative case for taxes on future consumption
(saving). In our baseline case of a unit intertemporal elasticity, optimal capital income tax rates are
2% on average and 4.5% on high earners. We find that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution has
a substantial effect on optimal capital taxation. If the intertemporal elasticity is one-third, optimal capital
income tax rates rise to 15% on average and 23% on high earners; if the intertemporal elasticity is
two, optimal rates fall to 0.6% on average and 1.6% on high earners. Nevertheless, in all cases that
we consider the welfare gains of using optimal capital taxes are small.


Mikhail Golosov                                        Aleh Tsyvinski
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
Yale University                                        Yale University
Box 208268                                             Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8269                               New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER                                               and NBER
m.golosov@yale.edu                                     a.tsyvinski@yale.edu

Maxim Troshkin                                         Matthew Weinzierl
Department of Economics                                Harvard Business School
University of Minnesota                                277 Morgan
4-101 Hanson Hall                                      Soldiers Field
1925 South 4th Street                                  Boston, MA 02163
Minneapolis MN 55455-0462                              and NBER
troshkin@umn.edu                                       mweinzierl@hbs.edu
Introduction
A prominent justi…cation for positive capital income taxation is that goods preferred by high-ability indi-
viduals ought to be taxed because consumption of these goods provides a signal of individuals’ otherwise
unobservable ability. If individuals’abilities are positively related to preferences for saving, this argument
implies that capital income should be taxed. The key exposition of this justi…cation is Saez (2002). Saez
shows that a small linear tax on a commodity preferred by individuals with higher ability generates a smaller
e¢ ciency loss than does an increase in the optimal nonlinear income tax that raises the same revenue from
each individual. He applies this logic to capital income taxation and concludes that, assuming the discount
rate is negatively correlated with skills, interest income ought to be taxed. Importantly, Banks and Diamond
(2009) in the chapter on direct taxation in the Mirrlees Review use this justi…cation as one of the essential
arguments for why policymakers ought to tax capital. Commissioned by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, the
Mirrlees Review is the successor to the in‡uential Meade Report of 1978 and is the authoritative summary
of the current state of tax theory as it relates to policy. Their chapter concludes: "With the plausible
assumption that those with higher earnings abilities discount the future less (and thus save more out of
any given income), then taxation of saving helps with the equity-e¢ ciency trade-o¤ by being a source of
indirect evidence about who has higher earnings abilities and thus contributes to more e¢ cient redistributive
taxation."
    We study the case for taxing goods preferred by those with high ability when commodity taxes are
allowed to be nonlinear functions of both income and consumption. In particular, we focus on the taxation
of future consumption (i.e., saving). In other words, this paper addresses the question whether taxing capital
is a good or a bad idea in an environment with heterogeneous discount factors.1 We analytically show that
heterogeneity in preferences across goods adds a force calling for nonlinear taxation that discourages lower
earners from consuming a good preferred by high earners. These optimal distortions encourage e¤ort among
high earners by threatening a larger distortion to their choices if they earn less. Quantitatively our main
…nding is that, for a plausibly calibrated model, preference heterogeneity of this type recommends capital
income tax rates that are 2 percent on average, and converge to 4.5 percent for high incomes. Tax rates
can be substantially higher if the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is lower. In all cases, however, the
welfare gains due to these capital income taxes are small. Our work is in the line of recent research, such
as Golosov and Tsyvinski (2006), Ales and Maziero (2009), Weinzierl (forthcoming), and Kocherlakota and
Pistaferri (2007, 2009), that uses micro level data to evaluate predictions of dynamic optimal policy models.2
    Our speci…c results are as follows. We …rst derive analytical expressions that determine the shape of
optimal commodity taxation. We start in a two-type, two-commodity economy and demonstrate that the
high ability type faces no distortion to its chosen commodity basket, while the low type faces a distortion
away from consumption of the good preferred by the high type. We show that this simple example illustrates
a key intuition: the distortion faced by a high type if it mimics a lower type is larger than the distortion the
   1 The answer of the survey by Atkeson, Chari, and Kehoe 1998 in a Ramsey environment is "Taxing Capital Income: A Bad

Idea." Conesa, Kitao, and Krueger 2008 argue in a quantitiative OLG model with heterogeneous agents that "Taxing Capital?
Not a Bad Idea After All!". The New Dynamic Public Finance literature argues for a generally positive capital wedge (see, e.g.,
surveys by Golosov, Tsyvinski, and Werning 2006 and Kocherlakota 2010).
   2 See also Pavoni and Violante (2007) for an application of optimal insurance models to the design of welfare to work programs.




                                                                2
high type faces if it truthfully reveals its type. We then examine an economy with two goods and a continuum
of types where the relative preference for one good rises with ability. As in Diamond (1998), Saez (2001), and
Golosov, Troshkin, and Tsyvinski (2010a,b), we analytically study the forces driving the optimal distortions
to commodity choices. Our analysis shows that the key force of optimal nonlinear commodity taxation in
this setting is that it discourages the consumption of a good preferred by high earners among lower earners.
The intuition is as follows. The goal of optimal tax policy (in the Mirrleesian framework) is to redistribute
from high-ability workers without discouraging their work e¤ort. The optimal use of commodity taxation
then aims to increase the attractiveness of earning a high income. High-ability individuals will choose to
earn more if relative marginal commodity tax rates on the goods they most value generate distortions to
their consumption choices that are greater when they earn less. These distortions allow the tax authority
to levy higher income taxes on high-ability individuals and redistribute more resources to those with lower
ability.
    We then examine the quantitative case for capital income taxation in this environment. We use data
from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) to calibrate the relationship between ability3 and
intertemporal discounting, i.e., preferences for future relative to current consumption. This relationship
is distinct from that between income and intertemporal discounting, which has been the focus of most of
the relevant prior literature on preference heterogeneity. One exception is Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro
(2006), who …nd a positive relationship between ability and the holding of positive net assets, and our
results are consistent with theirs. An important paper by Cagetti (2003) analyzes a related question: the
relationship between education and time preferences. His …nding–that higher education groups exhibit
(substantially) greater preferences for saving–is consistent with the positive relationship between ability and
savings preferences that we uncover in the data. For a state of the art review of earnings, consumption and
life cycle choices, including environments with informational frictions, see the Handbook chapter by Meghir
and Pistaferri (forthcoming).
    Our main …nding is that the computed optimal capital income tax rates for empirically plausible cal-
ibrations are as follows. For the baseline example of an intertemporal elasticity of substitution equal to
one, optimal rates are U-shaped in income up to a high wage and then plateau at approximately $150,000
of annual income.4 The optimal maximal capital income tax rate is everywhere less than 4.54%, and the
population-weighted average capital income tax rate is 2.0%. Welfare gains from these optimal capital income
taxes are negligible.
    We show that these baseline results are robust to varying the form of the social welfare function and the
                                                                                                                      1
elasticity of labor supply. In contrast, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, which equals                       in our
model, has a substantial e¤ect on optimal capital income tax rates. The baseline assumption of                        = 1 is a
standard benchmark in mainstream optimal tax and macroeconomic models. The smaller the intertemporal
   3 We measure ability by the survey respondent’s score on the cognitive ability portion of the Armed Forces Quali…cation Test

(AFQT). While it is impossible to measure ability perfectly, the AFQT score is commonly used, such as in the study of the
returns to education.
   4 Each individual faces, in equilibrium, a distortion to consumption choices smaller than that if he earned less, consistent

with our analytical results. The simulations are performed with a bounded distribution, so there is a highest type. This highest
type faces no distortion, as shown analytically in Section 3. Whether rates decline with income for a range of types just below
the highest type depends on the speci…cation of the population distribution.




                                                               3
elasticity, the larger the optimal rates.      For a low intertemporal elasticity ( = 3), optimal rates rise to
15.0% on average and 23.5% on high earners, while for a high intertemporal elasticity ( = 0:5) they rise to
only 1.6%. Even when sizeable capital income tax rates are optimal, however, they still yield small welfare
gains.
   As an extension we also study optimal capital taxation in a stochastic setting in which there is a re-
lationship between ex post ability and preferences over goods consumed within a period. We show that
this relationship does not a¤ect the optimal intertemporal distortion: i.e., the inverse Euler equation as in
Golosov, Kocherlakota, and Tsyvinski (2003) continues to hold. Optimal distortions within the second period
are similar to the results from the static model.
   The idea that goods preferred by the highly able ought to be taxed has a long history in tax research and
is a favorite of tax theorists. Nearly all comprehensive treatments of modern tax policy contain a section on
this result. For example, Tuomala (1991) writes "...the marginal tax rates on commodities that the more
able people tend to prefer should be greater;" Salanie (2003) warns "If there is a positive correlation between
the taste for …ne wines and productivity, then …ne wines should be taxed relatively heavily (God Forbid!);"
while Kaplow (2008) argues "it tends to be optimal to impose a heavier burden on commodities preferred
by the more able and a lighter burden on those preferred by the less able." No doubt the enthusiasm for
this result is due to the notion that, as Mirrlees put it "This prescription is most agreeable to common
sense." In other words, taxes on goods preferred by high-ability individuals contribute to progressivity and
the redistribution of income. The starting point in the literature for this idea is Mirrlees (1976, 1986), who
shows that goods preferred by the able ought to be taxed. His results are on the ratio of after-tax to pre-tax
prices for an individual’s marginal purchase of a good, so they impose no linearity or income-independence
constraints on optimal taxes. His results do not, however, tell us how these taxes ought to vary with the
distribution of abilities or the details of individual preferences. Perhaps in part to make progress along this
dimension, subsequent work often focused on linear, income-independent commodity taxes in the presence
of preference heterogeneity (such as Saez, 2002). Our analysis returns to the general Mirrleesian setting,
characterizing optimal policy analytically and, for capital taxation, quantitatively.
   A contemporaneous analysis of this issue with a focus complementary to ours is Diamond and Spinnewijn
(2009).5 While we focus on the how preferences change with ability on average, they focus on heterogeneity
of preferences among individuals with the same ability. In their model, individuals sort into occupations
and the task of the tax authority is to use occupation-speci…c linear capital taxation to ensure that high-
ability individuals of all preference types choose the high-productivity occupation. Because they assume
that individuals with higher discount rates also have a lower willingness to work, Diamond and Spinnewijn
…nd that the tax authority should levy a linear capital tax on the high earners and a linear subsidy on the
low earners. This discourages the high-skilled, impatient workers from deviating to the low-productivity
occupation. While important, this result depends on the absence of an intensive margin of e¤ort and on
the assumption of a positive relationship between discount rates and the willingness to work, which may
be di¢ cult to demonstrate with available empirical evidence. It also does not consider the possibility of
  5 Gordon and Kopczuck (2010) also …nd evidence to suggest including capital income in the tax function because of infor-

mation it carries about individuals’wages.



                                                            4
nonlinear capital taxation. The approach we take in this paper allows for nonlinear capital taxation and is
set in the standard Mirrleesian framework where individuals choose e¤ort.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides an illustrative example of our theoretical results
in an economy with two ability types and heterogeneity in preferences over two goods. Section 2 derives
conditions on the optimal policy in a general model of optimal taxation with a continuum of ability types and
heterogeneity in preferences. In Section 3, we calibrate the model to data from the NLSY on heterogeneous
time preferences and calculate optimal distortions for a baseline setting. In Section 4 we extensively examine
the robustness of the baseline results to variation in the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, the labor
supply elasticity, and the form of the social welfare function. We also compare the estimated relationship
between ability and time preference to that which would be required for the prevailing capital income tax
rates of developed economies to be optimal. Section 5 considers the dynamic, stochastic model. An Appendix
contains technical details referred to in the text.



1     A simple example
In this section we introduce a simple two-type example that captures the main intuition behind the more
general model. We show that, in this setting, the optimal relative commodity tax discourages the consump-
tion by the low ability agents of the good preferred by the high ability agents. In particular, the relative
marginal tax (wedge) is positive on this good for the low-ability individual, while the high-ability individual
faces no distortion.
    There is a continuum of measure one of two types of individuals indexed by i = fl; hg. The size of each
group is equal to 1=2. These individuals di¤er in wage (skill) wi , where wh > wl > 0. The wage is private
information to the agent. There are two commodities. The consumption of each commodity by an agent of
type i is denoted by ci1 and ci2 . The utility function for an individual i = fl; hg is given by:

                                                                          yi
                                                     ui ci1 ; ci2 ;              ;
                                                                          wi

where yi denotes the amount of output (income) produced by the agent. That is, the agent i provides the
amount of labor li      0 to produce output y i = wi li                      0. The planner observes output y i but not the
                                                                                     i=fl;hg
wage wi or e¤ort li . Agents’ consumption of each good cit                           t=f1;2g
                                                                                               0 is also observable. Let uin be the
partial derivative of ui (c1 ; c2 ; l) with respect to the nth argument. Note that these marginal utilities, and
preferences in general, may depend on ability. We assume that uin > 0 for n = f1; 2g and ui3 < 0.
    The planner’s problem is a mechanism design problem in which the mechanism assigns consumption and
income allocations to each wage type reported by agents. The planner designs the mechanism to maximize
a Utilitarian social welfare function.

Problem 1 Planner’s problem in two-type example:

                                                                X                        yi
                                                max                     ui ci1 ; ci2 ;                                          (1)
                                         fci1 ;ci2 ;yi gi=l;h   i
                                                                                         wi


                                                                    5
subject to the incentive compatibility constraint

                                                                 yh                                    yl
                                            uh ch1 ; ch2 ;                       uh cl1 ; cl2 ;                   ;                                               (2)
                                                                 wh                                    wh

and the feasibility constraint
                                                    X
                                                             yi        ci1           p2 ci2         0:                                                            (3)
                                                      i

    Constraint (2) is an incentive compatibility constraint stating that an individual of type i = h prefers
the consumption and income bundle intended for it by the planner,                                                     ch1 ; ch2 ; y h , to a bundle   cl1 ; cl2 ; y l
allocated to an individual of type i = l.6 Constraint (3) is feasibility, where we assume that the marginal
                                                                                                                              1
rate of transformation of consumption commodities is equal to the price ratio                                                 p2 .
    Consider …rst a benchmark environment in which the wage wi is observable to the planner. Then the
constrained e¢ cient problem does not have the incentive compatibility constraint (2). The solution is an
undistorted consumption margin for both ability types –the marginal rate of substitution across commodities
is equal to the marginal rate of transformation:7

                                                                                 i
                                                       ui1 ci1 ; ci2 ; wy i                   1
                                                                                        =        :                                                                (4)
                                                       ui2
                                                                               i
                                                                 ci1 ; ci2 ; wy i             p2


for i = fl; hg.
    Now, consider a program with unobservable wages. Let                                            0 be the multiplier on constraint (2). From
the …rst order conditions for consumption, we obtain the following expressions for the marginal rate of
substitution between consumption commodities for the high-wage individual, type i = h:

                                                                                 h
                                                      uh1 ch1 ; ch2 ; wy h                      1
                                                                                         =         ;                                                              (5)
                                                      uh2
                                                                               h
                                                                 ch1 ; ch2 ; wy h               p2


and for the low-wage individual, type i = l:

                                                                                                            yl
                                                                                         uh  l l
                                                                                          2 c1 ;c2 ;       wh
                                         ul1 cl1 ; cl2 ; wy l
                                                             l
                                                                                 1                           l
                                                                         1                ul2    cl1 ;cl2 ; y l
                                                                                                            w
                                                                    =                                       yl
                                                                                                                      :                                           (6)
                                                          yl
                                         ul2 cl1 ; cl2 ; wl              p2              uh  l l
                                                                                          1 c1 ;c2 ;       wh
                                                                                 1                           l
                                                                                          ul1    cl1 ;cl2 ; y l
                                                                                                            w



    Equation (5) shows that the consumption choices of the high-ability individual are undistorted. The
                                    uh
                                     1( )                                                                                                                         1
marginal rate of substitution       uh
                                            is equal to the marginal rate of transformation, which is equal to                                                    p2 .
                                     2( )

Equation (6) shows that if the multiplier                 on the incentive compatibility constraint is not equal to zero,
then the consumption choices of the low-ability individual may be distorted.
    Now, suppose we impose a condition requiring that if all individuals are given the same consumption and
    6 Writing this constraint we assumed that only an individual of type i = h can misrepresent his type. This is easy to ensure

if the ratio wh =wl is high enough.
    7 The consumption-labor margin is also undistorted.




                                                                             6
income allocation, (c1 ; c2 ; y), the marginal utility of good 2 relative to good 1 is higher for the high-ability
individual (type i = h) than for the low-ability individual (type i = l). This condition on the relative shape
of indi¤erence curves between goods for individuals of di¤erent ability levels resembles that discussed by
Mirrlees (1976) in equation (37) of his treatment of this topic.8
    Assumption 1 The utility function u satis…es:

                                            uh2 c1 ; c2 ; wyh             ul2 c1 ; c2 ; wyl
                                                                  >                                                      (7)
                                            uh1 c1 ; c2 ; wyh             ul1 c1 ; c2 ; wyl

for any (c1 ; c2 ; y)   0.
    The …rst order conditions (5) and (6), together with Assumption 1, imply a proposition characterizing
the distortions in the optimal allocation.

Proposition 1 Suppose that ci1 ; ci2 ; y i     i=l;h
                                                       is an optimal allocation solving (1) through (3). Then the op-
timal choice of consumption for the high-ability individual (i = h) is not distorted. Suppose that Assumption
1 holds. Then the optimal choice of consumption for the low-ability agent (i = l) is distorted away from good
2 in favor of good 1:
                                                                      l
                                                   ul1 cl1 ; cl2 ; wy l          1
                                                                             <      :
                                                                    yl
                                                   ul2 cl1 ; cl2 ; wl            p2

    This Proposition states that if good 2 is particularly enjoyed by high-ability workers, the planner should
impose a distortion (i.e., a positive relative tax)9 on the consumption of good 2 by the low-ability workers
(but not on consumption of that good by high-ability workers). The intuition for this result is as follows.
The planner wants to discourage a high-ability individual from deviating and claiming that he is a low type.
A high-ability agent …nds deviating less attractive if doing so causes him to face a positive relative tax on
the good that he values highly. The cost to the planner of such a positive relative tax is a distortion in the
consumption choices by the low-ability agent. Assumption 1 ensures that the costs of such distortion are
smaller than the gain from relaxing the incentive compatibility constraint.
    It is important to be clear that this result depends on preferences varying by ability level, not income.
In particular, it does not apply to goods with an income elasticity of demand greater than one but for which
preferences are unrelated to ability. For those goods, the inequality in (7) would be an equality because
each type would have the same ratio of marginal utilities given the same consumption and income bundle.
Instead, the case for di¤erential taxes requires the high-ability individuals to prefer good 2 even when at the
same income level as the low-ability individuals.
    Related to Proposition 1, we now derive a second result characterizing the design of optimal nonlinear
commodity taxes. This result compares the distortions that individuals face under the optimal policy when
   8 Though Assumption 1 does not rule out complementarity of consumption and leisure, our results do not rely on that. In

fact, in the more general analysis below, we specify separability to highlight that our results are driven by the e¤ects that
preferences have on the sub-utility from consumption goods. The alternative, in which some goods are more complementary to
labor than others, provides a second reason to deviate from uniform commodity taxation …rst discussed by Corlett and Hague,
1953.
   9 In this model, equilibrium wedges correspond to taxes for each type. We interchangeably use the terms wedges and taxes

to refer to these distortions.



                                                                  7
they reveal their type and when they mimic a lower type. We call the latter the "deviator’s distortion" to
contrast it with the distortion faced by individuals who truthfully reveal their types.
                                                                                                i0 ji
    De…nition 1 The "deviator’s distortion (i0 ji)" is de…ned as                                        (for i 6= i0 ):

                                                                            0     0   i0
                                                                   ui1 ci1 ; ci2 ; ywi
                                                   i0 ji
                                                               =                      i0
                                                                                            :
                                                                   ui2 ci1 ; ci2 ; ywi
                                                                            0     0




In words, this measures the distortion to the consumption choices of an individual of type i who reports
being of type i0 and receives the latter’s allocation of consumption and income.
    We now state the following corollary.

Corollary 1 Suppose that ci1 ; ci2 ; y i   i=l;h
                                                   is an optimal allocation solving (1) through (3). Then the optimal
choice of consumption for the high-ability agent (i = h) is distorted away from good 2 in favor of good 1 more
strongly by the "deviator’s distortion (ljh)" than by the distortion the high-ability agent faces if it reveals its
type. Formally,
                                                           l                                h
                                     uh1 cl1 ; cl2 ; wyh               uh1 ch1 ; ch2 ; wy h                 1
                                                                   <                                    =      :
                                                      yl
                                     uh2 cl1 ; cl2 ; wh                uh2 ch1 ; ch2 ; wh  yh               p2

Proof. This result follows immediately from the previous Proposition and Assumption 1.
    Corollary 1 helps with understanding the role of optimal commodity taxes and shows that the planner
encourages individuals to exert e¤ort by threatening them with higher distortions to their consumption
choices if they earn less. The relevant distortions these individuals would face if they earned less are not the
distortions faced by lower-ability individuals who tell the truth about their type, because preferences di¤er
with ability. Speci…cally, because higher ability individuals prefer good 2 in our example, a distortion away
                                                                                                                               0
from good 2 as perceived by type i0 is perceived to be more distortionary by type i with wi > wi . This
"deviator’s distortion (i0 ji)" adds an incentive for high ability individuals to exert e¤ort.


2     Model
In this section, we set up a model with a continuum of ability types, as in the classic Mirrlees (1971) frame-
work. Agents are heterogeneous in their preferences. We derive a formula for optimal relative commodity
taxes that are allowed to be nonlinear in consumption and to depend on income, and we explain the novel
components of this formula relative to models without preference heterogeneity.
    There is a continuum of measure one of individual agents. Agents are indexed by i 2 [0; 1]. Individuals
di¤er in their abilities, which we measure with their wages, denoted by wi and distributed according to
the density function f (w) over the interval [wmin ; wmax ]. Ability is private information to the agent. Each
individual has the continuous and di¤erentiable utility function:


                                               U wi = u ci1 ; ci2 ; li ; wi :                                                      (8)


Utility is a function of the consumption of good 1, c1                          0, and the consumption of good 2, c2      0, as well as

                                                                        8
of labor e¤ort l         0.10 Superscripts i on consumption and labor denote the values of these variables for the
individual, and the partial derivatives of utility take the following signs: uc1 ( ) > 0; uc2 ( ) > 0; ul ( ) < 0.
The output y i = wi li         0. Utility is also a function of the wage wi because we assume that preferences across
consumption goods are a function of ability. This assumption simpli…es the planner’s problem by retaining
a single dimension of heterogeneity. Two or more dimensions introduce a multiple screening problem for
which a tractable analytical approach at this level of generality has not been developed.11 Later, we will
parameterize the in‡uence of ability on preferences with the function                                      wi where        wi > 0 for all wi :
    A social planner maximizes a utilitarian social welfare function. The planner’s problem is given as follows.

Problem 2                                                     Z    wmax
                                                                                           yi i
                                             max                           u ci1 ; ci2 ;      ; w f wi dwi                                      (9)
                                     fci1 ;ci2 ;yi gi2[0;1]    wmin                        wi

subject to the feasibility constraint
                                             Z   wmax
                                                              yi     ci1      p2 ci2 f wi dwi            0;                                    (10)
                                                wmin


and the incentive compatibility constraint

                                                               yi i                                yj i
                                             u ci1 ; ci2 ;        ;w               u cj1 ; cj2 ;      ;w ;                                     (11)
                                                               wi                                  wi

for all i; j 2 [0; 1].

    Constraint (11) is the incentive compatibility constraint ensuring that an individual of type i prefers the
consumption and income allocation intended for it by the planner to the allocations intended for any other
individual of type j. As in the previous section, the relative price of c2 is p2 .
    It is standard to rewrite the planner’s problem with explicit tax functions. To characterize the form of
these optimal tax functions, we follow the formal techniques of the Mirrleesian literature. We start with the
statement of the problem solved by each individual, who takes the tax functions as given.

Problem 3 Individual’s Problem, i 2 [0; 1]:


                                                                     max U wi                                                                  (12)
                                                                   fci1 ;ci2 ;li g

 subject to the individual’s after-tax budget constraint,


                            w i li   T w i li          ci1 + t1 wi li ; ci1                 p2 ci2 + t2 wi li ; ci2   0:                       (13)


    The budget constraint requires careful examination. The nonlinear income tax T wi li                                            : R+ ! R
                                                                              i            i i                                      1
is a continuous, di¤erentiable function of income y = w l . The two other tax functions, t                                              wi li ; ci1 ;
  1 0 Extending the model to more than two goods (for example, to more than two periods) is straightforward. The analytical

results on optimal distortions are direct analogues of those derived below.
  1 1 See Kleven, Kreiner, and Saez (2009), Tarkiainen and Tuomala (2007), and Judd and Su (2008) for discussions of the

approach to optimal taxation with multi-dimensional heterogeneity.


                                                                               9
t2 wi li ; ci2   : R+   R+ ! R are commodity tax functions that we also assume to be continuous and
di¤erentiable. Importantly, note that we explicitly allow for the taxation of each commodity to be nonlinear
in consumption of that good and to depend on income.12 The budget constraint (13) has the multiplier
  (i)     0.
    In this approach, the social planner’s problem is as follows:

Problem 4 Planner’s Problem
                                                                     Z   wmax
                                                 max                            U wi f wi dwi                             (14)
                                       fT ( );t1 ( );t ( )gi2[0;1]
                                                   2
                                                                     wmin


subject to the feasibility constraint
                          Z   wmax
                                     T wi li + t1 wi li ; ci1 + p2 t2 wi li ; ci2        f wi dwi        0;               (15)
                           wmin


and incentive compatibility, which is that each individual i 2 [0; 1] solves the optimization problem in (12),
given tax policies T wi li ; t1 wi li ; ci1 ; and t2 wi li ; ci2 .

    In words, the social planner chooses a tax system to maximize utilitarian social welfare subject to two
constraints.      First, the budget constraint requires that total tax revenue be non-negative (we assume no
government spending for simplicity). Second, each individual will respond to the tax system by choosing
labor supply and a consumption bundle that maximize his or her utility.


2.1      The optimal commodity choice wedge
We now derive a formula that allows us to study the forces determining the optimal commodity wedge, i.e.,
the wedge distorting commodity choices. We formulate the Hamiltonian from the planner’s problem (9)
using the budget constraint, envelope condition, and …rst order condition with respect to labor li from the
individual’s utility maximization problem:

                                                                                                    l i ul i ( )
                    H wi = U wi +                  w i li    ci1     p2 ci2     f wi +   uw i ( )                  ;      (16)
                                                                                                         wi

where subscripts denote partial derivatives and ( ) denotes the set of arguments of the utility function,
 ci1 ; ci2 ; li ; wi . The …rst term of the Hamiltonian is the utility of the individual with wage wi . The second
is the government’s budget constraint multiplied by its multiplier . The third term is the evolution of the
state variable U wi with respect to wi , as derived above, and is multiplied by the co-state variable .13
    To solve for the optimal policy, choose l and ci1 as the control variables, with ci2 an implicit function
de…ned by the budget constraint. The …rst order condition with respect to ci1 combined with the condition
  1 2 These tax instruments are notationally redundant, in that a single tax function of the consumption of one good and income

would be su¢ cient to characterize the full policy. Separating taxes into these functions aids interpretation and has no e¤ect
on the analytical or quantitative results of the paper.
  1 3 The above procedure uses the so-called …rst order approach, where the …rst-order conditions of the individual’s problem

are assumed to be su¢ cient, not just necessary, conditions for a maximum. We check that these are su¢ cient in all numerical
simulations we perform in Section 3.



                                                                         10
that individuals will set the ratio of marginal utilities from the consumption goods equal to the price ratio
multiplied by the marginal tax ratio, yields the following expression for the distortion to individual i0 s
consumption basket:

                                                                                                         l i u li c i ( )
                                                          f wi                wi    uwi ci1 ( )                   1
                       1 1 + t1c1 wi li ; ci1    1                                                             wi
                                               =                                                                                :       (17)
                       p2 1 + t2c2 wi li ; ci2   p2                    1
                                                                                                            l i uli ci ( )
                                                         f (wi )       p2     (wi ) uwi ci2 ( )                  wi
                                                                                                                   2




To further characterize the optimal distortion to commodity purchases given by (17), we solve for the
multipliers      and   wi under the following assumption:
   Assumption 2 Utility function u in (8) is separable in consumption and labor:


                                     uli ci1 ci1 ; ci2 ; li ; wi = uli ci2 ci1 ; ci2 ; li ; wi = 0                                      (18)


The following proposition derives an expression for optimal commodity taxes.

Proposition 2 Given Assumption 2 on the individual utility function, the solution to the Planner’s Problem
(14) satis…es:
                                                                            C (wi )
                                      1 1 + t1c1 wi li ; ci1    A1 wi + B(wi )
                                                              =               C(wi )
                                                                                     ;                                                  (19)
                                      p2 1 + t2c2 wi li ; ci2   A2 (wi ) + p2 B(w i)



where
                                          A1 wi = uwi ci1 ,            A2 wi = uwi ci2                                                  (20)
                              Z                                                           Z                                         !
                                  wj =wmax                                                     wj =wmax
                                              1                        1 F wi                                   1
              B w i = p2                         f wj dwj                                                          f wj dwj             (21)
                               wj =wi        ucj                      1 F (wmin )             wj =w   min
                                                                                                               ucj
                                               2                                                                    2


                                                        C wi = f wi                                                                     (22)

Proof. In the Appendix, we derive the following expressions for                          and          wi :

                                                                       1
                                                   = R wj =w                                                                            (23)
                                                             max      p2
                                                        wj =w   min   u j   f (wj ) dwj
                                                                       c2


                                                    0                        R wj =wmax                                     1
                                                                  1                            1
                                                              (1 F (wi ))      wj =wi         u j   f wj dwj
                                                    B                                          c2                           C
                         wi = 1         F wi        @1                         R wj =wmax                                   A:          (24)
                                                                  1                             1
                                                            (1 F (wmin ))       wj =w   min    u j   f   (wj ) dwj
                                                                                                c2


Using these results in expression (17), we obtain (19).
   As with the conditions for optimal marginal income tax rates from, e.g., Diamond (1998), Saez (2001), and
Golosov, Troshkin, and Tsyvinski (2010b), expression (19) is not a fully closed-form solution as it depends
on optimal utility and consumption levels. Instead, it is a representation of the …rst order conditions of the
optimal problem allowing us to examine the forces a¤ecting optimal taxes.
   We identify three important forces at play. Two are familiar from previous results in Mirrleesian optimal


                                                                  11
taxation, for instance from the formulas for the income tax in Diamond (1998) and Saez (2001). However,
they have no impact in our model without the existence of an additional, novel, force.
    The novel force a¤ecting distortions in result (19) is the disparity between A1 wi and A2 wi , which
are the derivatives of the marginal utility of consumption of goods 1 and 2 with respect to the wage. This
disparity determines whether policy discourages consumption of good 1 or good 2. If A1 wi and A2 wi are
equal (for instance, if they are both zero), there is no distortion to consumption choices in the optimal policy.
If, instead, higher-ability workers relatively prefer good 2, then uwi ci1 < 0 while uwi ci2 > 0, so A1 wi < 0
and A2 wi > 0. In that case, because both B wi and C wi are non-negative, the ratio on the right-hand
                              1
side of (19) is less than     p2 ,   and the optimal distortion discourages marginal consumption of good 2. In other
words, preferences over goods that vary with ability introduce a reason for using di¤erentiated marginal
commodity taxes to provide incentives for high-ability individuals to exert work e¤ort.
    Whether the distortion to consumption choices increases or decreases with wages depends on the behavior
of A1 wi and A2 wi as the wage level increases. Though a full characterization depends on the speci…c
form of the utility function, the lower marginal utilities of consumption that come with higher wi will push
A1 wi and A2 wi toward zero as the wage level increases, reducing the size of this distortion at higher
wages. Intuitively, marginal commodity tax rates that decline with income on the good more valued by
high-ability individuals will encourage them to earn more, allowing the tax authority to levy higher income
taxes on them and redistribute more resources to those with lower ability.
                                                                                                    C (wi )
    The two forces familiar from previous optimal tax analyses generate the ratio                   B(wi )    in (19). This ratio
can be interpreted as the cost-bene…t ratio of the distortion, so a higher value for it reduces the optimal
distortion by o¤setting the disparity between A1 wi and A2 wi .
    First, B wi measures the redistributive bene…t of a distortion at wage wi . That distortion allows the
planner to shift income from those with wages above wi to the population as a whole, raising total welfare.
Formally, consider a two-part perturbation in the planner’s allocations made possible by this distortion. First,
the planner lowers utility by 1 unit for each individual above wi by extracting consumption from them while
                                                               R wj =w
preserving incentive compatibility.14 The planner extracts p2 wj =wimax u1j f wj dwj in resources from this
                                                                                           c2

action, and it lowers social welfare by 1            F wi    units. Second, the planner raises utility by 1              F wi
units for each individual in the population by granting them additional consumption while preserving incen-
                                                                            R wj =wmax 1 F (wi )
tive compatibility. The cost to the planner of this action is 1 F p(w
                                                                    2
                                                                      min )  wj =wmin    u j     f wj dwj , and it
                                                                                                      c2

raises social welfare by 1            F wi    units. The net change in social welfare from these two actions is zero,
while the net resources raised by the planner is:

                       Z   wj =wmax                                     Z   wj =wmax
                                       1                     p2                        1    F wi
                  p2                      f wj dwj                                               f wj dwj :
                       wj =wi         ucj              1    F (wmin )   wj =wmin            ucj
                                        2                                                       2



Rearranging this result, these two actions yield excess resources if:


                                                           B wi > 0;
  1 4 Note that this action is possible only because of the distortion at w i . Otherwise, individuals above w i would respond by

earning less.



                                                               12
so that the planner can raise social welfare through redistribution whenever B wi is positive. Moreover, the
greater is B wi ), the more valuable is this distortion to the planner. Intuitively, higher-ability workers have
lower marginal utilities of consumption, and the more concave is utility in good 2 above wage wi , the more
valuable is the redistribution made possible (i.e., incentive compatible) by the commodity choice distortion
at wi .
    Second, C wi measures the cost of the distortion at wage wi because it is the share of the population
whose choices are directly a¤ected by a commodity tax at wi . When this share is low, the optimal consump-
tion distortion (if non-zero) is larger, as the planner wants to concentrate distortions on small sub-populations
                               C (wi )
all else the same. The ratio B(wi ) is multiplied by p2 in the denominator because if A1 wi = A2 wi = 0,
                                                                          1
the undistorted marginal rate of transformation equals                    p2 :
    We can derive several speci…c results that characterize the optimum and aid intuition. First, for the top
type in a bounded ability distribution, (1               F (wmax )) is zero, and the result (19) reduces to:

                                                     1 1 + t1c1 (wmax )   1
                                                                         = :
                                                     p2 1 + t2c2 (wmax )  p2

so the commodity distortion is zero on the highest ability worker.15 Second, the distortion is also zero on
the lowest ability worker, as B (wmin ) = 0.              Third, if we restrict attention to commodity distortions that
are a linear function of the consumption of the good, an argument similar to Saez (2002) and Salanie (2003)
shows that goods preferred by the highly able ought to be taxed.
    As in the two-type model of Section 1, we can clarify the way in which the optimal policy provides
incentives for the high-ability individuals to exert e¤ort.                      First, the "deviator’s distortion (i0 ji)" in this
model equals:
                                                                      0     0    i0

                                                 0
                                                             uci0 ci1 ; ci2 ; ywi ; wi
                                                i ji           1
                                                         =                       i0
                                                                                         :
                                                             uci0 ci1 ; ci2 ; ywi ; wi
                                                                      0     0

                                                               2


We will show in numerical simulations in Section 3 that the "deviator’s distortion (i0 ji)" (i0 < i) discourages
the consumption of commodity 2 more than does the truth-telling distortion for individual i, or that

                                                 i0 ji       1 1 + t1c1 wi li ; ci1
                                                         <                           :
                                                             p2 1 + t2c2 wi li ; ci2

    One may also be interested in the pattern of marginal tax rates on income that are the focus of the
conventional Mirrleesian optimal tax literature. In this paper’s multiple-commodity setting, the marginal
tax rate on income can be calculated relative to the distortion to consumption of one of the commodities.
In the Appendix, we derive an expression analogous to (19) that describes these relative marginal income
taxes. In addition, the numerical results of the next section can be used to calculate the optimal marginal
income taxes (relative to commodity consumption) implied by the data.
  1 5 If the ability distribution is unbounded, as argued by Saez (2001), the pattern of rates near the top of the distribution

depends on the speci…cation of preferences. Formally, if A1 and A2 decrease quickly enough with wi , the optimal distortion
falls with wages as well.




                                                                    13
3     Optimal capital income taxes in a calibrated model
The results of Sections 1 and 2 show the forces a¤ecting optimal commodity taxation when preferences over
goods vary with ability. We now turn to a quantitative study of this topic when the commodities in the
utility function are current and future consumption (savings).
    We begin our quantitative analysis of optimal capital income taxation by discussing the existing literature
on the relationship between time preferences and income. That relationship is distinct from the relationship
that matters for this paper: that between time preferences and ability. We provide a calibration of time
preferences by ability level (and thus wages) using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.
We then simulate the optimal capital income taxes justi…ed by these estimates and relate our results to the
analytical expression (19) from the previous section.


3.1     Calibrating the model
In this section, we calibrate the model of optimal commodity taxation from Section 2. In particular, we
estimate the relationship between time discounting and cognitive ability using panel data from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY).
    A sizeable literature exists on measuring and explaining di¤erences in saving behavior across income
groups.16 Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes (2004) …nd a "strong, positive relationship between saving rates and
lifetime income," using data from the PSID, but they argue that preference di¤erences cannot explain their
…ndings (at least, without a strong bequest motive). Lawrance (1991) calculates annual time preference rates
using data on food consumption and …nds that implied discount factors rise with income, but Dynan (1993)
shows that Lawrance’s results are sensitive to the inclusion of controls.
    Less research exists on whether saving preferences are related to innate ability, the relationship of interest
for our analysis. One exception is Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro (2006), who use the same dataset we use
and …nd results consistent with ours, though they focus on a di¤erent measure of the relationship between
preferences and ability. An intermediate case is an important paper by Cagetti (2003), who estimates discount
factors by education group using detailed micro data on income and wealth from the PSID and SCF. As
with income, educational attainment is likely to be a¤ected by individuals’ time preferences, so Cagetti’s
estimates cannot directly be used to determine the relationship of interest in this paper. Nevertheless, his
…nding that higher education groups exhibit (substantially) greater preferences for saving is consistent with
the positive relationship between ability and savings preferences that we uncover in the data.
    With the goal of calibrating our model, we provide evidence on the relationship between saving preferences
and ability. In brief, our approach is to use data on income and net worth from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth (NLSY) and a standard model of an individual’s intertemporal utility maximization problem
to compute a discount factor for each individual in the sample. Next, we regress these discount factors on
the log of ability and other personal characteristics observed by the NLSY, where we measure ability with
individuals’scores on a widely-used aptitude test. The coe¢ cient on ability in this regression allows us to
  1 6 For example, see Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1995). A related literature focuses on the consequences of these di¤erences

for the extent of self-insurance against shocks. See Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008), for example.



                                                              14
predict, holding …xed other personal characteristics, a discount factor for each level of ability. Using NLSY
data on wages by ability level, we are then able to estimate a functional relationship between discount factors
and wages, the key inputs to our policy simulations. To summarize, we estimate an elasticity of the annual
discount factor      to the wage w of 0.0036. For example, a change in the wage from $20 to $24 per hour,
a 20 percent increase, corresponds to a change in the annual discount factor from 0.9604 to 0.9610, a 0.07
percent increase.
   Throughout the numerical analysis, we use the following utility function. For consistency with the previous
section, we consider a utility function that is separable in consumption and labor. Preferences over goods
are normalized so that they do not mechanically a¤ect labor e¤ort, as detailed in the Appendix. In addition,
we assume that utility from consumption is constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) and the disutility from
labor e¤ort is isoelastic:
                                  !           1                                                   1
                          wi            ci1         1            1                  1       ci2       1   1
              U=                                        +                       (p2 )                         li   :    (25)
                      1 + (wi )               1             1+       (wi )                        1

   As a baseline case, we assume          = 1 and       = 3. With            = 1, this utility function simpli…es to

                                            wi               1                          1
                                  U=           i
                                                 ln ci1 +           ln ci2                   li                         (26)
                                        1 + (w )          1 + (wi )

   We now provide some more details on our calibration, beginning with the data. The NLSY consists of a
nationally representative sample of individuals born between 1957 and 1964, …rst interviewed in 1979, and
interviewed annually or biannually since. The NLSY contains data on individuals’ net worth and income
over time, allowing us to roughly estimate saving rates as described below.
   The key advantage of the NLSY for our purposes is that it includes a direct measure of ability. This
allows us to relate a measure of ability, not income, to time preferences. In 1980, the NLSY administered the
Armed Forces Quali…cation Test (AFQT) to 94 percent of its participants. This test measured individuals’
aptitudes in a wide range of areas, including some mechanical skills relevant to military service.
   We use an aggregation of scores in some of the areas covered by the AFQT as the indicator of ability
for each head of household whose family income and net worth we will measure.17 This aggregation, the
AFQT89, is calculated by the Center for Human Resource Research at Ohio State University, as follows:

          Creation of this revised percentile score, called AFQT89, involves (1) computing a verbal
      composite score by summing word knowledge and paragraph comprehension raw scores; (2) con-
      verting subtest raw scores for verbal, math knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning; (3) multiplying
      the verbal standard score by two; (4) summing the standard scores for verbal, math knowledge,
      and arithmetic reasoning; and (5) converting the summed standard score to a percentile.

   Our measure of preferences is based on the discount factor                   implied by using NLSY data on individuals’
  1 7 The AFQT most likely measures some combination of innate ability and accumulated achievement. To the extent that

more innately patient individuals invest more in human capital and thereby have higher AFQT scores because of achievement,
not ability, our analysis will be biased toward …nding a stronger relationship between ability and time preferences than that
which truly holds.



                                                             15
household income paths and net worth in a simple model of optimization described in the Appendix. Intu-
itively, the higher is …nal net worth relative to the cumulative value of income, the greater the estimated .18
To give a sense for the data, in Table 1 we show the mean and standard deviations of                                  by AFQT quintile.

                                         Table 1. Summary of                 by AFQT quintile
                                                                           AFQT quintile
                                                      Bottom           2             3       4           Top
                           Mean                           0.336      0.374         0.394   0.418        0.466
                           Std. dev. of                   0.156      0.176         0.180   0.215        0.252
                                                 i
                           Implied           w        1.0486         1.0437       1.0413   1.0387       1.0338
                           Implied           wi       0.9536         0.9581       0.9603   0.9628       0.9673
                                     i
                           Mean w                         12.35      16.29         18.98   21.67        25.39

    Table 1 also shows the implied values of                      wi , the parameter of interest from the model of Section 2,
and     wi , the standard annual discount factor.19 The variation in                       within AFQT quintiles is large relative
to the variation across wage levels. These results have their limitations for use in calibrating our model. The
data are likely to be very noisy, and our inference of                       is based on a simpli…ed model.            Moreover, simple
AFQT quintile means of          are likely to be misleading, as they fail to control for variables correlated with
both ability and saving behavior.
    Table 2 shows the results of a regression of ln ( ) on ability as well as other observable characteristics. In
particular, we control for the cumulative value of family income over the head of household’s working life,
the head’s age, age squared, and gender.20 Formally, we estimate:

                                                      2
                      ln =      1 age    +    2 age       +   3 gender   +    4   ln (income) +   5   ln (AF QT ) :


where the calculation of "income" is described in the Appendix.
  1 8 We lack data on families’ expected future income ‡ows from sources such as Social Security and bequests. To the extent

that these ‡ows are greater relative to past income for low earners, we are underestimating the true for low earners and
thereby overestimating the strength of the relationship between ability and savings preferences. If these ‡ows are greater for
high earners, we are underestimating the relationship’s strength. Similarly, we do not take into account the existing tax system
when estimating . If capital income tax rates are progressive, this will cause us to underestimate the positive relationship
between ability and savings preferences.
  1 9 Note that, because the model with which we estimate     uses 23-year periods, is the discount factor across these periods.
The Appendix describes how to convert into the preference parameter           wi from the utility function (25).
  2 0 The estimate of the coe¢ cient on ln(AF QT ) is 2.71E-02 (4.45E-03) if we do not control for age, age squared, or gender.




                                                                      16
                                                  Table 2. Regression results
                                   Variable            Coe¢ cient      Std. Err.        t-statistic
                                   age                 -2.62E-02       2.97E-02         -0.88
                                   age2                8.80E-04        8.36E-04         1.05
                                   gender              1.16E-02        8.15E-03         1.42
                                   ln (income)         1.69E-01        7.61E-03         22.15
                                   ln (AFQT)           2.60E-02        4.46E-03         5.82
                                   Note:      indicates signi…cance at the 1% level
                                   Observations: 7008
                                   F-statistic: 203.98
                                   Adjusted R-squared: 0.127

    This regression yields a highly signi…cant estimate for             5   of 0.026 (standard error of 0.004).21 ;22 In words,
this coe¢ cient implies an elasticity of 0:026 for the discount factor                  with respect to ability as measured by
the AFQT. For example, if ability increases by 10 percentile points from 50 to 60 (a twenty percent increase),
the discount factor       would increase from 0.394 to 0.396 (i.e., by approximately 0.47 percent). These …ndings
are consistent with the …ndings of the literature cited above that relates saving to income and with Benjamin,
Brown, and Shapiro (2006), who …nd a "strong, statistically signi…cant, and positive relationship between
AFQT score and the propensity to have positive net assets" in the NLSY. Those authors, using a di¤erent
measure of time preference, report "an additional 10 percentile points of AFQT is associated with an increase
of about 1.5 percentage points in the propensity to have positive net assets."
    The estimate of       5   allows us to derive a value of       for each ability level holding …xed an individual’s age,
gender, and cumulative income. In particular, we use

                                                                            0:026
                                                      = 0:356 (AF QT )              ;                                           (27)


where the constant 0:356 is pinned down by matching the value of                          for the middle AFQT quintile from
Table 1 (0:394) with the mean AFQT score in that quintile (49:26). Expression (27) allows us to calculate,
from the average AFQT score by quintile, a "regression-based " for each quintile that can be compared to
the simple means in Table 1. The results are shown in Table 3, along with the implied values of                             wi and
   wi .
  2 1 We also have run simulations controlling for the slope of income during the 1979-2004 period and over the past ten years

for each individual. These controls reduce the coe¢ cient on AFQT to 0.021 and 0.015, but it remains signi…cant at the 1%
level. Note that these results imply a weaker relationship between ability and preferences.
  2 2 Measurement error likely a¤ects both our estimates of ability and discounting, though bias would be introduced only by

error in the former. While AFQT is an imperfect measure of ability, its retest reliability is very high. Moreover, if AFQT
mismeasures ability, it is unclear whether that biases our results down or up. It may be that AFQT measures those parts of
ability that are particularly highly correlated with preferences (i.e., ability to delay grati…cation, cognitive alacrity), and a more
accurate measure of ability would show less relationship with preferences.




                                                                 17
                                    Table 3. Regression-based             by AFQT quintile
                                                                   AFQT quintile
                                                  Bottom       2                3                4       Top
                           Mean                    0.378     0.389            0.394            0.398    0.400
                           Implied       wi       1.0433    1.0419            1.0413           1.0409   1.0406
                                             i
                           Implied       w        0.9585    0.9598            0.9603           0.9607   0.9610
                                     i
                           Mean w                  12.35     16.29            18.98            21.67    25.39

     The …nal step is to relate these discount factors to wages, as wage rates are the measure of ability in the
model from Section 2 that we will use to simulate optimal policy. The NLSY provides data on individuals’
reported wages, and we report the average of these wages by AFQT quintile in Table 3.23 Assuming the same
functional form as in expression (27), the values of           wi and wi in Table 3 imply the following relationship
between discounting and wages:
                                                                               0:0036
                                                   wi = 1:0526 wi                          :                                   (28)

or
                                                                              0:0036
                                                    wi = 0:9500 wi                     :                                       (29)

Expression (28) allows us to derive              wi and    wi for a wide range of wages.
     To simulate optimal capital income taxes using the estimated form for                                wi in expression (28), we
specify a wage (wi ) distribution, calculate the implied values for                              wi , and numerically simulate the
planner’s problem in (9). We also simulate an augmented planner’s problem that limits the planner to no
capital income taxation. This enables us to calculate welfare gains from optimal capital taxation.
     We use a wage distribution that starts at $4 and increases in equally-sized discrete bins. Based on Saez
(2001), we assume that the distribution of the population across these wages is lognormal up to $62.50 and
Pareto with a parameter value of 2.68 (following Golosov, Troshkin, and Tsyvinski, 2010b) for higher wages.
We calibrate the lognormal distribution with the 2007 wage distribution for full-time workers in the United
States as reported in the Current Population Survey.
     To measure the intertemporal wedge we use the expression:

                                                                   u ci ( )
                                                                      1
                                                                   u ci ( )     1
                                                                      2
                                                      ()=1                                                                     (30)
                                                                          r

where r is the annual rate of return to savings.24 The variable                     ( ) measures the relative distortion toward
good 1 and away from good 2 at a given income level. Under the capital income tax interpretation,                             ( ) is
   2 3 We compute wages from the total wage and salary income divided by the total hours worked in 1992, as reported in 1993.

We calculate mean wages by AFQT quintile limiting the sample to workers who reported more than 1,000 hours worked. Using
all workers does not change the pattern, but all wage levels rise because some workers with low reported hours have high
imputed hourly wages.
   2 4 In the notation of the model of Section 3, p =   1
                                                   2   1+r
                                                           , as we assume that savings earn a net rate of return r. We set
                 R                                                                                     R
1 + r = 1 ln          wi f wi , where we calculate the average instantaneous discount rate, = ln            wi f wi ; and set
r = . The implicit tax is on net capital income, i.e., the implicit after-tax return to saving (marginal rate of transformation)
is (1 + r (1     )) :



                                                              18
the implicit tax on the interest income earned on good 2, i.e., capital. If this expression is positive, the tax
policy is discouraging future consumption relative to current consumption. More informally, it is taxing the
return to saving, so we will refer to it as the implied capital income tax.


3.2    Optimal capital income taxes
Figure 1 shows optimal nonlinear capital income tax rates in the baseline case ( = 1 and                                                             = 3).
                                   0.12
                                                                                     Optimal capital income tax rates

                                    0.1


                                   0.08


                                   0.06


                                   0.04


                                   0.02


                                      0
                                          0                   200       400           600                800                 1000
                                                                      Annual income, $1000s


                              Figure 1: Optimal capital income tax rates in the baseline model

   Optimal capital income tax rates are U-shaped (as in Diamond 1998 and Saez 2001). They rise from
$100,000 in annual income, corresponding to a wage of $40 per hour, through the point at which the Pareto
tail of the wage distribution begins, at an income of around $150,000. Above that income level optimal rates
plateau at around 4.5%.
   The pattern of optimal rates in Figure 1 can be better understood by examining the components of the
analytical result describing optimal distortions from Section 3: expression (19) : In Figure 2A and Figure 2B,
                                                             C (wi )
we show the evolution of A2 wi        A1 wi and the ratio B(wi ) under the optimal policy over the income
distribution, which we split at $300,000 to enable easier examination.
                    -5               Panel A                                                -7                 Panel B                                -4
                x 10                                                                     x 10                                                   x 10
                                                  i       i
                                                                        0.015        5                                   i          i
                                          A (w )-A (w )                                                          A (w )-A (w )
                                              2       1                                                            2           1
            8
                                          C(wi)/B(wi) (right axis)      0.012        4                           C(wi)/B(wi) (right axis)       2.5


            6                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                        0.009        3
                                                                                                                                                1.5
            4
                                                                        0.006        2
                                                                                                                                                1

            2                                                           0.003        1
                                                                                                                                                0.5


            0                                                           0            0                                                           0
                0        50    100      150    200              250   300            300        400   500   600    700    800           900   1000
                              Annual income, $1000s                                                    Annual income, $1000s

                       Figure 2: Components of the analytical expression for optimal distortions

   These …gures show that, as anticipated in Section 3, the di¤erence between the cross-partial derivatives
of the marginal utilities of consumption for each good with respect to the wage, A2 wi                                                           A1 wi , falls as

                                                                                19
                                                                                      C (wi )
wages increase. The cost-bene…t ratio of the distortion, represented by               B(wi )       also diminishes with income.
Figure 2A shows that the U-shaped pattern of optimal distortions in Figure 1 is due to the rapid fall and then
earlier stabilization of the A1 wi    A2 wi term, so that the optimal distortion starts out large, diminishes
quickly as the high population density causes the cost-bene…t ratio to be relatively larger, and then rebounds
                          C (wi )
as the rate of decline in B(wi ) exceeds that of A2 wi     A1 wi around $100,000 of income. Figure 2B
shows that these two components decline at a similar rate at higher incomes. This pattern explains why
optimal distortions plateau and are essentially constant at high incomes.
   The increasing size of the distortions for most of the wage distribution in Figure 1 may seem to contradict
the intuition discussed above that distorting savings among lower earners will enable more e¢ cient redistri-
bution from higher earners. However, the equilibrium distortions shown in these …gures are not the relevant
distortions for an individual claiming an allocation intended for a di¤erent type (e.g., type i claiming to
be type i   1). Such an individual has a lower          wi than the type whose allocation he claims, and this
magni…es the e¤ective distortion to his intertemporal optimization if he chooses to mimic the lower type.
What matters for individual i’s incentives, then, is that the "deviator’s distortion" (as de…ned in Section 1)
he faces if he claims to be type i    1 is higher than the distortion he faces if he tells the truth. Figure 3
shows the two relevant series: the "deviator’s distortion (i0 ji) " and the truth-telling distortion to type i.
                           0.12
                                                                         Truthtelling distortion
                                                                         Dev iator's distortion
                            0.1


                           0.08


                           0.06


                           0.04


                           0.02


                              0
                                  0     200        400           600           800             1000
                                                 Annual income, $1000s


                             Figure 3: Deviator’s distortion in the baseline model

   The deviator’s distortion always exceeds the truth-telling distortion, consistent with the analytical results
above. Optimal nonlinear capital income taxation thereby discourages high-skilled individuals, who value
saving, from earning less and claiming a more generous tax treatment.
   The welfare gain from optimal capital income taxation given the calibrated                            wi is negligible.   To
measure the welfare gain, we …rst simulate the optimal policy when capital wedges are constrained to be
zero. The planner designs bundles of total consumption and labor income, rather than of consumption in
each period and labor income, among which individuals choose. Each individual is then free to allocate his
chosen total consumption across periods according to his preferences, with no distortion. This allows us to
calculate the factor by which consumption of all agents in both periods would have to be increased in the
model without capital taxes to yield the same level of social welfare as in the model with the optimal taxes
shown in Figure 1. This factor is 0.00002% of aggregate consumption. The welfare gain is concentrated

                                                         20
among low earners.



4      Robustness of baseline results
In this section we extensively examine the robustness of the baseline numerical results. We start by con-
sidering social welfare functions other than the Utilitarian function assumed throughout the analysis thus
far; this turns out to have little impact on our results. Next, we vary the two key parameters of the utility
                                                1                                                              1
function: the elasticity of labor supply            1     and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution         . We …nd
that the former matters very little while the latter substantially a¤ects the magnitude of optimal capital
income tax rates but has little e¤ect on the welfare gains from optimal policy. Finally, we compare the
degree of preference heterogeneity we observe in the data to that needed to justify a range of average capital
tax rate levels.25


4.1        Alternative social welfare functions
The Utilitarian social welfare function, in which individual types are valued by the social planner according
to their proportions of the total population, is a natural choice. As Vickrey (1945) and Harsanyi (1953, 1955)
argued, a Utilitarian social welfare function is equivalent to the expected utility function of an individual
in an ex ante state when he is uncertain over his type. It is also a key benchmark in modern optimal tax
studies.
    Nevertheless, we may be interested in social welfare functions that are more redistributive than the
Utilitarian benchmark.        Social welfare functions that are concave in individual utilities are a common
variant of the Utilitarian assumption in optimal tax research. Denoting social welfare with W , we can write
                                                    Z    wmax
                                           W =                  U wi    f wi dwi                                         (31)
                                                        wmin


where      parameterizes the concavity of social welfare and where           = 1 for a Utilitarian social welfare function.
We consider two more concave versions of expression (31), where                 = 0:5 and    = 0:25.
    The baseline results for optimal capital income taxes turn out to be robust to these di¤erent assumptions
on social preferences. Figure 4 shows optimal rates for these three social welfare functions under our baseline
parameter assumptions of         = 1 and      = 3.
  2 5 We
       have also checked the robustness of our results to the number of periods in the model. Numerical simulations that allow
for more than two periods, with one consumption good per period, show that optimal distortions are nearly constant across
time.




                                                                 21
                             0.1
                                                           ρ = 0.25 (Highly redistributiv e case)
                            0.09
                                                           ρ = 0.5 (Intermediate case)
                            0.08                           ρ = 1.0 (Utilitarian case)

                            0.07

                            0.06

                            0.05

                            0.04

                            0.03

                            0.02

                            0.01

                                 0
                                     0   200      400           600              800            1000
                                                Annual income, $1000s


                         Figure 4: Robustness to varying the social welfare function

   The gaps between the optimal rate schedules in Figure 4 are small over the entire income distribution.
The rates for high earners plateau at 4.6%, 4.6%, and 4.5%.                The di¤erences are slightly larger at lower
wage levels, as the planner maximizing a more concave social welfare function uses larger distortions on low
earners’consumption choices to enable greater incentive-compatible transfers to them.


4.2    Elasticity of labor supply
                                               1
The Frisch elasticity of labor supply equals       1   in our model. The baseline assumption of            = 3:0 implies
an elasticity of 0:5, consistent with the evidence in Chetty (2010). Figure 5 shows optimal capital income
tax rates for this baseline value and two alternative values:         = 1:5 implies an elasticity of 3:0, while   = 6:0
implies an elasticity of only 0:2:

                           0.1
                                                                        σ = 1.5 (High elasticity )
                          0.09
                                                                        σ = 3.0 (Baseline)
                          0.08                                          σ = 6.0 (Low elasticity )

                          0.07

                          0.06

                          0.05

                          0.04

                          0.03

                          0.02

                          0.01

                             0
                                 0       200      400           600              800                1000
                                                Annual income, $1000s

                        Figure 5: Robustness to varying the elasticity of labor supply

   Despite the wide variation in labor supply elasticities covered by Figure 5, there are only minor di¤erences
in optimal capital income tax rates. At high income, the optimal rates plateau at similar rates, and there is
a steep increase beginning around $100,000 of annual income. The only sizeable di¤erence is for the lowest
skilled, who face high rates when the labor supply elasticity is high and low rates when it is low.                 The


                                                          22
explanation for this pattern lies in the planner’s use of intertemporal distortions as a substitute for marginal
labor income taxes. When the labor supply elasticity is low, labor income taxes are less distortionary, so
the planner does not need to distort the intertemporal margin to provide incentives for the high skilled to
exert e¤ort. When the elasticity of labor supply is high, capital income taxes serve a more important role
in encouraging work.


4.3     Intertemporal elasticity of substitution
                                                                      1
The intertemporal elasticity of substitution equals                        in our model. The baseline assumption of   = 1 is a
standard benchmark in mainstream optimal tax and macroeconomic models. But there is substantial debate
over the true value of this parameter, so we explore its e¤ects on our baseline results by considering three
alternative values:    = 0:5;         = 2, and         = 3. For each case, we compute the implied           wi following the
same procedure described in Section 3.1. Figure 6 shows optimal rates under these di¤erent assumptions
on :

                                           γ   = 3.0   (Lowest IES)
                                0.3        γ   = 2.0   (Low IES)
                                           γ   = 1.0   (Baseline)
                            0.25           γ   = 0.5   (High IES)


                                0.2


                            0.15


                                0.1


                            0.05


                                 0
                                     0         200             400           600        800     1000
                                                             Annual income, $1000s


                  Figure 6: Robustness to varying the intertemporal elasticity of substitution

    Figure 6 shows that varying the intertemporal elasticity of substitution has substantial e¤ects on optimal
capital income tax rates. For a low intertemporal elasticity ( = 3), optimal rates rise to 23.5%, while for
a high intertemporal elasticity ( = 0:5) they rise to only 1.6%. The baseline case plateaus at 4.5%.
    For the planner considering the use of optimal capital taxes, a low intertemporal elasticity of substitution
means that individuals’intertemporal allocations will change little in response to distortions. Moreover, the
incentive e¤ects of these distortions will be strong, as individuals are eager to avoid allocations that distort
them away from their preferred allocations. These factors explain the high optimal capital income tax rates
when     = 3, and similar reasoning explains the low rates when                      = 0:5.
    Though a low intertemporal elasticity can generate substantially higher optimal tax rates, the welfare
gains of moving from no capital taxation to the optimum remain negligible regardless of .
    Further robustness checks in which we vary the elasticity of labor supply, the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution, and the social welfare function together reinforce the lesson that optimal capital income tax
rates are substantially larger than in the baseline case only when the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
( 1 ) is small.

                                                                          23
4.4      Comparing optimal to existing capital income taxes
Finally, we explore how sensitive our results are to the form of                              wi .   In particular, we compare our
estimate of the empirical relationship between time preferences and ability to that which would be required
to justify a given level of capital income taxes. This examines the robustness of our results to the strength
of the relationship between preferences and ability.
    We calculate the       wi functions that yield population-weighted average optimal intertemporal wedges
corresponding to a range of capital income tax rates. To do so, we continue to model (as in expression 28)
the function      wi as a two-parameter power function

                                                                                "
                                                        wi =           wi           ;                                         (32)


where     and " are scalars. We …x           wi at its value for wi = $28 to ensure comparability of these preferences
to our empirical estimates. Then, we use the wage (wi ) distribution and utility function (25) from Section
3 with    = 1 and      = 3, and we vary the values of               and " in (32) while simulating the planner’s problem
in (9) ; (10), and (11).
    Leading studies …nd that tax rates on capital income in developed economies today are over 40% .26
Figure 7 plots the         wi required for the population-weighted average optimal intertemporal wedge to
imply capital income tax rates of 10%, 20%, and 40% as well as the values for                                wi from our baseline
analysis of the NLSY data.

                                2

                               1.8                              i
                                                             α(w ) f or 10% av erage marginal rate
                                                                i
                               1.6                           α(w ) f or 20% av erage marginal rate
                                                                i
                               1.4                           α(w ) f or 40% av erage marginal rate
                                                                            i
                                                             Baseline α(w )
                               1.2

                                1

                               0.8

                               0.6

                               0.4

                               0.2

                                0
                                    0   50       100   150    200        250            300    350    400
                                                             Wage, $


                    Figure 7: Preferences          wi required to justify average capital tax rates

    To aid intuition, Figure 8 plots the conventional annual discount factor                          wi implied by these    wi .
  2 6 The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD 2008) reports average combined corporate and

personal statutory rates on distributed corporate pro…ts of 42.4 percent in 2007, down from 50 percent in 2000. An alternative
measure is the "tax ratio" of capital income tax revenue to total capital income. Carey and Rabesona (2004) calculate the tax
ratio for capital income across sixteen OECD countries in 2000 to be 46.3.




                                                               24
                                             2.5



                                              2



                                             1.5



                                              1

                                                                                              i
                                                                                         β(w ) f or 10% av erage marginal rate
                                                                                              i
                                             0.5                                         β(w ) f or 20% av erage marginal rate
                                                                                              i
                                                                                         β(w ) f or 40% av erage marginal rate
                                                                                                        i
                                                                                         Baseline β(w )
                                              0
                                                  0        50        100      150    200          250       300     350      400
                                                                                    Wage, $


                            Figure 8: Preferences                         wi required to justify average capital tax rates

    As these …gures make clear, the empirical relationship between time preferences and ability is far weaker
than that which would justify the capital income tax rates prevailing in developed economies today, given
our baseline calibration with                         = 1. For example, to justify a 20% capital income tax rate, the discount
       27
rate        would need to be more than 200% larger for an individual at the twentieth percentile of the ability
distribution than for an individual at the eightieth percentile. The NLSY data implies only a 12% gap
between these two individuals.



5       Extension: Optimal Capital Taxation when Stochastic Abilities
        are Related to Preferences
In this section, we extend our analysis of optimal capital taxation when preferences vary with ability to a
stochastic setting in a simple environment. The environment below parallels the dynamic Mirrlees model
similar to, for example, Golosov, Kocherlakota, and Tsyvinski (2003), Albanesi and Sleet (2006), and Golosov,
Tsyvinski and Werning (2006). While di¤erent from the model analyzed in previous sections, the model here
addresses an additional aspect of how optimal taxes ought to respond to a relationship between preferences
and ability.
    In period t = 1, agents have a common ability level w = 1, consume a good x, and produce income
y. In period t = 2, agents have abilities wi that take one of two values (i = fl; hg for low and high) with
               P
probability i : i i = 1, consume two goods c1 and c2 ; and produce income y i . Let wh > wl > 0. Abilities
are private information to the agent. Importantly, agents with the high second-period ability have a relative
preference for c2 over c1 measured by                                wi where            0
                                                                                              wi < 0, just as in the previous sections.
    An individual’s problem in this setting with no policy is, for i 2 fl; hg:
                                         2                                          "                                                        #3
                                                                      X                     wi               1                         yi
                       max               4u (x)            v (y) +             i
                                                                                                 ln ci1 +           ln ci2         v          5
              x;y;fci1 ;ci2 ;y i g
                                                                                               i
                                                                                        1 + (w )          1 + (wi )                    w2i
                                 i=1;2                                i=l;h

 2 7 That    is,     wi where            wi =         ln        wi    :




                                                                                         25
subject to the budget constraint


                                                 (1 + r) (y        x) + y i             ci1     ci2         0:


where (1 + r) is the marginal rate of transformation of goods across periods.
   The individual allocations satisfy standard stochastic Euler equations:28

                                                X           wi                                          X                    1
                      u0 (x) =        (1 + r)       i
                                                                  u0 ci1 =                    (1 + r)            i
                                                                                                                                         u0 ci2
                                                        1 + (wi )                                                    1+          (wi )



   The social planner’s problem is similar to the static problem in Section 2:

Problem 5
                                     2                                 "                                                                                 #3
                                                           X                   wi               1                                                   yi
                   max               4u (x)     v (y) +           i
                                                                                    ln ci1 +           ln ci2                               v             5       (33)
                                                                                  i
                                                                           1 + (w )          1 + (wi )                                              wi
          x;y;fci1 ;ci2 ;y i g
                             i=1;2                        i=l;h


subject to the feasibility constraint

                                                                       X
                                                                                   i
                                              (1 + r) (y      x) +                     yi      ci1    ci2        0;                                               (34)
                                                                       i=l:h


and incentive compatibility in period t = 2 :

         wh                1                                  yh                  wh                1                                                 yl
            h
              ln ch1 +           ln ch2                   v                            ln cl1 +           ln cl2                                v             ;   (35)
     1 + (w )          1 + (wh )                              wh                     h
                                                                              1 + (w )          1 + (wh )                                             wh

                                                                                                                                                                    29
which says that the high-ability agents do not choose to mimic the low-ability agents in the second period

   Let     denote the multiplier on the incentive compatibility constraint (35).
   The …rst-order conditions of the planner’s problem yield a condition describing optimal policy:
                                                                                                                     !
                                                        1    X                            1      1
                                                                               i
                                              (1 + r) 0    =                                  + 0 i                      :                                        (36)
                                                     u (x)
                                                                      i=l;h
                                                                                       u0 ci1  u c2

Result (36) is the Inverse Euler Equation, and it is the same condition that describes optimal policy when
preferences do not vary across types. Thus, the planner’s optimal policy toward saving is una¤ected by the
relationship between stochastic ability and the preference for goods when the planner is able to use nonlinear,
income-dependent commodity taxes.
                                                                                                                                                i
   How does the optimal policy treat consumption choices in the second period? De…ne                                                                as the distortion
 2 8 An equivalent expression combining the second-period commodities could be used, instead.
 2 9 As in the previous Sections, we assume that only the high ability agent can pretend to be the low ability agent and not
vice versa.




                                                                           26
to second-period consumption choices for an individual of second-period type i:

                                                           (wi ) 0
                                                 i       1+ (wi ) u     ci1
                                                     =      1                 ;
                                                         1+ (wi ) u
                                                                    0   ci2

In the Appendix, we show that the optimal policy is the same as that from our analysis of optimal capital
taxation in previous sections. In particular, the high type faces no distortion to its commodity choices
    h                                                                                                      l
(       = 1), while the low type is distorted away from the good that the high-type relatively prefers (       > 1).



6         Conclusion
Among others, Mirrlees (1976) and Saez (2002) have argued that goods preferred by the high-ability ought to
be taxed as part of an optimal tax policy that seeks to redistribute toward the individuals with (unobservable)
low ability. Recently, the logic for taxing goods preferred by those with high ability has been used to argue
for positive capital income taxation, for example by Banks and Diamond (2008).
        We study the case for nonlinear taxes on goods justi…ed by a relationship between ability and preferences
over them. We derive an analytical result characterizing the optimal distortion to consumption choices and
decompose it into both conventional and novel factors. Then, we calibrate a model economy to micro data
that allows us to estimate savings preferences and their relationship to measured ability. When we simulate
optimal policy given these estimates, we …nd that the magnitude of optimal capital income taxes is modest–
only 2% on average and 4.5% on high earner–for our baseline case with a unit intertemporal elasticity of
substitution. The welfare gains from these taxes are small. These results are robust to variation in the social
welfare function’s concavity and the elasticity of labor supply. Substantially larger optimal capital income
tax rates are implied if the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is lower, though even in that case the
welfare gain from imposing optimal capital income taxes remains small.




                                                             27
7       Appendix

7.1       The Derivation of the General Tax Ratio, expression (19)
The Hamiltonian from the main text, (16), includes the following di¤erential constraint:

                    @U i
                         = uwi ci1 ; ci2 ; li ; wi +           li 1          T 0 w i li       t1yi wi li ; ci1                  p2 t2yi wi li ; ci2            ;    (37)
                    @wi

derived using the envelope condition on the individual’s utility maximization problem. Using the individual’s
…rst order condition with respect to labor li , we can rewrite the Hamiltonian as:

                                                                                                                                            l i ul i ( )
                         H wi = U wi +                     w i li      ci1     p2 ci2     f wi +                     uw i ( )                              ;
                                                                                                                                                 wi

where subscripts denote partial derivatives and ( ) denotes the set of arguments of the utility function,
 ci1 ; ci2 ; li ; wi .
    To solve for the optimal policy, choose l and ci1 as the control variables. The …rst order conditions yield

                                                                                                        l i uli ci ( )
                                                              f wi                 uwi ci1 ( )                wi
                                                                                                                 1
                                            dci2
                                                   =                                                                                ;
                                            dci1                                                        l i u li c i ( )
                                                           p2 f (wi )              uwi ci2 ( )               wi
                                                                                                               2




and
                                                                                                  u li ( )       l i u l i li ( )
                                        dci2   wi f wi +                      uw i l i ( )          wi                 wi
                                             =                                                                                          :
                                        dli                                                             l i u li c i ( )
                                                   p2 f (wi )                      uwi ci2 ( )               wi
                                                                                                               2




    Individuals will allocate their after-tax income so that the following relationships hold:

                                                     dci2       uci1             1 + t1c1 wi li ; ci1
                                                          =            =                                                                                            (38)
                                                     dci1       uci2           p2 1 + t2c2 wi li ; ci2

                                                                                        @t1 (wi li ;ci1 )                  @t2 (wi li ;ci2 )
                                                       wi 1         T 0 w i li               @y i                  p2           @y i
                               dci2         ul i
                                    =            =
                               dli          uci2                             p2 1 + t2c2 wi li ; ci2

so we can write:

                                                                                                                               l i u li c i ( )
                                                                        f wi                 wi        uwi ci1 ( )                          1
                            1 1+     t1c1    w l ; ci1
                                               i i
                                                             1                                                                          wi
                                                           =                                                                                          :             (39)
                            p2 1 +   t2c2    wi li ; ci2     p2                                                                     l i uli ci ( )
                                                                       f (wi )          (wi ) p12        uwi ci2 ( )                        wi
                                                                                                                                              2




    The expression (39) includes multipliers from the planner’s problem.                                                       Next, we derive expressions for
them in terms of the model variables.                         This yields the optimal tax result (19).                                            To do so, we write the
Hamiltonian in terms of only the control and state variables. The individual’s budget constraint implicitly
de…nes c2 as a function of the variables li ; wi ; ci1 as well as taxes, which themselves depend on these three


                                                                                28
variables. Therefore we can write:
                                                           ci2 =           ci1 ; li ; wi ;

and                                                                                                         !
                                    @U i                                             li uli ci1 ; li ; wi
                                         =          uw i       ci1 ; li ; wi                                     :
                                    @wi                                                     wi

Next, we use expression (8), the individual’s utility function, from the main text:


                                                     U wi = u ci1 ; ci2 ; li ; wi


to write the following implicit expression for ci2 :


                                                      ci2 =             U i ; ci1 ; li ; wi :



   With these substitutions, write the Hamiltonian as
                                                                                                                                                               !
         i           i        i i                                                                                                       li uli ci1 ; li ; wi
   H w       = U w       +   wl      ci1       p2     U    i
                                                               ; ci1 ; li ; wi       f w   i
                                                                                                +         uw i   ci1 ; li ; wi
                                                                                                                                               wi

   Pontryagin’s Maximum Principle implies

                               0
                                    wi =            f wi                p2 f w i          Ui    U i ; ci1 ; li ; wi       :


The transversality conditions yield:

                                                                                 1
                                    = R wj =w                                                                         ;
                                              max
                                           wj =w    min
                                                           p2      Uj     U j ; cj1 ; lj ; wj    f (wj ) dwj

                                           0                            R wj =wmax                                                            1
                                                         1
                                                     (1 F (wi ))          wj =wi           Uj       U j ; cj1 ; lj ; wj f wj dwj
                wi = 1       F wi          @1                           R wj =wmax                                                            A:
                                                         1
                                                      (1 F (0))          wj =wmin          Uj    U j ; cj1 ; lj ; wj          f   (wj ) dwj

Use
                                                                                      @cj2    1
                                               Uj     U j ; cj1 ; lj ; wj =                =     ;
                                                                                      @U j   ucj
                                                                                                      2


to derive the expressions (23) and (24)from the main text.




                                                                          29
7.1.1      Expression for optimal marginal income taxes

For income taxes, we are interested in the extra tax an individual pays when he earns a dollar of income.
This will include commodity taxes. We start by combining results from the previous section to obtain:

                                            @t1 (wi li ;ci1 )             @t2 (wi li ;ci2 )
                     1   T 0 w i li              @y i                p2        @y i                        f wi +                    uw i y i ( )
                                                                                                                                                     uy i ( )
                                                                                                                                                                   l i uy i y i ( )
      dci2                                                                                                                                            wi
           =                                                                                         =                                                                                 :
      dy i                        p2 1 + t2c2 wi li ; ci2                                                     p2 f (wi )                    uwi ci2 ( )       li uyi ci2 ( )

Denote the labor wedge relative to good 2 as                                     l;c2 :    Then, using the results (23) and (24), we can write:

                                                            uy i ( )                                  R wj =wmax            1                           (1 F (wi ))    R wj =wmax               1
                     f wi       p2 u w i y i ( )             wi              l i uy i y i ( )            wj =wi            u j   f wj dwj               (1 F (w0 ))      wj =wmin              u j   f wj dwj
                                                                                                                            c2                                                                  c2
(1      l;c2 )   =                                                                                                                                                                                              :
                                                                                              R wj =wmax        1                                (1 F (wi ))    R wj =wmax        1
                         p2 f   (wi )   + uwi ci2 ( )                li u   y i ci2   ()         wj =wi        u j     f    (wj ) dwj            (1 F (w0 ))      wj =wmin       u j       f   (wj ) dwj
                                                                                                                  c2                                                                  c2



Using expressions (20), (21), and (22), this simpli…es to:

                                                                                              uy i ( )                                 C (wi )
                                                                       uw i y i ( )            wi          l i uy i y i ( ) +          B(wi )
                                      (1          l;c2 )   =                                             C(w )         i                         :                                         (40)
                                                                                           A2 (wi ) + p2 B(w i)




Note that if A2 wi > 0, as we assumed throughout the analysis, (1                                                                 l;c2 )   is smaller than if A2 wi = 0.
Applying (19) to (40) yields the parallel result for the labor wedge relative to good 1 (                                                                    l;c2 ):


                                                                                              uy i ( )                                 C (wi )
                                                                       uw i y i ( )            wi          l i uy i y i ( ) +          B(wi )
                                      (1          l;c1 )   =                                                C(wi )
                                                                                                                                                 :                                         (41)
                                                                                            A1 (wi ) +      B(wi )


Here, if A1 wi < 0, the labor wedge is greater than if there is no relationship between preferences and
ability.


7.2        Estimating time preference from NLSY data
Our measure of preferences will be the discount factor implied by using NLSY data on income and net worth
in a simple model of individual optimization . Suppose individuals live for three periods. In the …rst two
periods, roughly corresponding to ages 20 through 42 and 43 through 65, they work, consume, and borrow
or save. In the third period, they are retired and live for 23 years (for simplicity, as this makes all three
periods of similar length). The individual solves the following utility maximization problem:
                                            "                                                                                                        #
                                                    1                                 1                          1
                                                (c1 )            1     (c2 )                     1        2 (c3 )                1
                                max                                  +                               +                                   v (y1 ; y2 )
                               c1 ;c2 ;c3           1                      1                                      1

subject to
                                                           (y1       c1 ) R2 + (y2                   c2 ) R       c3 = 0:




                                                                                            30
where ct and yt are consumption and income in period t;                       is the discount factor across 23-year periods (i.e.,
                                                                       23                   23
if the one-year-ahead discount factor is , then                   =         ), R = (1:05)           is the average return to saving over
a 23-year period, and v ( ) is an unspeci…ed function for the disutility of earning income.
     We make the assumption that an individual’s total value of income prior to age 43 is identical to the
income it will earn from age 43 until retirement. In the notation of the model, we assume y1 = y2 for all
individuals. Solving the individual’s problem yields:

                                    1   2         2   2       1        1                y1 R + y2
                              ( )           (R)           + ( ) (R)          + 1                            = 0:
                                                                                           Rc1

Assuming y1 = y2 ;                                                                              !!
                                                                                        1
                                                      1               y1 1 + R          2
                                        =             1           3+4                           1       :
                                              2R                      c1 R

If   = 1, so if the utility from consumption is logarithmic, this simpli…es to:

                                                                                    1       !
                                                    1             y1 1 + R          2
                                                  =           3+4                           1
                                                    2             c1 R

As expected, the higher is income relative to consumption, the greater the estimated                               for an individual. We
drop 37 individuals whose estimated                   is negative or exceeds two in the                 = 1 speci…cation, leaving 7,008
observations.
     To estimate , we need values for y1 and c1 for each individual. For y1 , we use the NLSY’s observations on
income over time for each individual to calculate the "future value" of income earned prior to and including
2004. We do not observe income in all years for each individual. To obtain an income …gure comparable
to ending net worth for each individual, we calculate the future value of the observed incomes for each
individual. Then, we scale that future value by the maximum number of years observable over the number
of years observed for each individual. We also do not observe initial net worth. However, if we control for
net worth in 1985, just six years after the survey began, the coe¢ cient on AFQT is hardly changed.
                     2004
                     X       1
   Formally, y1 =         R 23 (2004 t) yt . Using the full time series of income rather than simply the most
                     t=1979
recent observation of income is important for two reasons. First, it gives a better measure of the individual’s
likely lifetime or permanent income. Second, to calculate c1 , we assume that any income not accumulated
as net worth by 2004 was consumed. Formally, we denote the NLSY variable "family net worth" N W and
calculate c1 = y1    NW.
     Our data do not include components of individuals’ expected future income, such as Social Security
payments or other social transfers. To the extent that these omissions bias down the estimate of net worth,
we will understate saving rates. Therefore, if these transfers are progressive, we will be overestimating the
slope of discount factors versus ability. In a similar way, expected future gifts and inheritances are not taken
into account in the data. To the extent that these are increasing in recipient income, we are underestimating
the slope of discount factors versus ability.
     Finally, a note on converting the estimates of                   into the preferences in expression (25). The following



                                                                      31
equality relates the estimated       wi of individual i between the two periods t and t + 1 to its annualized
level, ^ wi :
                                                                         1
                                                             wi          23
                                                                                = ^ wi :

Next, ^ wi    is related to the model’s representation of preferences, denoted ^ wi , by the following
expression:
                                              ^ wi = (p2 )1                                    1
                                                                                                                  ;
                                                                                            ^ (wi )
                                                                                                                                                        1
Simplifying, note that the price ratio is the inverse of the annual return to saving, so p2 =                                                           1    and:
                                                                                                                                                    R 23

                                                                                    1
                                              ^ wi =                  1                             1
                                                                       1                                  ;
                                                                  R    23                       (^ (wi ))

                                                                                1                                 !1
                                                i                 1                                   1
                                          ^ w           =          1                                                   :                                             (42)
                                                                 R 23                           ^ (wi )

We calculate R as described in the footnote to expression (30), using the estimated ^ wi . Speci…cally, we
                              P^ i i
calculate R = 1 + r = 1 ln          w      , where i is the population proportion of type i. This re‡ects
                                 i
                                                                                                                                       P^
that the net rate of return r is set equal to the average discount rate                                                    =     ln            wi   i
                                                                                                                                                            in the data.
                                                                                                                                           i


7.2.1   Utility function normalization, expressions (25) and (26)

Here, we detail the normalization of preferences in the expression (25). The goal is to scale the preferences
across goods so that they do not mechanically a¤ect labor e¤ort. For an example of such an e¤ect, consider
the case of an individual solving an intertemporal optimization problem with utility

                                          T                                (1           )
                                                                                                                                 !
                                          X                        cit                           1            1       yti
                                                    i t 1
                                 U=
                                          t
                                                                         (1                 )                         wti

and budget constraint
                                                T
                                                X1
                                                        pt yti            cit               pT ciT = 0;
                                                t

with multiplier . Substituting the individual’s …rst order conditions into the budget constraint yields the
following value for   :
                                 0                                     1                                               1    1(    1)
                                                                                                                                 1+
                                     TP1
                                                        pt                                            pT
                              B            pt            t   1              + pT                          T   1             C
                              B       t          ( i)                                           ( i)                        C
                             =B                 TP1
                                                                                                                            C          :
                              @                                                                   1                         A
                                                         pt wti                 1
                                                                                        (pt )         1

                                                    t




                                                                           32
This expression for      implies:

                                                                                0                                                                1   1
                                                                                        P
                                                                                        T                     1
                                                                                                                               i t 1
                                                                                                                                                                1+


                                                                                B t         (pt )                                                    C
                                                                        1
                              yti = wti               1
                                                          (pt )             1   B                                                                    C                :
                                                                                @ TP1                                                                A
                                                                                                    (pt )          1
                                                                                                                               wti           1

                                                                                            t


In this case, the chosen income level yti depends on preferences.
   We wish to avoid that dependence, so we specify preferences in a way that will cause each individual’s
labor e¤ort to be independent of time preferences. Consider a normalized version of the previous utility
function:                        00                                             1                                                                                               1
                           T
                           X     BB                       i T       t
                                                                                C                                     (1             )
                                                                                                                                                                                C
                                 BB                  w                          C (pt )1                          cit                          1           1         yti        C:
                      U=         @@ P                                           A                                                                                               A
                                    T
                                                                    s 1                                             (1                   )                           wti
                           t=1                  ( (wi ))
                                         s=1

This is a generalization of (25) to T rather than 2 time periods. Substituting the individual’s …rst order
conditions into the budget constraint yields the following value for :

                                         0                                          TP1                                                          1(         1)
                                                                                                                                                           1+
                                                                                                        i T        t
                                         B                          1+                              w                                            C
                                        =B
                                         @ TP1
                                                                                        t                                                        C
                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                        P
                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                     s 1
                                                              wti           1
                                                                                    (pt )       1
                                                                                                              ( (wi ))
                                                 t                                                      s=1


This expression for      implies:

                                                                                                        0                  TP1                                  1          1+
                                                                                                                                                      T     t
                                                                                1
                                                                                                        B1 +                                 wi                 C
                                           wti                1
                                                                  (pt )             1
                                                                                                        B                      t                                C
                      yti =                                                                             @ PT                                                    A               :
                                 TP1                                                        1+                                                       s 1
                                          wti             1
                                                              (pt )             1                                              ( (wi ))
                                    t                                                                             s=1


To simplify, note that
                                             T
                                             X                                                            T
                                                                                                          X1
                                                                                s 1                                                      T       t
                                                                    wi                      =1+                                 wi
                                             s=1                                                           t=1

so that the expression for yti simpli…es to:

                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                     wti            1
                                                                                                        (pt )              1

                                                yti   =                                                                                          :
                                                                    TP1                                                              1+

                                                                                    wti         1
                                                                                                    (pt )              1

                                                                     t


With this normalization, the choice of e¤ort does not depend on preferences.
   Note that if    = 1, the normalized utility function becomes
                                                          0                                                                                           1
                                             T
                                             X B                                    i T     t
                                                                                                                                                      C
                                               B                            w                                                  1         yti          C:
                                        U=     @P                                                        ln cit                                       A
                                                 T
                                                                                            s 1                                          wti
                                               t=1                      ( (wi ))
                                                                  s=1


                                                                                            33
These normalized utility functions are used in the main paper.


7.3     Dynamic Model, result (36)
The planner’s problem is stated in the main text. The …rst-order conditions are:


                                                               u0 (x) = R ;

                                                 1
                                                        u0 ch1                     h
                                                                                       +       =        h
                                                                                                            ;
                                     1+           (wh )

                                         wh
                                               u0 ch2                              h
                                                                                       +       =        h
                                                                                                            ;
                                     1 + (wh )
                                                                                                        !
                                     1               0                          1 + wl
                                                 u       cl1       l
                                                                                                            =       l
                                                                                                                        ;
                               1+        (wl )                                  1 + (wh )
                                                                                                                !
                               wl                                               wh 1 + wl
                                     u0 cl2                    l
                                                                                                                    =       l
                                                                                                                                :
                           1 + (wl )                                           (wl ) 1 + (wh )

   Together, they yield
                                                                                                                            !
                                 h                             l                              h                     l
                                              +                                 =                       +                           ;
                            1+    (wh )           1+           (wl )                       u0 ch1           u0 cl1

                                                                               !                                                !
                              wh          h         wl                     l
                                                                                                    h                   l
                                              +                                        =                    +                           ;
                          1 + (wh )             1 + (wl )                                    u0 ch2             u0 cl2

and thus the Inverse Euler Equation:
                                                                                                            !
                                         1    X                                   1      1
                                                                       i
                                     R 0    =                                         + 0 i                     :
                                      u (x)
                                                           i=l;h
                                                                               u0 ci1  u c2

These …rst order equations also imply no distortion on the consumption choices in period 2 of the high type
but a distortion to the choices of the low type, just as in the simple two-type model in the main text.


References
 [1] Albanesi, Stefania and Christopher Sleet (2006). "Dynamic Optimal Taxation with Private Information,"
      Review of Economic Studies 73, pp. 1-30.

 [2] Ales, Laurence, and Pricila Maziero (2009). "Accounting for Private Information," Working Paper.

 [3] Atkinson, Anthony and Joseph Stiglitz (1976). "The Design of Tax Structure: Direct vs. Indirect Tax-
      ation," Journal of Public Economics.

 [4] Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro (2006). “Who is ‘Behavioral’? Cognitive
      ability and anomalous preferences.” Harvard University mimeo, May.

                                                                           34
 [5] Banks, James and Peter Diamond (2008). "The Base for Direct Taxation," Mirrlees Review, Institute
    for Fiscal Studies.

 [6] Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston (2008). "Consumption Inequality and Partial In-
    surance," American Economic Review 98(5).

 [7] Cagetti, Marco (2003). "Wealth Accumulation over the Life Cycle and Precautionary Saving," Journal
    of Business and Economic Statistics, 21(3).

 [8] Chetty, Raj (2010). "Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro and
    Macro Evidence on Labor Supply," NBER Working Paper 15616 version December 2009. Newer version
    available from author’s website.

 [9] Corlett, W.J. an D.C. Hague (1953). "Complementarity and the Excess Burden of Taxation," Review
    of Economic Studies (21), pp. 21-30.

[10] Diamond, Peter. Discussion of "New Dynamic Public Finance: A User’s Guide," in the NBER Macroan-
    nual 2006, pp. 365-379.

[11] Diamond, Peter and Johannes Spinnewijn (2009) "Capital Income Taxes with Heterogeneous Discount
    Rates," MIT working paper, May 19.

[12] Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes (2004). "Do the Rich Save More?," Journal
    of Political Economy.

[13] Dynan, Karen E. (1993)."The Rate of Time Preference and Shocks to Wealth: Evidence from Panel
    Data." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Economic Activity Section WP 134.

[14] Golosov, Mikhail, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2003). "Optimal Indirect and Capital
    Taxation," Review of Economic Studies, 70(3).

[15] Golosov, Mikhail and Aleh Tsyvinski (2006). "Designing Optimal Disability Insurance: A Case For
    Asset Testing," Journal of Political Economy.

[16] Golosov, Mikhail, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Ivan Werning (2006). "New Dynamic Public Finance: A User’s
    Guide," NBER Macroannual 2006, MIT Press.

[17] Golosov, Mikhail, Maxim Troshkin, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2010a). "Optimal Taxation: Merging Micro
    and Macro Approaches," forthcoming Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.

[18] Golosov, Mikhail, Maxim Troshkin, and Aleh Tsyvinski (2010b). "Optimal Dynamic Taxes," Working
    Paper.

[19] Gordon, Roger H., and Wojciech Kopczuk (2010). "The Choice of the Personal Income Tax Base,"
    Working paper.




                                                    35
[20] Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonthan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes (1998). "Precautionary Saving and Social
    Insurance," Journal of Political Economy, 103.

[21] Kleven, Henrik, Claus Kreiner and Emmanuel Saez (2009). "The Optimal Income Taxation of Couples",
    Econometrica 77(2), 2009, 537-560.

[22] Kaplow, Louis (2008). The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics.

[23] Kocherlakota, Narayana (2009). The New Dynamic Public Finance. Princeton University Press.

[24] Kocherlakota, Narayana and Luigi Pistaferri (2009). "Asset Pricing Implications of Pareto Optimality
    with Private Information," Journal of Political Economy 117(3).

[25] Kocherlakota, Narayana and Luigi Pistaferri (2007). "Household Heterogeneity and Real Exchange
    Rates," Economic Journal 117.

[26] Judd, Kenneth and Che-Lin Su (2006). "Optimal Income Taxation with Multidimensional Taxpayer
    Types," Working Paper, earliest available draft April, 2006; more recent draft November 22, 2006.

[27] Meghir, C and Luigi Pistaferri (forthcoming). "Earnings, consumption, and life cycle choices," Handbook
    of Labor Economics, vol. 4.

[28] Mirrlees, James (1971). "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation," Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies.

[29] Mirrlees, James (1976). "Optimal Tax Theory: A Synthesis," Journal of Public Economics.

[30] Mirrlees, James (1986). "The Theory of Optimal Taxation," Handbook of Mathematical Economics, eds.
    K.J. Arrow and M.D. Intrilligator: Elsevier.

[31] OECD (2008). "Table II.4: Overall statutory tax rates on dividend income," downloads from the OECD
    Tax Database: www.oecd.org/ctp/taxdatabase.

[32] Salanie, Bernard (2003). The Theory of Taxation.

[33] Saez, Emmanuel (2001). "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates" Review of Economic
    Studies, 68, , 205-229.

[34] Saez, Emmanuel (2002). "The desirability of commodity taxation under non-linear income taxation and
    heterogeneous tastes," Journal of Public Economics.

[35] Tarkiainen, Ritva and Matti Tuomala (2007). "On optimal income taxation with heterogeneous work
    preferences", International Journal of Economic Theory, 3(1).

[36] Tuomala, Matti (1991). Optimal Income Tax and Redistribution.

[37] Weinzierl, Matthew (forthcoming). "The Surprising Power of Age-Dependent Taxes," Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies.


                                                     36
