NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DETERMINANTS OF FOOD AID PROVISIONS TO AFRICA AND THE DEVELOPING
WORLD
Nathan Nunn
Nancy Qian
Working Paper 16610
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16610

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

We gratefully acknowledge funding from the NBER Africa Project. We thank Eva Ng, Sayon Deb
and Katherine Wilson for valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Nathan Nunn and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Determinants of Food Aid Provisions to Africa and the Developing World
Nathan Nunn and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 16610
December 2010
JEL No. F13,F19,O11,O19
ABSTRACT
We examine the supply-side and demand-side determinants of global bilateral food aid shipments
between 1971 and 2008. First, we find that domestic food production in developing countries is negatively
correlated with subsequent food aid receipts, suggesting that food aid receipt is partly driven by local
food shortages. Interestingly, food aid from some of the largest donors is the least responsive to production
shocks in recipient countries. Second, we show that U.S. food aid is partly driven by domestic production
surpluses, whereas former colonial ties are an important determinant for European countries. Third,
amongst recipients, former colonial ties are especially important for African countries. Finally, aid
flows to countries with former colonial ties are less responsive to recipient production, especially for
African countries.

Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, Ma 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
Nancy Qian
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
nancy.qian@yale.edu

I. Introduction
Food aid has been one of the most important policies for economic development
since World War II. During its peak in 1965, food aid accounted for 22% of all aid
given to developing countries. It is meant to alleviate hunger by feeding the local

population. Through monetization, it is also meant to help fund projects that the
recipient governments deem helpful for general economic development. The
effectiveness of food aid has been the subject of intense debate in recent years. In
the academic realm, existing studies that empirically estimate the impacts of food

aid have found mixed results. Some have found that food aid alleviates hunger

(Levinsohn and McMillan, 2007; Quisumbing, 2003; Yamano, Alderman and
Christiaensen, 2005), and by doing so can be an effective policy for reducing conflict

(e.g., Bardhan, 1997). Critics have observed that food aid is not always targeted or

delivered to the most needy. Some have even argued that it could have the

unintended and perverse effect of making the populations in recipient countries
worse off. For example, there are many accounts of how food aid can increase

conflict (Knack, 2001). A companion study to this paper confirms this fear and finds

a positive relationship between food aid on the incidence of conflict (Nunn and Qian,
2011).

This paper addresses the important issue of food aid by focusing on the

determinants (rather than the consequences) of food aid and the different patterns
of food aid across donors and recipients. We are particularly interested in the

2

differences for African countries as they are arguably the most reliant on food aid
today.

The analysis begins by first providing a statistical overview of food aid

shipments to Africa and the rest of the developing world. Then we examine a

number of specific determinants of annual bilateral shipments of cereal aid between
1971 and 2008.

We find that an important determinant of food aid is the recipient country’s

domestic production of food in the previous years. Less food production in period t

is correlated with increased food aid received in the next two years. This

relationship is much stronger for African recipients than for non-African recipients.

In other words, food aid given to Africa appears much more responsive to recipient
need than food aid given to the rest of the developing world.

For each donor country, we then estimate the responsiveness of its food aid

shipments to adverse production shocks in receiving countries. We find strong
evidence that food aid from many of the largest cereal producing countries, which

are also some of the largest donors – e.g., Canada, USA, India and China – is the least

responsive to variation in recipient cereal production.

We then turn to factors in the donor countries that affect food aid shipments.

We focus on two donor country factors: domestic cereal production and former
colonial ties. We show that U.S. production of cereals – wheat in particular – is an
important determinant of food aid flows. If the U.S. experiences a positive

production shock, the amount of food aid given increases in the subsequent two
3

years. Interestingly, the correlation between donor domestic production and aid
flows seems unique to the United States.

For Old World donors, we examine another potential determinant of food

aid: former colonial ties. We find that only African countries are more likely to
receive more food aid from former colonial masters, where as all countries are more
likely to receive food aid from countries that were colonized by the same colonizer.

This is interesting because it suggests that foreign countries, especially former

colonial masters, are a more important source of food aid for the economies of

African countries. The greater importance of the colonizer-colony relationship for
food aid flows to Africa may be explained by the fact that African countries more
recently gained independence relative to countries in Latin America and Asia.

Our last results examine the interaction between colonial history and the

responsiveness of donors to recipient need, as measured by recipient cereal
production. We find that for all countries when the recipient and donor have the

same former colonizer, food aid shipments are less responsive to recipient need. For
African countries this is also true when the donor is the former colonizer. This
suggests that although colonial ties increase the total amount of aid flows between
two countries, the increased flows appear to be much less responsive to need. These

flows are not necessarily going to the locations that need it most. This is interesting
and suggests that food aid from former colonial masters are intended for general
development or other objectives rather than for the alleviation of acute hunger.

4

The paper is organized as follows. In the following section, to help motivate

our investigation of the determinants of food aid, we review the existing evidence on

the consequences of food aid. Section III provides a statistical overview of food aid
flows to all developing countries. In Section IV, we focus on the determinants of food

aid to Africa and the rest of the world. Finally, we offer concluding remarks in
Section V.

II. Consequences of Food Aid in Africa and the Rest of the World
Before presenting our analysis on the determinants of food aid shipments to

developing countries, we first provide a brief overview of the potential benefits and
costs to the receiving countries. A more detailed description is provided in Nunn
and Qian (2011).

The most prominent problems associated with food aid can be divided into

three categories. The first problem is one that faces all foreign aid. Food aid can be a

significant source of revenues for some recipient countries. It is also entirely
fungible and can be monetized and spent at the discretion of the recipient
government. This increase in resources could increase political competition, which
can often lead to increased conflicts within the recipient countries.

Second, a closely related problem is that governments of poor countries often

have little political incentive to deliver these additional resources appropriately, i.e.
to the most needy. For example, in his study of food aid in Rwanda during the early

1990s, Peter Uvin (1998) finds that aid was misused by the government and
allocated to a few elites, generating discontent and conflict. He writes: “The
5

development enterprise directly and actively contributes to inequality and
humiliation. The material advantages accorded to a small group of people… living in

Rwanda contribute to greater economic inequality and the devaluation of life of the
majority” (Uvin, 1998, p. 142). This is just one of many examples that one comes
across in the accounts of aid workers. Another example is in Zimbabwe, where the
government would only provide food aid to known political supporters (Thurow

and Kilman, 2009). Or, in Somalia, were food aid was often not at all used to alleviate
the hunger of any population. During the early 1990s, many observed food aid being
traded for arms or stolen and then sold for money, which was pocketed by the
government (Perlez, 1992). Or, in Rwanda during the early 1990s, where

government stealing of food aid was so problematic that aid was canceled on several
occasions (Uvin, 1998, p. 90).

Finally, a commonly cited problem is that food aid increases the amount of

cheap foods in recipient countries, and thus decreases the price of agricultural

production and the income of farmers in those countries (Pedersen, 1996; Kirwan

and McMillan, 2007). This not only decreases agricultural incomes but also
increases income inequality between urban and rural workers.

In a companion paper, Nunn and Qian (2011), we examine the effect of food

aid on the incidence of conflict, a potential negative impact of food aid that has been
hypothesized in the literature but never formally tested. Identifying such a causal

mechanism is fraught with difficulties. To overcome these, we focus specifically on
wheat aid from the United States, which constitutes the vast majority of aid given by
6

the largest donor of aid in the world (see below). We instrument for U.S. wheat aid
to donor countries using weather induced wheat production shocks. Our estimates

show that food aid causes increased civil war incidence in receiving countries.

Although we find large effects for internal conflicts, we find no effects on inter-state

conflict. We find that the effects on receiving countries within Africa are not
statistically different from other parts of the world. However, the regional estimates
are very imprecise.

In summary, studies on the consequences of food aid thus far provide enough

evidence on the negative effects of food aid to warrant great concern over its

effectiveness. To understand why food aid does not have the impact it is meant to,
we must first understand the determinants of food aid, which is the focus of this
study.

III. A Statistical Overview of Food Aid to Africa and the Rest of the Developing
World
This section provides a descriptive overview of the pattern of global food aid

shipments. It is important to keep a few facts in mind for the following discussion.

First, over 90% of food aid is cereals. Therefore, food aid will be synonymous with

cereals aid in this paper. Second, when food aid is reported, the value of food aid
typically includes shipping costs, which can constitute more than half of the total

value of aid (Barrett and Maxwell, 2005). Since data on the itemized value of food

aid are not available and shipping companies are typically from the rich countries,
we will report food aid in terms of volume of food rather than dollar value. This also
7

sidesteps some difficulties in interpretation since it is not clear how exactly food aid
is valued. Moreover, grain markets are thought to be segmented, and the price that
the donor government values the food (or even the world grain price) may not
reflect the value to the recipients of food aid.

We begin by examining the aggregate trend in food aid shipments to Africa

and to the rest of the world. The total volume of food aid shipped each year

(measured in tonnes) between 1971 and 2008 is reported in Figures 1 and 2 for

African and for non-African countries, respectively. The data are from the Food and
Agricultural Organization’s (FAO) FAOSTAT Database. Cereals include wheat, rice,

barley, maize, rye, oats, millets, sorghum, buckwheat, quinoa and other grains

including mixed grains. Donor and recipient countries may ship and receive

different types of cereals. Therefore, for the purposes of comparison, we often use
this broad category of cereals rather than specific types of cereals. Where possible,
we also consider specific cereals, such as wheat.

There are interesting differences in the aggregate patterns between African

and non-African recipients. For Africa as a whole, food aid has increased steadily
from 1971 to the mid-1980s, while for the rest of the developing world, after a sharp

fall in the early 1970s, it remained remarkably stable during this time. In the late
1980s food aid to Africa fell noticeably, while it remained much more stable for the

rest of the developing world. Even today, the amount of food aid shipped to African

countries remains well below the levels that existed during the Cold War.

Importantly, this decline in food aid does not correspond to a similar decline in
8

poverty within Africa during the period, which suggests that other factors are
responsible for the significant decline in food aid.

Figure 1. Total cereal aid shipped each year to African countries.

9

Figure 2. Total cereal aid shipped each year to non-African countries.

Figures 3 and 4 report the origins of food aid shipments to African and non-

African recipients. From the figures, it is clear that the vast majority of food aid is

from the United States. Canada, Australia, and Japan are also significant suppliers of
aid to both African and non-African countries.

10

Figure 3. Total cereal aid shipped to African countries, between 1971-2008, by
donor.

11

Figure 4. Total cereal aid shipped to non-African countries, between 19712008, by donor.

Next, we turn to an overview of the recipient countries within Africa. The

total amount of food aid received during our sample period by each African country

is shown in Figures 5 and 6. Figure 5 shows the countries with the largest food aid
receipts and Figure 6 shows the countries with the smallest food aid receipts. Note
the difference in scales for the two figures.

12

Figure 5. The largest African recipients of total cereal aid 1971-2008.

13

Figure 6. The smallest African recipients of total cereal aid 1971-2008.

From the figures, it is clear that Egypt has been by far the largest recipient of

food aid. It is followed by Ethiopia, Sudan, Morocco and Mozambique. The identity of
recipient countries within Africa makes clear the fact that aid is often (or typically)

not given to the most needy. Egypt, the largest beneficiary of food aid, has per
capita income that is well above the average for the rest of Africa.

14

IV. Determinants of Food Aid in Africa and the Rest of the World
We now turn to an examination of the determinants of food aid, focusing

both on the supply-side (donor-specific factors) as well as on the demand-side

(recipient-specific factors). We also consider historical bilateral determinants of
food aid.

Our empirical analysis examines variation in cereal food aid shipments from

donor countries to recipient countries every year between 1971 and 2008. Let d

denote donor countries, r recipient countries and t years. Further, let ln yd,r,t denote

the natural log of the total amount of cereal aid (measured by weight) shipped from

donor country d to receiving country r in year t. Our estimating equations take the
following form:

ln yd,r,t = αd + αr + αt + β1 Xd,r + β2 Xr,t-1 + β3 Xd,t-1 + εd,r,t

(1)

Our specification includes donor fixed effects αd, recipient fixed effects αr and time

period fixed effects αt. The equation includes the following determinants of food aid
shipments: lagged recipient production of cereals denoted Xr,t-1, lagged donor

production of cereals Xd,t-1, and historical connections between donor and recipient

countries Xd,r. In practice, when examining donor and recipient production, we will
consider various lag structures.

Since the dependent variable in (1) is the natural log of food aid shipments,

countries with zero aid flows in a particular period are omitted from the sample.

Therefore, our coefficients capture the correlation between the independent
15

variables of interest and the amount of food aid shipped, conditional on food aid

being shipped. In other words, our estimates capture the intensive margin only, and
not the extensive margin. Our estimates do not provide any evidence on the
determinants of whether donors ship any food aid to recipient countries in a
particular year.

Recipient country cereal production
The first determinant we examine is food production in recipient countries.

Since the stated purpose of most food aid is for humanitarian relief, we expect that
food aid shipments will be greater to countries after they have a production
shortage in their country. A priori, the expected delay between domestic production

and food aid receipts is not clear. For example, if food aid can respond immediately,

then we would expect a contemporaneous relationship between domestic
production and food aid. If instead food aid responds more slowly, then we would

expect production to affect food aid receipts with a one or two year lag.

16

Table 1. Responsiveness of food aid to recipient production.

We test for a contemporaneous effect and one-year and two-year lagged

effects of domestic production on food. Domestic production is measured as the
natural log of domestic production, measured in metric tons (MT). The data are
from FAOSTAT.

Estimates are reported in table 1. The results in column 1 show that when

countries have lower production in a period, then food aid receipts increase that
period and in the following period. There is also evidence of a response two years

later, but this effect is not statistically significant. These results provide evidence
that food aid does respond to recipient country production shocks. Looking at
African and non-African recipients separately (columns 2 and 3), we find some

differences. Food aid appears to respond much more strongly to the adverse
17

production shocks of African countries relative to non-African countries. One

explanation for this is that negative production shocks are much more likely to

result in loss of life in Africa, where a larger proportion of the population is at or
near subsistence consumption. Therefore, the international community is much
more responsive to these shocks.

The responsiveness of food aid to domestic production provides evidence

that a portion of food aid is indeed driven by humanitarian motives. Because both
production and food aid are measured in logs, the estimates provide the elasticity of

food aid with respect to recipient production. The 0.22, 0.16 and 0.09 elasticities for

African countries in the three years following a shock are large. They suggest that

for African countries, food aid does provide some insurance against negative
production shocks.

We examine how this responsiveness varies by donor country. Motivated by

the finding in table 1 that contemporaneous and one-year lags of recipient

production are important, we examine the responsiveness of food aid in period t to
recipient production in periods t and t-1. We allow the estimated impact to differ by

donor country. The estimation results are reported in table 2. Each row of the table

reports the coefficient and standard error of the relationship between recipient

cereal production and food aid shipments from a donor country. The reported
country coefficients are ordered from the largest estimated impact to the smallest.
The results are reported separately for all recipients, African recipients and nonAfrican recipients.

18

A clear pattern emerges. First, the coefficients are negative for all countries,

which suggest that in general, aid is more likely to go to countries soon after they

experience adverse production shocks. Second, the results show that the food aid

provided by large cereal producing countries like Canada, China and the United
States respond most weakly to domestic production. A number of explanations are

consistent with this pattern, but it is consistent with the finding in Nunn and Qian

(2011) that food aid shipments – at least for the U.S. – are driven not only by need in

receiving countries, but also by donor country supply considerations. We consider

this possibility explicitly later in this study.

Table 2. Responsiveness of food aid to recipient production, by donor.

19

Comparing the results for African and non-African aid recipients, several interesting

patterns emerge. The overall ranking of the responsiveness of donor countries is

broadly similar. For example, Libya is always among the most responsive and the
USA, Canada, India and China are always among the least responsive. However,

there are some stark differences. For example, while aid from New Zealand and
Austria is very responsive to African-recipient production shocks (coeff = -0.38 and -

0.36), they are very unresponsive to non-African-recipient production shocks (coeff
= -0.02 and -0.11).

Donor-specific determinants of food aid
One reason that may explain why for some countries aid is less responsive to

the needs of recipient country production is that aid may also be driven by

objectives of the donor country that are unrelated to recipient production. We
investigate two such possible objectives.
Donor cereal production

First, we explore the role that production shocks in donor countries may

play. Many of the rich donor countries implement policies that protect domestic

agricultural prices. One way of doing this is to purchase “excess” domestic food
production and give or sell it in far away markets where it will not affect the prices

of domestic producers. Barrett and Maxwell (2005) discuss such policies in his book
on food aid policy. Many of the largest food producers practice such policies.

20

The United States has perhaps been the most persistent practitioner of such

policies under PL 480, which was established under the Eisenhower administration
in 1954. President Kennedy renamed it the Food for Peace Program in 1962. It is

comprised of three aid categories: Titles I, II and III. Title I, which historically has

been the most important component of food aid, is administered by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) and provides low interest loans to developing

and transition countries for the purchases of U.S. agricultural commodities. Title II
aid is gifts of food from the U.S. government for meeting emergency and non-

emergency food needs. In recent years, emergency food needs have received much

more resources than non-emergency food needs. The aid is often administered by

NGOs. Title III provides government-to-government grants to support long-term

growth in developing countries and makes up a very small part of PL480 food aid
(Kodras, 1993).

We now examine whether domestic production shocks in the donor country

are correlated with subsequent food aid shipments. We continue to examine the
year of the production shock and the two years that follow: t, t+1, t+2. If domestic

production shocks affect food aid shipments, then this suggests that alternative
factors – besides purely humanitarian considerations – also come into play when

deciding food aid shipments.

We begin by examining whether food aid shipments from the United States

are affected by U.S. production shocks. This is motivated by the findings from Nunn

and Qian (2011). Table 3 reports these estimates in columns 1-3. The unit of
21

observation is a recipient country in a year. The estimates show that there is strong
evidence of a positive cereal production shock increasing the supply of cereal aid

two years later if the recipient country is African.

Table 3. U.S. production and U.S. food aid.

Columns 4-6 of the Table 3 report estimates looking specifically at wheat,

which comprises the vast majority of U.S. food aid (Nunn and Qian, 2011). With

wheat a similar relationship is found. A positive wheat production shock increases
the amount of wheat aid given to African countries two years later. For wheat we

also find an almost identical effect for non-African countries. For both, the elasticity
is about 1.3. This suggests a very strong relationship between U.S. production and

food aid shipments. (Note that the estimates shown here illustrate that U.S. food aid
is driven by U.S. production, the argument from Nunn and Qian (2011). However,

the estimates from the two studies are not directly comparable because Nunn and
22

Qian (2011) estimates a different specification; they exploit both time variation in
U.S. production and cross-sectional variation in the likelihood of receiving any U.S.
food aid and having many more controls) so that they can control for country and
year fixed effects.

Table 4 reports the same estimates but for all other donor countries. The

findings show that for non-U.S. donors, there is no relationship between domestic
cereal production and cereal aid shipments. This is true whether or not the recipient
country is African.

Table 4. Production and food aid (non-U.S. donors)

23

Taken together, the results of tables 3 and 4 provide evidence that the United

States is the only donor that systematically determines its food aid amounts based
on its own domestic production.
Donor-recipient colonial ties

We also investigate the role of former colonial ties. Colonial history can

continue to matter through contemporary channels if it affects the relationship

between two countries today. To test for this, we include in our estimating equation
two indicator variables. The first equals one if the donor country is a former colonial

“master” of the recipient country. An example is Britain and Ghana. The second
equals one if the donor country and the recipient country are former colonial
“brothers” – i.e., both are former colonies of a European country. An example would
be the United States and Nigeria, which were both colonies of Britain.

Estimation results are reported in table 5. As shown in column 1, colonial

heritage matters. Food aid shipments are greater if either the donor was a former

colonizer of the recipient or if the two countries shared a similar colonizer.

Interestingly, the latter effect is statistically larger in magnitude than the former
effect.

We find stark differences between former colonies within and outside of

Africa. The estimates in columns 2 and 3 show that both sets of countries are more

likely to receive aid from a donor that was a colonial brother (relative a country

with no colonial ties). However, only African countries receive more aid from their
former colonial masters. This is interesting because it suggests that former colonial
24

ties are much more important in African economies. This likely reflects the fact that
African colonies more recently gained independence relative other former colonies.

Table 5. The importance of Colonial ties.

It is possible that colonial ties not only affect the level of food aid shipped

from donor to recipient country, but also the responsiveness of aid to recipient

needs. This would occur, for example, if colonial ties facilitated greater concern by

the donor country for the recipient country or if ties resulted in better
infrastructure that increase the flow of information regarding a production fall

and/or the physical transportation of food aid in response to that fall. We test for
such effects by returning to our examination of the responsiveness of food aid
25

shipments to recipient production, but allowing for the relationship between donor
shipments and recipient production shocks to differ depending on the colonial
history of the pair.

The results are reported in Table 6. To simplify the exposition of the

interpretation of the results, we examine the average of the natural log of
production in periods t-1 and t instead of production in periods t-2, t-1 and t. (The

conclusions from the estimates are qualitatively identical if one considers
production in the three periods separately.) We then interact domestic production

with the two colonial indicator variables to allow differential responsiveness by
colonial history. We also include both indicator variables directly in the estimating
equation.

The results show that for all recipient countries, aid is less responsive to local

production shocks when it comes from colonial brothers. For African countries food

aid shipments are less to recipient shocks from both former colonial masters and

brothers. These results suggest that although former colonial ties result in more aid
being given, that aid is not targeted to relieve the pressures from production shocks.

26

Table 6. Colonial ties and food aid responsiveness.

IV. Conclusions
The determinants and consequences of foreign aid have come under

significant amounts of scrutiny and criticism in recent years. For example, the first

three articles in the CATO Journal in 2009 were about the fallibility of aid. Food aid is

central to foreign aid, as it is obviously meant for humanitarian purposes and has

historically been the most important component of foreign aid. Its humanitarian

intent is explicit. For example, U.S. president John F. Kenney named the U.S. food aid
program is officially named Food For Peace. In this descriptive paper, we provide

evidence consistent with the observations of concerned policy makers: food aid is

partly determined by humanitarian purposes and partly determined by objectives
27

that are unrelated to the needs of the recipient countries, such as colonial ties and
other policy objectives of the donor countries.

In addition, we show three striking new facts. First, food aid flows from the

largest donors of food aid, such as the United States, are the least responsive to the
production of recipients. Second, former colonial ties are an important determinant

for food aid receipt, but this increased aid is less responsive to donor need. It does
not appear successful at reaching those that need it most when they need it. In

addition, the importance of colonial ties appears to be different for African and non-

African countries, reflecting perhaps the differences in time since independence of
the two groups. All countries are more likely to get aid from their former colonial
brothers. But only African countries are also more likely to get food aid from former

colonial masters. Finally, aid due to former colonial ties is less responsive to food
production falls in recipient countries than other aid, especially for African
countries.

These findings strongly support the recent concerns of policy makers and

observers that food aid is not being allocated to fulfill its primary purpose, which is
to alleviate hunger. They also open up several questions. For example, what roles do

former colonial links play in development through contemporary channels? And
perhaps more importantly, what are the barriers to more effective targeting of aid?

Is it a lack of intent (or the presence of other objectives) for donor countries – i.e., is

it political? Or are there other barriers such as the transmission of information,

28

transport or effective delivery within the recipient countries? These are all
important avenues for future research.

29

References
Bardhan, Pranab, “Method in the madness? A political-economy analysis of the

ethnic conflicts in less developed countries,” World Development, September
1997, 25, 1381–1398.

Barrett, Christopher B. and Daniel G. Maxwell, Food Aid After Fifty Years:
Recasting Its Role, London: Routledge, 2005.

Kirwan, Barret and Margeret McMillan, “Food Aid and Poverty,” American Journal
of Agricultural Economics, 2007, 89 (5), 1152–1160.

Knack, Stephen, “Aid Dependence and the Quality of Governance: Cross-Country
Empirical Tests,” Southern Economic Journal, October 2001, 68, 310–329.

Kodras, Janet, “Shifting Global Strategies of U.S. Foreign Food Aid, 1955–1990,”
Political Geography, 1993, 12 (3), 232–246.

Levihnson, James and Margaret McMillan, “Does Food Aid Harm the Poor?

Household Evidence from Ethiopia,” in A. Harrison, ed., Globalization and
Poverty, University of Chicago Press, 2007, chapter 13, pp. 561–598.

Nunn, Nathan and Nancy Qian, "Aiding Conflict: The Unintended Consequences of
U.S. Food Aid on Civil War," Working Paper, 2011.

Pedersen, Karl, “Aid, Investment and Incentives,” Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 1996, 98 (3), 423–437.

30

Perlez, Jane, “Somalia Aid Workers Split on Troops,” New York Times, November
1992, p. A14.

Quisumbing, Agnes R., “Food Aid and Child Nutrition in Rural Ethiopia,” FCND
Discussion Papers 158, International Food Policy Research Institute, 2003.

Thurow, Roger and Scott Kilman, Enough: Why the World’s Poorest Starve in an
Age of Plenty, New York: Public Affairs, 2009.

Uvin, Peter, Aiding Violence: The Development Enterprise in Rwanda, Kumarian
Press. West Hartford, CT, 1998.

Yamanop, Takashi, Harold Alderman and Luc Christiaensen, “Child Growth,

Shocks, and Food Aid in Rural Ethiopia,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 2005, 87, 273–288.

31

