NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPIDERS AND SNAKES:
OFFSHORING AND AGGLOMERATION IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY
Richard Baldwin
Anthony Venables
Working Paper 16611
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16611
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

This paper is a revised and retitled version of Baldwin and Venables (2010). Thanks to two anonymous
referees, Bob Staiger and participants in seminars at Oxford and Princeton, conferences in Boston
(NBER Summer Institute), Villars (CEPR), Rome (European Research Workshop in International
Trade), Osaka (Asia Pacific Trade Seminar), Jonkoping (European Regional Science Association)
and Denver (ASSA). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Richard Baldwin and Anthony Venables. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Spiders and snakes: offshoring and agglomeration in the global economy
Richard Baldwin and Anthony Venables
NBER Working Paper No. 16611
December 2010, Revised December 2012
JEL No. F13,F29
ABSTRACT
Global production sharing is determined by international cost differences and frictions related to the
costs of unbundling stages spatially. The interaction between these forces depends on engineering
details of the production process with two extremes being ‘snakes’ and ‘spiders’. Snakes are processes
whose sequencing is dictated by engineering; spiders involve the assembly of parts in no particular
order. This paper studies spatial unbundling as frictions fall, showing that outcomes are very different
for snakes and spiders, even if they share some features. Both snakes and spiders have in common
a property that lower frictions produce discontinuous location changes and ‘overshooting’. Parts may
move against their comparative costs because of proximity benefits, and further reductions in frictions
lead these parts to be ‘reshored’. Predictions for trade volumes and the number of fragmented stages
are quite different in the two cases. For spiders, a part crosses borders at most twice; the value of trade
increases monotonically as frictions fall, except when the assembler relocates and the direction of
parts trade is reversed. For snakes the volume of trade and number of endogenously determined stages is
bounded only by the fragmentation of the underlying engineering process, and lower frictions monotonically
increase trade volumes.
Richard Baldwin
Cigale 2
1010 Lausanne
SWITZERLAND
and CEPR
and also NBER
rbaldwin@cepr.org
Anthony Venables
Department of Economics
University of Oxford
Manor Road Building
Manor Road
Oxford OX1 3UQ, United Kingdom
and CEPR
tony.venables@economics.ox.ac.uk

1. Introduction
An ever finer division of labour has long been associated with economic progress. One step
forward came as the steam revolution made it economical to produce goods far from consumers.
Yet even as this first spatial unbundling (production unbundled from consumers) dispersed
production globally, manufacturing clustered locally in factories and industrial districts to reduce
coordination costs. A second step was triggered by the information and communications
technology (ICT) revolution that massively lowered the cost of organising complex activities
over distances. Advances in telecommunications and computing transformed information
management and this in turn transformed the organisation of group-work across space. Stages of
production that previously were performed in close proximity – within walking distance to
facilitate face-to-face coordination of innumerable small glitches – can now be dispersed without
an enormous drop in efficiency or timeliness. More recently, this second unbundling has spread
from factories to offices, resulting in both the outsourcing and offshoring of service-sector jobs.
Numerous examples serve to illustrate the pervasiveness of unbundling. The “Swedish” Volvo
S40 has an air-conditioner made in France, the headrest and seat warmer made in Norway, the
fuel and brake lines in England, the hood latch cable in Germany, and so on. Some parts are even
made in Sweden (airbag and seat beats).1 In auto-production unbundling is sometimes
‘modularised’, with parts coming together for assembly into a module which is then shipped
whole to final assembly plants (Frigant and Lung 2002). For example, US car seats are typically
assembled domestically in a plant within one hour of the final auto assembly plant. While there
are virtually no US imports of complete car seats, imports of seat parts (mainly from China)
amount to $5 billion annually (Klier and Rubinstein 2009).
The first large-scale unbundling of manufacturing processes started in the mid-1980s and took
place over short distances; the Maquiladora programme created ‘twin plants’ along the USMexico border. Although the programme started in 1965, it only boomed in the 1980s with
employment growing at 20% annually from 1982 to 1989 (Dallas Fed 2002, Feenstra and
Hanson 1996). Another production unbundling started in East Asia at about the same time and
for the same reasons. In Europe, the unbundling was stimulated first by the EU accession of
Spain and Portugal in 1986, and then by the emergence of Central and Eastern European nations
from the early 1990s. While offshoring from high-wage economies continues, the reverse
process – so-called ‘reshoring’ – is also observed (Wu and Zhang 2011, Shirkin et al 2011). The
phenomenon is too new to have generated much research but examples abound. General Electric
has moved some of its appliance manufacturing from China to Kentucky, and NCR is shifting its
production of ATM machines from China, India, and Hungary back to a facility located in
Georgia (Collins 2010, Davidson 2010).
Unbundling has been centre stage in much recent international trade research. There have been
important empirical studies charting the rise of trade in parts and components (Ng and Yeats
1999, Hummels, Ishii and Yi 2001, Ando and Kimura 2005, Kimura, Takahashi and Hayakawa
2007). However, formal measurement has been problematic since trade data does not make clear
what goods are input to other goods, and analyses based on input-output tables are at too high a
level of aggregation to capture the level of detail suggested by industry examples (Johnson and
1

Headquarters and some assembly are in Sweden, although the company is now owned by the Zhejiang
Geely Holding Group.

1

Noguera 2012). Analytical work has taken a variety of approaches. Much of the focus has been
on taking simple characterisations of the technology of unbundling and drawing out the general
equilibrium implications for trade and wages (Yi 2003, Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2008,
Markusen and Venables 2007, Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud 2010). Others have linked it to
multinational activity (Helpman 1984, Fujita and Thisse 2006) and have placed it in the wider
context of the organisation of firms (Helpman 2006).
This paper focuses on quite different aspects. We take seriously the fact that technology – the
engineering of the production process – dictates the way in which different stages of production
are linked, and study the implications of this for unbundling.2 Possibilities are illustrated in
Figure 1. Each cell is a stage at which value is added to a product that ends up as final
consumption good; each arrow is a physical movement of a part, component, or the good itself.
These may be movements within a country (possibly within a plant), or may be unbundled
movements between plants in different countries.

Figure 1: Spiders and snakes

Part
Part

Part
Component
assembly

Part

VA

Final
assembly

Part
Part

VA

VA

VA

There are two quite different configurations. One we refer to as the spider: multiple limbs (parts)
coming together to form a body (assembly), which may be the final product itself or a
component (such as a module in the auto-industry). The other is the snake: the good moving in a
sequential manner from upstream to downstream with value added at each stage.3 Most
production processes are complex mixtures of the two. Cotton to yarn to fabric to shirts is a
snake like process, but adding the buttons is a spider. Silicon to chips to computers is snake like,
but much of value added in producing a computer is spider-like final assembly of parts from
different sources.

2

Some management literature discusses this interaction, e.g. Sako (2005).
Dixit and Grossman (1982) analyse multi-stage production, but the order in which stages are performed
is immaterial. Levine (2010) and Costinot et al (2011) study the implications of a snake in which mistakes
can occur at each stage.

3

2

In production processes like those illustrated in the diagram the location of any one element
depends on the location of others. We focus on ‘unbundling costs’ that occur when an arrow on
the figure crosses an international boundary. They are likely to comprise the costs of
coordination and management as well as direct shipping costs.4 These unbundling costs create
centripetal forces binding related stages together. Firms seek to be close to other firms with
which they transact, this depending on the technology of the product; it is different for snakes
(each stage linked to an upstream and a downstream stage) than for spiders (each part linked only
to assembly, but assembly linked to many parts). But there are also centrifugal forces that
encourage dispersed production of different stages. For example, different stages have different
factor intensities which create international cost differences and incentives to disperse. There is a
tension between comparative costs creating the incentive to unbundle, and co-location or
agglomeration forces binding stages of production together.
The paper analyses the interaction of these forces and shows how they determine the location of
different parts of a value chain. We look at the efficient location of these stages when decisions
are taken by a single cost-minimising agent, and also at outcomes when stages are controlled by
independent decision takers. In the cost-minimising case the extent of offshoring and the volume
of trade are discontinuous and non-monotonic functions of unbundling costs. If unbundling costs
fall through time there are periods in which offshoring proceeds slowly, punctuated by periods of
rapid change when a key production stage (such as assembly) relocates, taking many parts
producers with it. Interactions between comparative advantage and co-location forces produce a
systematic tendency for offshoring to ‘overshoot’ compared to predictions based purely on
comparative production costs. An inevitable consequence of overshooting is ‘reshoring’; as ICT
advances continue to weaken co-location forces, some offshored parts production moves back to
its low-cost location. If the location of each stage of production is determined by independent
decision takers then coordination failures mean that outcomes may not minimise costs. There
may be multiple equilibria and locational hysteresis.
Our results highlight the fact that offshoring is unlikely to be a continuous process. As key stages
relocate so other stages also move, perhaps against their comparative production costs; major
parts of an industrial sector relocate in a discontinuous manner. These issues have arisen in
earlier work on inter-industry linkages (e.g. Venables 1996, Fujita et al 1999) but in a stylised
Dixit-Stiglitz structure of symmetric firms producing differentiated products. The present paper
moves significantly beyond this work, with detailed focus on the heterogeneity between different
stages of the chain and the interplay between these stages.
The remainder of the paper develops models of the spider and the snake in a two-nation setting
(nations N and S), looking first at the spider. The economic setting is kept as simple as possible
yet, despite this simplicity, interactions among stage-specific comparative advantage and stagespecific unbundling costs produce a surprisingly rich gallery of offshoring processes. The
questions we address are: which stages are produced in N, which are produced in S, and how
does this balance change during a process of globalisation? While the spider and snake give rise
to different outcomes, there are a number of general implications that we draw out in concluding
comments.

4

And costs associated with length and variability of time in transit, Harrigan and Venables (2006).

3

2. The spider
Throughout this section (spider) and the next (snake), the setting is a world of two countries, N
and S, and we assume that all demand for the final product is in N.5 Production of the single final
good requires a range of parts (intermediate inputs) that can be produced in N or S, and we
assume production costs differ between countries part by part. Dispersing parts production across
countries is costly, so a tension arises between unbundling production to reduce factor costs, and
bundling it to reduce coordination and shipping costs.
The spider is a production process where separate parts are assembled into the final good.6 Parts
are indexed by y  Y. Unit production costs of all parts are unity if they are produced in N and
b(y) if produced in S, where b  b( y)  b and b 1  b . This means that S has comparative
advantage in parts with b < 1, and N has it in those with b > 1. Although it never enters the
formal analysis, it is convenient to refer to S as labour-abundant, N as capital-abundant, parts
with b(y) < 1 as labour-intensive, and those with b(y) >1 as capital-intensive.
When production of a part and assembly take place in different nations production costs are
augmented by a per-unit cost tθ(y) that reflects shipping costs and a wider set of communication
and coordination costs. This ‘unbundling cost’ is composed of a part-specific component, θ(y) 
[0,  ], and the general level of international friction, t  0. Each part is therefore a point {b(y),
θ(y)} in Figure 2 which has factor cost on the vertical axis and unbundling cost on the horizontal
axis; the set of parts, Y, is defined by [0,  ] x [ b , b ].
A unit of the final good is produced by assembling  ( y ) units of each part y  Y. The per-unit
factor cost of assembly is aN or aS (in N or S, respectively). As all consumption is in N, goods
assembled in S incur a per-unit shipping cost, t times α; here α parameterises final good shipping
cost and any other trade barriers. We look first at the cost minimising location of parts and
assembly, i.e. we ignore any potential coordination issues that might arise when parts-makers
and the assembler are different firms.
2.1. Cost minimisation
Due to unbundling costs, the locations of assembly and parts production are jointly determined;
we first characterise the least-cost location of each part given the location of assembly and then
determine assembly’s least-cost location.
For any level of international friction, t, the set Y partitions into three regions: set S, containing
parts in which S’s cost advantage is so strong (b so low) that the efficient location is S regardless
of assembly’s location; set N, where N’s cost advantage dominates in an analogous manner; and
a set of parts, NS, that are cheaper to keep bundled with assembly. The sets S, N and NS are
defined by two ‘unbundling thresholds’. If assembly is in N then the cost of sourcing part y from
N is unity and the cost of sourcing it from S is b(y) + tθ(y). The line bN 1  t therefore defines
the threshold (see Figure 2). Parts below this line are cheaper to source from S, even though

5
6

The simplification unclutters analysis; we could allow final demand in both, but larger in N than S.
We call this assembly of the final good although it could be assembly of a component sold in N.

4

assembly is in N; parts above the line are sourced from N. Likewise bS 1  t defines the
unbundling threshold when assembly is in S. Parts above bS (set N) are most efficiently sourced
from N, and those below are sourced most cheaply from S.

Figure 2. Parts production costs and unbundling costs
b
bS = 1 + tθ
b

N

1

N: set of parts produced in N when
assembly is in N or in S.
S: set of parts produced in S when
assembly is in N or in S.
NS: set of parts produced in N if assembly
is in N, in S if assembly is in S.

NS

S
b

bN = 1 - tθ
0





The threshold definitions and Figure 2 give the location of parts production, conditional on the
location of assembly and t. Notice that co-location with assembly is less important relative to
productions costs when t is small, i.e. lowering the general level of international friction, t,
makes N and S larger but NS smaller. Summarising:
Proposition 1: Location of parts, given assembly’s location.
i) If t = 0, parts y with b  b(y) > 1 are produced in N; those with b  b(y) < 1 are
produced in S.
ii) If t > 0, there is a set of parts, NS, that co-locate with assembly.
iii) As t → ∞ all parts co-locate with assembly (N and S disappear).
iv) As t falls some parts relocate away from assembly in line with comparative production
costs (NS shrinks); at t = 0, NS disappears.
v) Parts cross borders at most twice (once directly and once embodied in the final good).
Given proposition 1, the cost-minimising location of assembly is found by comparing total costs
5

when assembly is in N with costs when it is in S, with parts location determined by the sets N, S
and NS. Denoting total costs when assembly is in N or S by CN , CS, we have:

CN  aN  

 ( y)dy  

yN NS

yS

b( y)  t ( y) ( y)dy,

CS  aS  t   

1  t ( y) ( y)dy  ySNS b( y) ( y)dy.
yN

(1)

The first term on the right hand side of each equation is unit assembly cost plus, if assembly is in
S, the cost tα of getting the assembled product to consumers. The second and third terms are the
cost of producing parts in N and S respectively with the limits of integration reflecting costminimising parts location. Assembly occurs in N unless CN - CS > 0, where:

C N CS  aN  aS  t 




 t    ( y) ( y)dy    ( y) ( y)dy     1  b( y)  ( y)dy 
 yNS
yN
 yS



(2)

The forces determining assembly’s location are grouped into the three bracketed terms. The first
is S’s trade-cost-adjusted comparative advantage in assembly. The second is the difference in
parts’ unbundling costs; these costs are paid on S parts when assembly is in N, but on N parts
when it is in S. The third term reflects the difference in production costs for parts in NS which
are produced in either N or S, depending on the location of assembly.
An increase in any term tends to favour assembly in S, so the sign and magnitude of the terms
and the way they change with t are the focus of our analysis. The first term’s size and sign has
two determinants: S’s comparative advantage in assembly (aN - aS), and the final-good shipping
costs t. If aN - aS < 0, the term is always negative and thus always favours assembly in N; if aN aS > 0, then it is negative for high t and positive for low t. The second term is the product of t and
integrals depending on the sizes of sets S and N, the shares of parts in assembly,  ( y ) , and the
unbundling cost intensity of the parts, θ(y). The term tends to be positive when comparative
advantage in parts is skewed towards S, i.e. set S is large relative to set N in which case
assembly in N incurs high unbundling costs. 7 Falling t affects the size of both S and N
(Proposition 1.iii) and also reduces the magnitude of the second term directly, with it
disappearing at t = 0. The third term’s sign is also ambiguous. Shifting production of parts in NS
from N to S lowers the factor-costs of parts in the range [bN,1] but raises factor costs for parts in
[1, bS]. The term is positive if the former outweighs the latter. Regardless of its sign, the third
term is zero at t = 0 since NS shrinks to zero (Proposition 1.iv).
Proposition 1 and equation (2) combine to give two propositions characterising the location of
assembly and parts production. The first covers the case in which comparative advantage in
assembly resides in S, and the second the case in which it is in N.

In terms of Figure 2 comparative advantage in parts is skewed towards S when [ b , b ] is low compared
to 1 (as shown) but skewed towards N if the range is high compared to 1.

7

6

Proposition 2: S has comparative advantage in assembly.
If aN - aS > 0 then:
i)
Assembly takes place in N at very high values of t, and in S at low values of t.
ii)
There is at least one switch point at which assembly moves from N to S.
If the switch point is unique (at t’) then reducing t brings:
iii)
a. For t > t’, an increase in S, the set of parts produced in S and exported to N.
b. At t = t’, assembly and production of parts in set NS moves from N to S.
c. For t < t’, reduction in NS implying a ‘reshoring’ process in which parts which
have ‘overshot’ move back from S to N.
iv)
Associated with changing location of production, reducing t brings:
a. For t > t’, an increase in the volume of trade in parts.
b. At t = t’ trade in the final product commences; the composition of parts trade
changes and its volume may increase or decrease.
c. For t < t’, reshoring increases the volume of trade in parts.
v)
The share of value added produced in S is maximised at t = t’, once assembly and
parts in set NS are in S.
Proof of part (i) comes from inspection of equation (2). As t → ∞, CN - CS becomes negative
since the first term in (2) limits to negative infinity, the second term disappears as S and N
shrink to null sets (Proposition 1), and the third term remains finite. Thus, regardless of the third
term’s sign, assembly and production of all parts takes place in N, co-locating with final demand.
At the other extreme, when t = 0, the second and third terms disappear, i.e. CN - CS = aN - aS, so
S’s comparative advantage in assembly dominates; parts with b > 1 are in N and the rest are in S.
Proof of part iii.b follows from this, as CN - CS is negative at high t and positive at low t.
Propositions iii.a and iii.c follow from the fact that N and S expand as NS shrinks with falling t
(Proposition 1iii). Parts iv and v follow similarly.
Proposition 3: N has comparative advantage in assembly.
If aN - aS < 0 then:
i)
Assembly takes place in N at very high and very low values of t.
ii)
There may be pairs of switch points where assembly and parts in NS switch from N
to S and then back from S to N. Each switch is associated with overshooting.
iii)
If there are no switch points then reductions in t increase the share of production in S
and the volume of trade.
If there is a single pair of switch points (t’, t’’) then
vi)
a. The share of value added produced in S is maximised at the upper switch point,
once assembly and parts in set NS are in S.
b. Reducing t increases the volume of trade except at a switch point at which
assembly and parts in NS switch from S to N.
Proof of part (i) comes from inspection of equation (2), noting the two points we showed above:
CN - CS turns negative as t approaches infinity (so assembly is in N for high t), and CN - CS equals
aN - aS < 0 at t = 0. The possibility of a pair of switch points can be shown by considering an
7

extreme example where comparative advantage in parts is so heavily skewed towards S that it
can be cheaper to move assembly to S (thus saving unbundling costs on importing parts from S)
despite the extra factor and trade costs of undertaking assembly in the ‘wrong’ region. For
example in the extreme case that S has comparative advantage in all parts (i.e. b = 1 > b ), (2)’s
second term is positive for all intermediate values of t since N is always empty. The third term is
also positive for intermediate t since shifting parts production from N to S always lowers direct
production costs. This means that, if aN - aS and  are small enough, CN - CS could be positive for
intermediate values of t as the strictly positive second and third term outweigh the negative first
term. Parts (iii) and (iv) follow directly from the location of production.
Equal unbundling costs
In order to explore and illustrate overshooting and reshoring more fully, we now add structure
that permits analytical solutions. The simplifications we assume are that all parts have the same
unbundling costs, i.e. θ(y) = 1 for all y, and that parts are uniformly distributed on [b, b ] with
equal shares in assembly, i.e. (y) = 1 for all y. This collapses the two-dimensions of Y into one.
Since the production process imposes no ordering on parts, we index them in order of S’s
comparative advantage, taking each part’s b as the index. The unbundling thresholds are points
(scalars rather than lines as in Figure 2) and the sets N, NS, and S are intervals N = [bS , b ] , NS
= [bN , bS ], and S = [b, b N ] .
With equal-unbundling cost, equation (2) becomes:8

 b b 
CN  CS  aN  aS  t   t (bN  b)  (b  bS )  1  S N  (bS  bN )
2 


(3)

where unbundling thresholds, bS and bN, characterise the cost-minimising location of parts given
the assembler’s location. It is easy to show that bS = 1 + t and bN = 1 - t, providing t is small
enough for the unbundling points bS and bN to lie within [ b , b ],9 while more generally bS =
min[1+t, b ] and bN = max[1-t, b ], allowing for corner solutions. We illustrate how intervals N, S,
and NS vary with the friction, t, on Figure 3 that has b on the vertical axis and t on the
horizontal; the left and right panels are drawn, respectively, for the cases where S and N have
comparative advantage in assembly.
The unbundling thresholds define three ranges of t (Figure 3). In range-I, both thresholds vary
continuously with t (bS = 1 + t and bN = 1- t). In range-III, both thresholds are invariant to t (bS =
b and bN = b ). In the intermediate range-II, one threshold is at its corner solution while the other

8

Integrals in (1) become

CN  aN  bbN db  bbN (b  t )db  aN  (b  bN )  (bN  b)t  (bN  b) / 2
C S  a S  t  bbS (1  t )db  bbS bdb  a S  t  (1  t )(b  bS )  (bS2  b 2 ) / 2
9

First order conditions are CN/bN = bN + t – 1 = 0, CS/bS = bS – t – 1 = 0 for cost-minimising division
of parts provided that bS, bN  [b, b ] .

8

varies with t.
To study how parts and assembly are offshored as frictions fall, we start with the case where S
has comparative advantage in assembly. From Proposition 2, assembly and all parts-production
is in N for sufficiently high t, but assembly and some parts are in S when t = 0. Parts’ location is
determined by the usual N, S, and NS analysis; assembly switches location at the value of t at
which CN – CS = 0. The expression for this is given in equation (3), and varies by range since the
expressions for bS and bN vary by range. When parameters are such that the switching point falls
in range-I (see Appendix 1), the switching point is:

t'

aN  aS
  2

(4)

where β ≡ 1 - ( b + b )/2 measures S’s cost advantage in parts, and is positive if the average cost
of producing parts in S, ( b + b )/2, is less than it is in N (unity). Figure 3 and the following
discussion assume β > 0, implying that bS takes its corner solution at a lower value of t than does
bN.10 Expression (4) tells us that assembly’s switching point reflects the balance between S’s
comparative advantage in parts and assembly, on the one hand, and the final-good shipping costs
on the other. When S is very competitive in assembly (aN - aS is large) and in parts production (
is large), the switch occurs at a higher level of t for any given final-good shipping cost . Higher
 corresponds to a lower assembly switching point for given aN - aS and .
Figure 3: Cost minimising locations of parts and assembly.
b

b

bS = min [1+ t, b]

b

N

1

NS

aN – aS > 0

 1

b

N

1

NS

aN – aS < 0

 1
S

S

b

b

bN = max [1– t, b]
t’
I

1 b

b 1
II

bN = max [1– t,b ]

t

t”

t"

III

I

S has comparative advantage in assembly

10

bS = min [1+ t,b ]

1 b

b 1
II

t

t'
III

N has comparative advantage in assembly

Analysis of the other case is analogous.

9

When the switch comes in range-I, the bold lines in the left panel of Figure 3 map out the
associated cost-minimising location of parts. At high t, assembly is in N and all parts are bundled
with assembly regardless of comparative production costs, i.e. NS = [b, b] . As t drops below the
maximum cost differential, 1- b , parts with the lowest b are offshored to S and exported to N for
assembly. At the switch point t’, assembly moves from N to S and parts in NS are moved to S en
bloc to keep them bundled with assembly. Now N exports parts to S, and S exports final goods to
N. Some of the parts in NS have higher production costs b > 1 (have ‘overshot’) and a reshoring
process begins as t falls further. At t = 0, the allocation of production matches comparative
advantage perfectly since assembly is in S along with all parts with b < 1.
The volume of trade in parts rises as t falls for any interval that does not include a switching
point; whether assembly is in N or in S lower t enables location of parts to be determined by
comparative cost advantage. But as assembly switches to S then trade volumes change
discontinuously. Trade in final goods increases (from zero), but instead of parts in sets S being
shipped to N, parts in N are shipped to S. The trade volume implications of this depend upon the
relative size of N and S. Total trade is maximized at t = 0 where the size of N is maximised and
final output is traded from S to N.
A more extreme form of offshoring and reshoring occurs when assembly’s switching point falls
in range-III, at point t’’.11 The evolution of parts and assembly offshoring is illustrated by the
small circles in Figure 3 (left panel). The whole industry – all parts and assembly – is in N at
very high levels of friction, but once t falls below t’’, the whole industry is offshored to S.
Reshoring of parts commences as t falls below b -1. The switching point is:

t "  (aN  aS  (b  b) ) / 

(5)

(appendix 1) so, as before, the switch comes at higher t’s when S’s cost advantages in parts and
assembly are large and final-good shipping costs are low. Now, however, it also depends on the
dispersion of S’s costs of parts production, namely b - b .
The case in which N has comparative advantage in assembly (aN - aS < 0) is described in
Proposition 3 and illustrated in the right panel of Figure 3. Assembly takes place in N both at
high and at low values of t. The double switching outcome is illustrated by the bold line on the
right panel of Figure 3 with switches in range-III and range-I. There are three phases: when t is
high, assembly stays close to the market because of costs of offshoring the final product; at
intermediate t it is cost minimising to locate assembly in S in order to best use low-cost parts
producers in S; at low t all elements – parts and assembly – locate according to their comparative
production costs.
Sufficient conditions for this double switching to occur can be seen from equation (3). There is a
switch point in range-III if CN – CS = 0 at some t  1  b . Setting t  1  b in (3), the condition is





that CN  CS  aN  aS  1  b   b  b   0 . While the first term is negative, this inequality
will hold if S’s cost advantage in parts is large enough (β large), and/or the dispersion of costs of
parts produced in S, i.e. b - b , is large. It is then efficient for assembly to be in S at this
11

Between these cases, switching occurs in range-II. See appendix 1 for parameters delineating for which
the switch occurs in range-III.

10

intermediate level of t, in order to best access a large range of low cost parts produced in S.
Appendix 1 analyses CN - CS across the three ranges in more detail.
Production costs, offshoring costs, and shipping costs
The analysis associated with Figure 3 assumes that parts differ in their production costs, b, but all
face the same unbundling costs, θ(y) = 1. However, it is possible that parts’ unbundling costs
vary systematically with their labour intensity, and in the working paper version we work
through a case that allows for this, assuming unbundling costs are higher for more labourintensive goods. There are two results. First, conditional on the location of assembly, a smaller
range of parts is produced in S. Second, assembly takes place in S for a wider range of values of
t. Thus, a consequence of it being more expensive to unbundle labour-intensive parts is that more
offshoring may take place. The intuition is that it is more expensive to access S’s cost advantage
through unbundling parts, and consequently more efficient to move assembly to S. Once again,
overshooting and reshoring occur.
Hereto we have considered only general reductions in friction that make unbundling – both
shipping and international coordination costs – less costly. It is straightforward to consider a
shock – say a sustained rise in oil prices – that raises the cost of shipping final goods (as
measured by) relative to the costs of coordinating different stages of production in N and S
(linked to ICT, for example). To take a concrete example, the formula for the breakpoint t’ in (4)
shows how t’ would vary if  rose but coordination costs t did not. By inspection of (4), the
breakpoint shifts to the left. If such a transportation cost shock (i.e. d > 0) were sufficiently
large, the system would be pushed back to the right of the break point for any given t. In this
case, assembly would move back to N along with a bulk of parts (the set NS). This can be
thought of as corresponding to what Rubin and Tal (2008) refer to as the ‘reversal of offshoring’.
2.2. Independent decision taking
The analysis hereto has looked at outcomes that are efficient, in the sense that the cost of
producing the complete good is minimised. A single decision taking agent could achieve this
outcome, but we now look at outcomes when decisions are taken independently by the assembler
and by producers of each part. To do this we revert to the general model as described in Figure 2,
and show that a cost-raising coordination failure is possible. This points to the incentive to
coordinate decision taking in order to achieve the cost minimising outcomes of the previous subsection.
Strategy sets and equilibrium concepts
Firms face two choices: location and price. We look at a simultaneous move Nash equilibrium in
location and start with the assumption that all parts are supplied to the assembler at cost
(behaviour rationalised by a contestability assumption).
With these assumptions, each parts producer takes the location of the assembler and all other
parts producers as given, and locates where the unit cost of supplying the assembler is lowest.
This gives location of parts exactly as described by sets N, NS and S (Figure 2). The assembler
chooses to locate in N or S to minimise overall costs but now, in contrast to the analysis of
section 2.1, takes as given the location of parts producers. Suppose first we start from a situation
where assembly is in N along with parts in sets N and NS while parts in set S are produced in S.
11

If the assembler switches from N to S with the location parts producers unchanged, the change in
costs is


C ( N  S )  a N  aS  t   t    ( y ) ( y ) dy    ( y ) ( y ) dy 
 yN  NS

yS

(6)

where we denote this by ΔC(N→S) to distinguish it from the section 2.1 analysis. The key
difference between this and (2) is that products in set NS are assumed not to move, implying that
(2)’s third bracketed term (which captured the factor cost change of shifting NS production to S)
is absent. Remaining terms give the change in factor and shipping costs for assembly (first
bracketed term) and in unbundling costs for parts remote from assembly (second bracketed
term). Conversely, starting from a long-run situation where assembly and parts in sets S and NS
are produced in S, a deviation by an assembler brings cost change, ΔC(S→N):



C ( S  N )  a N  a S  t   t    ( y) ( y)dy    ( y) ( y)dy 
 yN

yS  NS

(7)

Assembly in N is an equilibrium if relocation to S raises costs for assemblers, i.e. ΔC(N→S) > 0,
and assembly in S is an equilibrium if ΔC(S→N) > 0. Proposition 4 follows:
Proposition 4: Nash equilibrium location.
i) Given the location of assembly, the location of parts is efficient.
ii) For some parameter values there are two equilibria, one with assembly in N and the other
with assembly in S.
iii) Coordination failure means that location of assembly may be inefficient. In particular, if
assembly is initially in N and t is falling, then relocation to S occurs at a lower value of t
than is efficient.
Part follows from the construction of set N, NS and S. The proof of parts (ii) and (iii) comes by
using equation (2) in (6) and (7) to give

C( N  S )  CN  CS  

 t ( y)  1  b( y) ( y)dy  0 ,

(8)

 t ( y)  1  b( y) ( y)dy  0 .

(9)

yNS

C(S  N )  CN  CS  

yNS

The right hand side of each of these equations is non-negative by construction of the set NS, in
which 1  t ( y )  b( y )  1  t ( y ) ; the inequalities therefore hold strictly providing NS is not
empty. At the cost minimising switch points (section 2.2) CN  CS  0 , so (8) and (9) imply that
ΔC(N→S) > 0, and ΔC(S→N) > 0 at such points. Assembly in N and assembly in S are therefore
both equilibria in the neighbourhood of these points. Furthermore, assembly in N remains an
equilibrium for t in some interval below the point at which cost minimising assembly is in S. The
intuitive reason is that the location of production of parts in set NS is now taken as given instead
12

of being directly controlled by (and moving with) the assembler, and this makes the current
location attractive to the assembler.
Appendix 2 derives expressions for these Nash equilibrium switch-points in the example of
uniform unbundling costs. It also analyses a case in which the price at which parts are traded
may deviate from unit costs. This maintains the assumption that parts supply in N is contestable
(for example, access to technology and consequent entry by firms is easy in N). However, if a
part is produced in S then it is done so by a single firm. Such firms face competition from
potential supplies in N, but no threat of local competition. The difference between the cost of
production in S and the alternative of import from N is then a surplus that is divided between the
parts producer and assembler. This has the effect of making the assembler’s move to S less
attractive since, in this less competitive environment, it has to share part of the surplus with the
parts producer. It thereby further delays a move by the assembler from N to S, amplifying the
inefficiency derived above.
In summary, the Nash outcome means that – if decisions are taken independently – there may be
coordination failure and consequent inefficiency. Of course, this creates an incentive to
overcome the coordination failure, either by vertical integration or by measures such as the
assembler offering inducements for parts producers to relocate. An example is the development
of ‘supplier parks’ adjacent to assembly.12 While study of the Nash outcome demonstrates the
benefit of such measures, to the extent that they are successful, the cost-minimising case
describes likely outcomes.

3. The snake
We now turn to a supply chain of the ‘snake’ type. Here the product moves through a vertical
production process with value being added as a sequence of operations are performed. The
operations form a continuum indexed z [0,1] where z = 0 is the most upstream and z = 1 is the
most downstream, the output of which is the final good. Every operation combines primary
factors with the output of the previous stage, and does so with fixed coefficients. The costs of the
primary inputs required for each operation are different in N and S due to comparative advantage
differences. As before, we normalise N’s factor cost to unity for all z; in S they are c  c( z )  c ,
so operations with c(z) < 1 have lower factor costs in S. In addition to production costs,
‘separation costs’ are incurred each time the semi-finished good crosses the border. We express
this separation cost as τ(z)t where t is the general level of frictions, and τ(z) captures how
separation costs may vary along the snake.
The snake is differentiated from the spider in two crucial ways. The first is the vertical flow of
production that dictates the order in which operations are performed. Analysis of spider-type
products was simplified by reordering parts according South’s comparative advantage. For snake
processes, this is not possible; engineering dictates the order in which operations are
performed.13 The second difference follows from this, and relates to separation costs. With spider
12

See Sako (2005) for a description of how greenfield auto-assembly plants (such as VW’s Resende
plant and Ford’s Bahia plant) have been accompanied by construction of supplier parks in which capital
costs are met by the assembler.
13
This is contrast to Dixit and Grossman (1982) who allow parts to be added in any order.

13

processes, a separation (or unbundling) cost is incurred if a part’s production occurs in different
nation than assembly. With snake processes, the separation cost is incurred each time the semifinished good crosses the border. As we shall see, ‘stages of production’ arise naturally for the
snake even though they did not for the spider.
Cost minimisation
Figure 4 illustrates an example of production and unbundling costs along the snake. The
horizontal axis is the ordering of operations that have to be performed, z, and the horizontal line
is the unit cost (value added) of each operation if undertaken in N. Wiggly lines c(z) and τ(z)t are
unit costs in S and separation costs respectively. As illustrated, operations in the ranges marked
A, B, C are ‘labour intensive’ with lower cost in S. Should they be undertaken in S, given that
other segments are undertaken in N?
Figure 4: Costs along the snake

c(z)

D

1

A

C

B

τ(z)t

0

z1

z2

z2

z3

1

z

If the interval A is produced in S the factor-cost saving is given by the area A but an unbundling
cost of  (z1)t is incurred as the next (downstream) operation is in N. Interval B has low
production costs if undertaken in S but, if operations on either side of B remain in N, unbundling
costs at both ends of the interval, namely  ( z 2 )   ( z2 )t , are incurred as inputs are imported and

output exported. Notice, also that, if  ( z1 )   ( z 2 )t  D it may be efficient to move the whole
range A + D + B to S, even if it is not efficient to move A and B separately. Finally, range C, the
downstream end, will tend to get produced in N since all final consumption is in N. It will be
produced in S only if production-cost savings are sufficient to cover separation costs at both ends
of the range, τ( z 3 )t and τ(1)t. It can only be cost minimising to produce this range in S if z 3 is a
discrete distance below unity, so that the costs of separation are offset by cost saving across a
relatively wide range of stages.
14

Equal separation costs
We start by concentrating on the implications of variation in production costs, c(z), assuming that
the separation cost is ‘t’ wherever it occurs in the production process (i.e. τ(z)=1 for all z). The
analysis is facilitated by two concepts: fragments, and stages.
Definition: A fragment is an interval of the production process in which: either c(z) ≥ 1 for all z
in the interval and c(z) < 1 at adjacent points: or c(z) < 1 for all z in the interval and c(z) ≥ 1 at
adjacent points.
Definition: A stage is an interval of the production process performed in one nation; a ‘pure’
stage is a fragment; a ‘mixed’ stage involves fragments with c(z) ≥ 1 and c(z) < 1. A ‘separation’
occurs at each end of a stage.
Fragments are determined by technology and comparative costs, while stages are endogenous
location outcomes and may be the union of adjacent fragments. To simplify exposition we also
initially suppose that factor costs in S are either 1+ (for capital-intensive operations) or 1- (for
labour-intensive operations). We can then derive the following statement about the relationships
between stages and fragments.
Proposition 5: fragments and stages.
i) When t is zero, all fragments are stages.
ii) If t > 0, each fragment is contained in a single stage.
iii) Fragments that are below some minimum separation size, m  2t /  , will be contained in
the same stage as an adjacent fragment.
Part i) is obvious since in a frictionless world, factor costs are the only consideration and costs
are minimised by putting all capital-intensive fragments in N and all labour-intensive fragments
in S. Part ii) holds since if costs are reduced by offshoring any parts of a fragment, greater
savings are achieved by offshoring all parts in the fragment. Part iii) is true since a fragment that
is too small to be worth offshoring on its own will, by default, be bundled with either the
preceding or subsequent fragment; these, by definition of a fragment, will have different factor
intensity. The definition of m comes from direct calculation; the cost-saving from shipping a
labour-intensive fragment from N to S and back (or a capital-intensive sector from S to N and
back) is the length of the fragment times , so the shortest fragment for which factor-cost savings
cover the separation cost is m = 2t (recall production always starts and ends in N).
Proposition 5 ii and iii simplify the cost-minimising problem. Solutions will only involve
separation at the boundaries of fragments, and fragments with measure exceeding m will be in
the least factor-cost location. For example, consider the snake-process example depicted in
Figure 5, assuming that t is such that only the fragments f1, f2 and f3 are below the minimum size,
m . Fragments 0-a and b-c are capital-intensive fragments larger than m , so are most cheaply
performed in N. Since f1 is too small to make offshoring worthwhile, the entire interval 0 to c
forms a mixed stage and is undertaken in N. Interval c-d is labour-intensive and big enough to
make offshoring worthwhile, so we know that the first separation occurs at ‘c’. The interval e-f is
also large enough to merit offshoring on its own so the process will be in S at point e, with f2
bundled into a mixed stage in S. Likewise, segments f-g and h-1 are big enough to merit
15

placement in N and will form a mixed stage with f3, covering the interval f to 1. In this way,
three endogenous stages emerge, A undertaken in N, B undertaken in S, and C undertaken in N.
Figure 5: A snake production process

$
1+

f2

1
f3

f1

1-

z

0

a b
A

c

d e
B

f

gh
C

1

This illustrates how solving the cost-minimizing problem is done, and we show below how it can
be generalized. The illustration also makes clear a couple of generic features of such solutions.
First, the number and size of stages are endogenous variables that are influenced by a mixture of
engineering details and separation costs. Second, when t is sufficiently high, some stages will be
mixed (at the extreme of prohibitive t, all fragments will be mixed in single stage located in N),
and the degree of mixing falls with t. When separation costs fall, m falls and some fragments that
were previously part of mixed stages will be separated and placed in their lowest factor-cost
location. As a result:
Proposition 6: overshooting, trade and polarisation.
Falling t will be associated with:
i) An increase in the number of stages (i.e. unbundling or fragmentation);
ii) A decrease in the average size of production stages;
iii) An increase in trade volumes.
iv) Factor-intensity polarisation across stages;
v) Factor-intensity polarisation across nations;
Proof of part i) follows from the fact that m is decreasing in t, so smaller fragments are able to
cover separation costs and become stages. Part ii) is a direct implication of more stages and the
fixed range. The increase in trade, part iii), follows directly from the fact that the partially
assembled good will cross the border more times as the number of stages rises. Part iv) stems
16

from the fact that the newly created stages will always involve moving labour-intensive
fragments to S or capital-intensive stages to N, and part v) is the country dimension of the
reallocation of production in Part iv). Note that 6 i) may involve a capital-intensive fragment
moving from S to N,14 in which case we can say that overshooting has taken place and the
repatriation of the fragment could be considered ‘reshoring’. It follows that the share of value
added in S is not monotonically increasing as t falls.
Generalizations: c(z) and τ(z)
While convenient, the assumption that factor cost differences between N and S are restricted to
values c(z) = 1+ θ, c(z) = 1- θ, is not necessary. Suppose that fragment i occupies interval [zi,
zi+ζi], and now define m(i) as
m(i)  abs




z i  i

zi

c( z)  1dz ,

(10)



so m(i) is the difference in factor cost of producing fragment i in S rather than in N. It is now the
case that fragments with m(i) < m = 2t will be bundled with an adjacent fragment, exactly as in
the example above. The difference is simply that m can no longer be interpreted as a ‘length’ of
the snake (i.e., a measure of operations z), but instead captures the difference in costs of
producing the entire fragment in one country rather than the other. Proposition 6 continues to
apply.
The analysis above assumed that separation costs are the same at all points along the snake. This
captures the primary effect of reductions in t, which is to enable fragments to move in line with
comparative costs. However, if τ(z) varies with z, then changes in t will have an additional,
marginal effect on separation points. To see this, consider an alternative example in which S has
a comparative advantage in upstream products and N has advantage in downstream products, i.e.
c(z) is increasing for all z, with c(0) < 1 and c(1) > 1. There are just two fragments, and the cost
minimisation problem is that of choosing the dividing operation ẑ , upstream of which ( z  zˆ )
production takes place in S, while downstream stages z  zˆ take place in N. ẑ is chosen to
minimise total costs, denoted C (zˆ) , and given by:
zˆ

C( z )  c( z)dz   ( zˆ)t 



0

1



zˆ

dz .

(11)

ˆ t is the cost of transferring the
The first integral is the cost of producing the range 0  ẑ in S;  ( z)
product to N, and the final integral is the sum of the (unit) cost of producing remaining stages in
N. We assume that the functions c(z) and τ(z) are twice differentiable, so first and second
derivatives with respect to ẑ are
U ( zˆ)
 c( zˆ)   ' ( zˆ)t  1 ,
zˆ

 2U ( zˆ)
 c ( zˆ)   " ( zˆ)t
zˆ 2

Suppose initially that the first of these equations, set equal to zero, defines a global cost
minimum. If separation costs are uniform,  ' z  = 0, then the dividing operation is where
14

In figure 5, this would correspond to t being low enough that fragment f2 broke out of stage B
(produced in S) and became its own stage operating in N.

17

(12)

czˆ   1, as expected. However, if separation costs vary then the dividing point moves in either
direction according to whether they are increasing or decreasing with z. For a product adding
complexity with each operation, separation costs might increase,  ' z  > 0. The dividing point ẑ

is then where c zˆ  1, so that some operations with lower costs in S are performed in N. A
reduction in t, the common element of separation costs increases the range of operations
undertaken in S because, differentiating along the first order condition in (12) ,

  ' ( zˆ)
dzˆ

0
dt c( zˆ)   ( zˆ)t

(13)

(the denominator is positive by the second order condition). Conversely, a product such as a
natural resource which loses weight as it is processed may have  ' z   0 . This means that more

operations are done in S, c zˆ  1, since the separation cost saving from shipping a more
processed product offsets the higher factor costs of processing in S.

The general analysis of this problem is complex, particularly since second order conditions may
fail (see equations (12)). In the working paper version of the paper we illustrate an array of
possible outcomes which, once again, may involve overshooting and reshoring.
4. Spiders and snakes; conclusions

It is a commonplace to say that globalization is associated with the fragmentation, unbundling
and offshoring of production. But how does this occur given the complexity of actual production
processes or value chains? The engineering details of the production process matters and we
characterise two extremes as ‘snakes’ and ‘spiders’. Snakes are production processes where a
physical entity follows a sequential process with each operation adding value in a predetermined
order. Spiders are ‘many limbed’ processes, where parts come together for assembly. In practise
the two are combined: spiders might be attached to any part of a snake, and multiple snakes
might join into a spider. We conjecture that virtually all production processes can be thought of
as combinations of our cases.
Analysis of both spiders and snakes provides insights, some of them similar in the two cases,
others different. In both cases location is determined as the outcome of a tension between
international differences in production costs and co-location benefits due to unbundling costs.
Reductions in international frictions (be they trade costs or communication and coordination
costs) facilitate the relocation of production in line with comparative costs, but this relocation is
not necessarily continuous or monotonic. Overshooting and reshoring can occur in both the
spider and the snake, as parts move against their comparative costs (to save on unbundling
costs), and then move back when unbundling costs fall further. In the spider this occurs when
assembly relocates, taking a wide range of parts with it some of which move against their
comparative costs in order to maintain proximity to the assembler. Further reductions in
unbundling costs weaken this co-location force, causing some parts to ‘reshore’. In the snake,
reducing separation costs can cause relocation of a range of operations (a stage) which contains
both capital and labour intensive fragments. Some of these fragments move against their

18

comparative costs, and further unbundling-cost reductions enable them to move back.15
Both the spider and the snake potentially exhibit coordination failure and hence, if decisions are
made independently by separate firms, there may be inefficiently little offshoring as unbundling
costs fall. This arises as each firm cannot be sure that, if it were to move, parts to which it is
linked (assembly and parts in the spider, adjacent operations in the snake) will move in response.
The problem may be particularly acute in the snake where, for example, a capital intensive part
may be ‘stuck’ in N because it fails to coordinate with adjacent labour intensive parts. This
inefficiency suggests strong incentives to vertically integrate or for firms to take other measures
to coordinate actions and achieve the cost minimising outcome.
Other outcomes are quite different for the spider and the snake. In the spider, a part crosses
borders at most twice, once as a part and once embodied in final output. The value of trade is
bounded by twice the value of final output (value added over all parts and assembly) and does
not necessarily increase as trade frictions fall. The value of trade in parts responds in the
expected manner for any range of frictions that does not include a switching point. However,
over the full range, the relationship between the trade values and trade frictions is neither
continuous nor monotonic. Offshoring assembly both creates and destroys trade in parts,
reversing the direction of net parts exports in the process. It also may create or destroy trade in
final goods – creating it when assembly moves N to S, but destroying it when the switch occurs
in the reverse direction.
This is in marked contrast to the spider where falling frictions cause an ever finer slicing of the
snake, and a monotonic increase in trade volumes. Stages of production emerge endogenously
from the interplay of engineering details (the sequence in which parts must be added), separation
costs and comparative cost differences. The ratio of trade to the value of final output is
potentially unbounded, depending on the number of separate fragments in the value chain.
A further property of the snake is that falling frictions and consequent relocations cause the
factor intensities of activities taken in each country to become increasingly polarised; activities
in S become, on average, more labour-intensive, and those in N more capital-intensive.16
Implications for factor prices depend on the full specification of the general equilibrium, beyond
the scope of this paper, but the polarization is suggestive of factor price convergence. In contrast,
no such general polarisation result holds for the spider.
The tension between factor costs and co-location benefits is, we think, central to analysis of
offshoring. The analysis of spiders and snakes undertaken in this paper provides building blocks,
and further work needs to extend this to understand technologies that combine snakes and
spiders. Empirical work on offshoring needs to recognise the discontinuities and non-monotonic
patterns of trade and location that we have uncovered. And policy needs to understand the
disruptive potential for abrupt and discontinuous change in the location of related activities.

15

Non-monotonic effects of falling trade frictions is a property shared with many new economic
geography models (Fujita et al 1999). In the present context, they arise because, even if trade costs are
uniform (as in our examples), production cost savings from relocation vary across parts and operations.
16
Some fragments may move against their comparative costs, but only as part of stages which move in
line with the comparative cost of the whole stage.

19

REFERENCES

Ando, M. and F. Kimura (2005). The formation of international production and distribution
networks in East Asia. In T. Ito and A. Rose (Eds.), International trade (NBER-East Asia
seminar on economics, volume 14), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Arndt, S.W. and H. Kierzkowski (Eds.) (2001). Fragmentation: New Production Patterns in the
World Economy. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Baldwin, R. and F. Robert-Nicoud (2010). "Trade-in-goods and trade-in-tasks: An Integrating
Framework," NBER Working Papers 15882.
Baldwin, R. and A.J. Venables (2010). ‘Relocating the value chain: offshoring and
agglomeration in the global economy’ NBER wp16611
Collins, M. (2010). “Re-shoring–Bringing manufacturing back to American suppliers”.
Manufacturing.net, http://www.manufacturing.net/
Costinot, A., J. Vogel and S. Wang (2011). ‘An elementary theory of global supply chains’
NBER working paper 16936.
Davidson, P. (2010). ‘Some manufacturing heads back to USA’, USA Today, August.
Dixit, A. and G. M. Grossman (1982). Trade and Protection with Multi-Stage Production,
Review of Economic Studies 49(4), 583-594.
Dixit, A.K. and G. M. Grossman (1982). ‘Trade and Protection with Multistage Production’
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 49, No. 4, pp. 583-594.
Feenstra, R.C and G.H. Hanson (19906). ‘Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality’
American Economic Review, 86, 240-245.
Frigant, V. and Y. Lung (2002). ‘Geographical proximity and supplying relationships in modular
production’, International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 26.4 pp742-55
Fujita, M., P. Krugman, P. and A.J. Venables (1999) The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions and
International Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fujita, M. and J. Thisse (2006). ‘Globalization and the evolution of the supply chain: who gains
and who loses?’ International Economic Review, 47, pp 811-836
Grossman, G. M. and, E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008). Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of
Offshoring, American Economic Review, 98, pp 1978-97.
Harrigan, J. and A.J. Venables (2006). ‘Timeliness and agglomeration’, Journal of Urban
Economics, 59, 300-316.
Helpman, E. (1984). A Simple Theory of Trade with Multinational Corporations. Journal of
Political Economy 92, 451-471.
Helpman, E. (2006). Trade, FDI and the organization of firms’, Journal of Economic Literature,
XLIV, 589-630.
Hummels, D., D. Rapoport and K.-M. Yi, (1998). Vertical Specialization and the Changing
Nature of World Trade. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 4,
79-99.
20

Hummels, D., J. Ishii, and K-M. Yi (2001). The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in
World Trade. Journal of International Economics 54, 75-96.
Hummels, D., J. Ishii, and K-M. Yi (1999). "The nature and growth of vertical specialization in
world trade," Staff Reports 72, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Johnson, R. C. and G. Noguera (2012). “Accounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing and
Trade in Value Added” Journal of International Economics, 86, 224-236.
Jones, R. W. and H. Kierzkowski (2001). A Framework for Fragmentation, in: S.W. Arndt and
H. Kierzkowski (Eds), Fragmentation: New Production Patterns in the World Economy,
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Jones, R.W. (2000). Globalization and the Theory of Input Trade, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Kimura, F., Y. Takahashi and K. Hayakawa (2007). "Fragmentation and parts and components
trade: Comparison between East Asia and Europe," The North American Journal of
Economics and Finance, Elsevier, vol. 18(1), pages 23-40, February.
Klier, T.H. and J. Rubinstein (2009). ‘Imports of Intermediate parts in the auto-industry; a case
study’ http://www.upjohninst.org/measurement/klier-rubenstein-final.pdf
Levine, D. (2010). ‘Production chains’, NBER wp 16571
Markusen, J. R. (2002). Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade, MIT Press.
Markusen, J.R. and A.J. Venables (2007). ‘Interacting factor endowments and trade costs: a
multi-country, multi-good approach to trade theory’, Journal of International Economics,
73, 333-354
Ng, F. and A. Yeats (1999). Production sharing in East Asia; who does what for whom and why.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 2197, Washington DC.
Rubin, J. and B. Tal (2008). “Will Soaring Transport Costs Reverse Globalization?”
StrategEcon, CIBC World Markets Inc. http://research.cibcwm.com
Sako, M. (2005). ‘Governing automotive supplier parks: leveraging the benefits of outsourcing
and co-location’, processed, SBS, Oxford.
Sirkin, H., M. Zinser and D. Hohner (2011). “Made in America, Again”, Boston Consulting
Group report, August.
Venables, A.J. (1996). ‘Equilibrium locations of vertically linked industries’, International
Economic Review, 37, 341-59.
Wu, X. and F. Zhang (2011). “Efficient Supplier or Responsive Supplier? An Analysis of
Sourcing Strategies under Competition”, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1871425.
Yi, K-M. (2003). Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade? Journal of
Political Economy 111, 52-102.

21

Appendix 1:

The unbundling thresholds, bS and bN, and the cost difference CN - CS are, in the three ranges of t:
Range of t

bS

bN

CN - CS

1+ t

1- t

 aN  aS  t  2 

II: b  1 < t < 1  b

b

1- t

 aN  aS  t   b  1  t  / 2  b 1  b / 2

III: 1  b < t

b

b

 aN  aS  t   b  b

I:

t < b 1

2









For ranges I and II the switch points are given by (4) and (5) of the text. For range-II, switches
are at solutions of the quadratic expression. For the switch to occur in range-I, parameters must
be such that t’ < b -1; using the expression for t’ in (4), this implies that parameter must satisfy
aN  aS  b  1   2  . For the switch to come in range-III, it must be that t” > 1- b , so using









(5) the condition is aN  aS  1  b  b  b  .

Appendix 2: Independent decision taking.

To draw out the implications we go to our simplified example from section 2.1 where θ(y) = 1
and   1 for all parts, so equations (6) and (7) become:





C( N  S )  a N  aS  t  t (b  bN )  (bN  b





C(S  N )  aN  aS  t  t (b  bS )  (bS  b)

(A1)
(A2)

To avoid a proliferation of cases we assume that S has comparative advantage in assembly, aN aS > 0, and also that α is large enough to satisfy α - 2β > 0 and for the cost minimising switch
point to lie in range-I. In range-I, bN = 1 – t and bS = 1 + t, so (A1) and (A2) take the form:

C ( N  S )  2t 2  t  2   aN  aS 

(A3)

C ( S  N )  2t 2  t  2   aN  aS 

(A4)

The cost minimising switch point is t’  aN  aS /  2  (equation 4). At this value of t it is
apparent that C ( S  N )  0 and C ( N  S )  0 so that location in N and in S are both
equilibria. Starting with assembly in N, progressive reductions in t switch C ( N  S ) to
negative value at t*, t’ > t* > 0. Reductions in t therefore mean that the location of the industry
follows a path qualitatively like the bold line on the left-hand panel of figure 3, but with the
discontinuity occurring at a lower value of t, i.e. t* < t’.
Pricing with independent decision taking

Suppose that the parts supply in N is contestable. However, if a part is produced in S then it is
done so by a single firm facing competition from potential supplies in N, but no threat of local
22

competition. We assume that – given the absence of local competition in S – fraction γ of the
surplus on a part produced in S is captured by the parts producer. Thus, if the assembler is in N
and purchases a part from S, the price paid is b  t   1  (b  t ) where the term in square
brackets is the difference between the cost of production in N and the cost of supply from S (i.e.
the surplus on the sourcing from S). If the assembler is in S this price becomes b   1  t  b ,
where the surplus is cost of supply from N minus cost of production in S. Relocating from N to
S, the producer therefore saves t(1-2γ) on each part produced in S (the difference between these
two prices). If γ = 0 the assembler would have saved the whole of the unbundling cost t, but part
of this surplus is captured by the producer of the part in S. The set of parts supplied from S is
unchanged at bN  b (set S, given our Nash assumption), so the assembler’s cost savings on parts
produced in S are (1  2 )bN  b . The sets S, N and NS are exactly as before, reflecting the
fact that there is no surplus at the margin. The change in assembler’s costs in moving from N to
S are now:





C( N  S )  aS  aN  t   (b  bN )  (1  2 )(bN  b)

This is expression (A1) adjusted for the change in price paid for parts produced in S. A positive
value of γ therefore increases the overall change in costs associated with moving assembly from
N to S, so makes the move less attractive. The intuition is that moving assembly to S places the
assembler in an environment with less competition in the supply of parts. If t is falling through
time, a positive value of γ further postpones offshoring, amplifying the inefficiency arising from
uncoordinated decision taking.

23

