                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            RETAIL TRADE BY FEDERAL RESERVE DISTRICT, 1919 TO 1939:
                           A STATISTICAL HISTORY

                                         Haelim M. Park
                                         Gary Richardson

                                       Working Paper 16617
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16617


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2010




We thank Zhang Li for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Haelim M. Park and Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Retail Trade by Federal Reserve District, 1919 to 1939: A Statistical History
Haelim M. Park and Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 16617
December 2010
JEL No. E01,E21,N0,N1,N3,N32,N92,R11,Y1

                                              ABSTRACT

Soon after beginning operations, the Federal Reserve established a nationwide network for collecting
information about the economy. In 1919, the Fed began tabulating data by about retail sales, which
it viewed as a fundamental measure of consumption. From 1920 until 1929, the Federal Reserve published
data about retail sales each month by Federal Reserve district, but ceased to do so after 1929. It continued
to compile monthly data on retail sales by reserve district, but this data remained in house. We collected
these in-house reports from the archives of the Board of Governors and constructed a consistent series
on retail trade at the district level. The new series enhances our understanding of economic trends
during the Roaring „20s and Great Depression.


Haelim M. Park
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
parkhm@uci.edu

Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
Introduction

        The United States‟ experiment with regional central banks from 1913 to 1935 provides an

opportunity to study monetary and fiscal policies in an environment similar to that which exists

in the European Union today. Federal Reserve districts possessed a common currency, a trade

union, and intertwined monetary policies. Fiscal policies were set by the governments of states,

whose constitutions typically required balanced budgets. Recent research shows that differences

among districts can help to identify relationships – such as impact of discount lending during

banking panics – that economists have trouble identifying with recent data (Richardson and

Troost 2009). The only constraint on such studies is the lack of data. Few data series exist at the

Federal-Reserve-district level. National income accounts for the United States begin in 1929. So

do many other statistical series of interest to economics.

        This essay begins to fill that lacuna in the literature. It presents new data on retail trade

for the United States as a whole and for each Federal Reserve district. This task involves the

construction of several subsidiary data series: a series on retail trade each month in each Federal

Reserve district, a seasonally adjusted version of that monthly series, annual population estimates

for each district, and annual growth in per capita retail trade in each district.

        Constructing these series involves tackling a number of statistical issues. The issues

include seasonally adjusting monthly series, merging series with different base years, merging

series reported in different metrics (such as index values and percentage changes), estimating

populations for Federal Reserve districts by summing estimates made at the county level,

converting monthly into annual series, and calculating per capita growth from changes in index

values and population levels.




                                                   1
           Another statistical issue is the difference between the data as initially reported and the

data after subsequent revisions. The initial series represents the information available to agents at

the time they make decisions. Throughout our essay, we refer to this series as “initial data” or

“initial reports.” The final series indicates the actual state of the economy. Throughout our essay,

we refer to this series as the “final data,” “final reports,” or “final data series.” The former and

the latter often differ. Statistical agencies, such as the Federal Reserve, release data about the

economy, such as retail trade reports, on a regular schedule. Sometimes on the day of release,

they lack accurate or complete information. After the initial release, they update reports, correct

errors, incorporate additional information, and revise previous estimates. For data on retail trade,

the Federal Reserve routinely released updates. Some of these revisions were significant,

particularly from 1919 through 1923, when the series underwent large revisions, in part because

the Federal Reserve realized that its data reporting system provided erroneous information about

the state of the economy from 1919, when the lifting of wartime restrictions resulted in a

consumption boom, to 1921, when a recession beset all Federal Reserve districts.1

           The rest of this essay accomplishes these tasks. Section 2 describes the data sources.

Section 3 describes the methods that we use to calculate our statistical series. Section 4 compares

retail trade across the Federal Reserve districts. Section 5 compares patterns in growth rates of

retail trade. Section 6 compares patterns in growth rates of per capita retail trade. Section 7

compares retail trade during the NBER business cycles. Section 8 studies growth rates of

population. Section 9 examines the seasonal consumption cycle. Section 10 examines

differences between the initial and final data series. Section 11 concludes.




1
    Orphanides (2001) emphasizes the difference between initial and final data.


                                                           2
2. Data Sources

           Determining retail sales per capita requires data on retail trade and population. Data on

retail trade comes from two sources. The first is the Federal Reserve Bulletin, a monthly

publication of the Federal Reserve Board containing detailed information about the United States

economy, financial markets, and the behavior of the central bank. The second is “Department

Store Sales Preliminary Reports,” a monthly internal memorandum produced by the Federal

Reserve Board. This unpublished material resides in the research library of the Board of

Governors.2

         In 1919, the Federal Reserve Board began to develop an index of retail trade. The project

involved obtaining information about monthly sales “from department stores of representative

character throughout the country (Federal Reserve Bulletin, January 1920, p. 53).” Department

stores were defined as large shops selling many different kinds of articles at different sales

counters and commonly known as department stores in their respective cities. The sample

included the nation‟s largest mail-order houses and five-and-ten-cent chains. The sample

excluded “specialized retail stores and large apparel stores, even if these establishments reported

regularly and voluntarily to the reserve system (Federal Reserve Bulletin, February 1928, p.

115).”

         In February 1920, the Federal Reserve Bulletin published an initial index for the Twelfth

District based on reports from twenty-nine establishments. The number of stores increased over

time. Within a few months, the number of reporting establishments rose to over 300. In October

1920, the Federal Reserve Bulletin for the first time published information on retail sales in all

twelve Federal Reserve districts. The data described the month of August 1920. In December


2
    Note that the Federal Reserve Bulletin and the Federal Reserve‟s Preliminary Reports use the terms “retail
    trade,” “retail sales,” and “department store sales” as synonyms.


                                                         3
1924, 374 establishments reported monthly sales, including all of the nation‟s largest department

stores, mail-order houses, and five-and-ten-cent chains. In June 1925, the number rose to 523. In

February 1928, the number rose to 565. Reported sales exceeded $2,000,000,000, or

approximately 36 percent of total sales of all department stores in the nation. These reporting

establishments operated in 253 cities. In most of these cities, “stores reporting monthly to the

Federal Reserve banks (made) up at least two-thirds of the sales of all department stores (Federal

Reserve Bulletin, February 1929 p. 115).” Stores located in cities with a population exceeding

500,000 accounted for approximately 55 percent of the sales of all reporting stores. Stores

located in cities with populations between 100,000 and 500,000 accounted for 32 percent of total

sales. Information concerning city size and sales reports appears in Table 1.

        Information on sales was “reported by the cooperating stores to the Federal reserve banks

in each of the 12 Federal reserve districts, which in turn (sent the information) to the Federal

Reserve Board, where a retail report covering the entire United States (was) compiled and

published (Federal Reserve Bulletin, July 1925, p. 474)”. Retail establishments submitted

information on sales on the sixth day of each month. After collating reports from every store in

its district, “the Federal reserve bank telegraph(ed) the total dollar sales for all stores to the

Federal Reserve Board, where the sales from all reserve districts (were compiled). The combined

report for the United States (was) telegraphed to each Federal reserve bank on the eighth of the

month and a national report (was) prepared and sent to the reporting stores and published on the

tenth of the month (Federal Reserve Bulletin, July 1925, pp. 474-475).”

        The Federal Reserve guaranteed anonymity to the firms that reported. To protect

proprietary information, the Federal Reserve disseminated data on retail sales as an index

indicating the amount in a base period and percentage changes from that base. The Federal




                                                   4
Reserve periodically changed the base and the way in which it reported the data. In January

1920, the initial base was the average value of monthly sales for each Federal Reserve district in

1918, and the series reported percentage changes from that base, but not the index itself. In

March 1923, the Federal Reserve Bulletin began publishing the indices of retail sales, with a

base year of 1919, as well as the changes from the preceding month. In February 1928, a revision

set the base of 100 to be average retail sales in a district from 1923 to 1925. Tables presented the

entire series up to that point in time with the new and the old (1919) base. The revision also

adjusted the series for variations in the number of business days per month, due to phenomena

such as leap years, holidays, the changing date of Easter, and the rotation of week days through

the annual calendar. The Federal Reserve Bulletin for February 1928 reported revised data for

January 1919 through December 1927. According to the Bulletin, this series “supersede(d) the

old indexes that have been published up to the present time. These new indexes are based upon

data reported by a larger number of stores, more widely distributed, and have a broader and more

recent base period.”3 The Bulletin continued to report data in this format for two and a half

years.

         The 1928 revision also added a substantial amount of historical information. This

information included new series for the St. Louis district back to 1921 and Kansas City district

back to 1924. The series for Chicago was also completely revised going back to 1921. Chicago

revision appears to have been facilitated by the receipt of copious amounts of historical

information from retail stores throughout the Seventh District. This information allowed the size

of the sample to be expanded and its coverage to be more representative.4




3
    Federal Reserve Bulletin, March 1928, p. 114.
4
    Federal Reserve Bulletin, February 1928, p.115.


                                                      5
         Unfortunately, in August 1930, the Bulletin stopped publishing data on retail sales by

district. From then on, the Bulletin only published the index for the entire United States.

Thereafter, district-level retail-sales data appears only in the Federal Reserve Board‟s

preliminary reports on retail sales. This internal memorandum reported percentage changes in

retail sales in each district in each month compared with the same period of the previous year.

Copies of this internal memo survive in the research library of the Federal Reserve Board of

Governors for the months December 1924 through January 1940.

           Data on population comes from two sources. The first is the United States Census of

Population for the years 1920, 1930, and 1940. In 1920, the Census determined where

individuals resided on January 1 of that year. In 1930 and 1940, the Census determined where

individuals resided on April 1. For all three decades, the Census tabulated the number of

individuals residing in each county. Computerized county-level tabulations come from the

ICPSR.5 The second source is “Population Estimates, 1900 to 1950, ” which estimates the

population of each state on July 1 of each year from data on migration, births, and deaths.6


3. Methods for Constructing Statistical Series

         Converting the raw evidence of retail trade into useful statistical series involves several

steps. The first is determining the level of retail trade in each month relative to a base period. The

second is adjusting the monthly series for seasonal variations. The third is calculating the rate of

growth for retail trade at an annual frequency. The fourth is calculating the rate of growth of the

population. The fifth is calculating the rate of growth of retail sales per capita, by adjusting sales

growth to account for population growth.

3.1.     Retail Trade: Initial and Final Data

5
    Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) Study # 3.
6
    Current Population Reports Series P25-139.


                                                         6
       The Federal Reserve routinely released updates of information on retail sales. The

structure of the table in the Federal Reserve Bulletin facilitated these updates. The table included

information from the latest month available, the previous month, and the same month in the

preceding year. For example, the Federal Reserve Bulletin‟s issue for October 1930 contains

retail sales figures for August and July 1930 and August 1929. On several occasions, the Federal

Reserve recapitulated all previously published data. These recapitulations brought all of the

previously published data up to the current standard.

       Our essay reports both the final and initial data series. The final data series is constructed

by examining the Federal Reserve Bulletin for 1930 and working backwards through the issues

in reverse chronological order. This process yields the final series for the entire United States for

the years 1919 to 1939 and for the twelve Federal Reserve districts for the period from 1919 until

August 1930. Data for the Federal Reserve districts for the years 1929, 1928, and 1927 comes

from latest issues in which the information appears (i.e. the first issue in which it is found in

reverse chronological order). Data for years prior to 1927 comes from the February 1928 issue,

which contained a table of revisions stretching from 1926 back to the beginning of the series.

       For years 1930 to 1939, district-level data comes from the Federal Reserve‟s unpublished

Preliminary Report. The reports are processed using the procedures employed on the Federal

Reserve Bulletin. We begin with the latest memorandum and work backwards through the series,

finding final revisions of monthly data and incorporating them into our series. The information in

the Preliminary Report differs from that in the Bulletin in an important respect. The Preliminary

Report indicates the percentage change of retail sales from the same month in the preceding year.

Fortuitously, the Preliminary Reports and the Bulletin overlap for a period sufficient to extend

the retail trade indices until 1939. The results of our endeavor appear in Table 2.




                                                  7
         Reversing our procedure for constructing the final index yields information about initial

reports. We begin with the earliest issue of the Bulletin, work through the issues in

chronological order, and record the first report of retail trade for each month. The initial data

appears in several formats, such as changes from the previous month, index values with the base

set as the average value in 1919, and index values with the base set as the average value from

1923 to 1925. We standardize this information, and report all initial figures as index values with

the base set as the average value from 1923 to 1925, so that the initial reports can be compared to

the final data series, which are reported in the same metric. The results of this endeavor appear in

Table 3.

         Lacunae appear in some of the series for initial reports. These blank spots indicate that

the Federal Reserve bulletin did not initially report information for some districts when it

presented information for the rest. For example, at various times and for various reasons, the

Federal Reserve failed to report initial figures for Cleveland, Chicago, Kansas City, and St.

Louis.

3.2 Seasonal Adjustment

         Seasonal movements exist in many statistical series, including retail sales. Heating-oil

sales surge during the winter. Cooling-fan sales surge during the summer. Consumption peaks

every year during December. The obvious explanation is Christmas. These seasonal movements

obscure economic trends, cyclical fluctuations, and turning points in time series. So, economists

typically remove these seasonal variations. During the 1920s, the Federal Reserve published

seasonally adjusted retail trade series as well as seasonally unadjusted data. In 1928, the Federal

Reserve described its methods for adjusting for cyclical fluctuations, but on many occasions, the




                                                  8
Federal Reserve‟s methods were opaque.7 Therefore, we adjust the raw data for seasonal

fluctuations using modern techniques. The cutting-edge techniques come from the Census

Bureau. The Bureau‟s X-12 ARIMA algorithm estimates seasonal, trend, and irregular

components of time series using regression models with ARIMA errors, symmetric moving

averages, a moving seasonality ratio, and after accounting for outlier and calendar effects. We do

this using the X-12 ARIMA function in the EVIEWS statistical package. We report the final data

series adjusted for seasonal fluctuations in Table 4 and seasonal component in Table 5.

3.3 Annual Growth Rates

         Economists have many options when converting monthly data to annual growth rates.

Potential methods include

    a. Calculating the annual average for the monthly series and then the growth of this average

         from one year to the next.

    b. Calculating the annual median for the monthly series and then this median‟s growth from

         one year to the next.

    c. Calculating the growth rate for each month from the same month in the previous year,

         and then averaging these growth rates.

    d. Picking one month out of the year – perhaps the first month (January), a middle month

         (July), the peak month (December), or the last month (also December) – then calculating

         the growth rate between that month and the same month in the previous year.

We calculate the annual growth rate using all of these methods, and then compared the results.

         Figure 1 displays the outcome of this exercise. The dashed line indicates the growth of

retail sales in the month indicated from the same month in the previous year. The other symbols

indicate the annual growth rate calculated by the method indicated in the key. The square, for
7
    Federal Reserve Bulletin, March 1928, p. 240.


                                                    9
example, indicates the annual growth rate approximated by the growth from December in one

year to December in the next. The lightest horizontal line indicates the annual median of the

month to month growth rates. The darkest horizontal line indicates the annual average of the

month to month growth rates. In almost all cases, the latter line lies at a point almost identical to

the line indicating the growth rate of the annual average of the monthly indices. These lines also

closely approximate the growth in retail trade between July in one year and July in the previous

year. Since we measure population during July and calculate population growth rates between

this July and the previous July, we choose to use the annual average of the month to month

growth rates as our measure of the annual growth of retail sales. The results of this exercise

appear in Table 6.

       Scholars who use our data for macroeconomic studies may make different decisions

about how to calculate the growth rate. Scholars should ensure that their measure of the retail-

sales growth rate should be consistent with other decisions that they make concerning

aggregating, averaging, and differentiating data series.

3.4    Population and Population Growth

       Calculating the population of Federal Reserve districts requires extrapolating from census

data sets. The Census Bureau enumerated the population of the United States in the years 1910,

1920, 1930, and 1940, but in those years, enumerations occurred on different dates. Between

those years, the Census did not enumerate populations. The Census did, however, estimate the

population of all states on July 1st of each year. The population on July 1st is useful information,

because it enables us to accurately estimate the annual growth rate of the population and of retail

sales per capita. So, we base our series of population in Federal Reserve districts on the Census

Bureau‟s estimates of state populations on July 1st.




                                                 10
         The geography of Federal Reserve districts complicates these calculations. Federal

Reserve districts frequently contained fractions of states. The 6th (Atlanta) District, for example,

contained all of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, and portions of Tennessee, Mississippi, and

Louisiana. The 2nd (New York) District contained all of New York and portions of Connecticut

and New Jersey.

         To calculate the population of a Federal Reserve district, we sum the population of the

states and the portions of states that the district contains. We calculate the fraction of a state‟s

population lying within a Federal Reserve district by summing the populations of the counties

within the district and dividing by the total population of the state.8 This procedure works

because Federal Reserve districts contain groups of contiguous counties, and because counties

were never split between Federal Reserve districts. Data on the population of counties exists only

during the census years of 1910, 1920, 1930, and 1940. Between these years, we assume that the

fraction of the state‟s population with a Federal Reserve district changes linearly. Given these

assumptions, the population of the ith Federal Reserve district‟s population in year t is fit

                                                                                      
                  jI s jt  pij ,1920(t  1910) / 10   pij ,19101920  t  / 10    if   t  1919
                 
                  jI s jt pij ,1920                                                     if   t  1920
                           
                  s jt  pij ,1930(t  1920) / 10   pij ,19201930  t  / 10       if   t  1921, 1929
          f it   jI
                  jI s jt pij ,1930                                                     if   t  1930

                  jI
                            
                  s jt  pij ,1940(t  1930) / 10   pij ,19301940  t  / 10       if   t  1931, 1939

                  jI jt ij ,1940
                       s p                                                                if   t  1940

Where sjt indicates the population of state j in year t, as indicated in the Census Bureau‟s

estimates of state populations on July 1st of each year. j ε I indicates that state j lies within the ith


8
    The annual reports of the Federal Reserve Board listed the name of counties in each district. Note that during the
    1920s, counties in Alabama, California, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, South Dakota, North Dakota, Minnesota,
    Montana, and Texas split and formed new counties. During the 1930s, two counties in Georgia merged to form
    Fulton County.



                                                               11
Federal Reserve district. pij,1910 indicates the proportion of state j population lying within Federal

Reserve district i in year 1910, as indicated in the census of 1910. pij,1920 indicates the

proportion of state j population lying within Federal Reserve district i in year 1920, as indicated

in the census of 1920. pij,1930 indicates the proportion of state j population lying within Federal

Reserve district i in year 1930, as indicated in the census of 1930. pij,1940 indicates the proportion

of state j population lying within Federal Reserve district i in year 1940, as indicated in the

census of 1940. For the years 1910, 1920, 1930, and 1940, pijt equals the sum of all the counties

in state j belonging to district i divided by the total population of the state. Note that if the state

lies entirely within one Federal Reserve district, then pijt equals 1. Table 7 reports the population

on July 1st for each Federal Reserve district.

        The annual growth rate of the population of a Federal Reserve District is,

         f it   f it  f i ,t 1  f i ,t 1
         




for district i in year t. This growth rate indicates the rate of expansion of the population from July

of the preceding year until July of the current year. Table 8 reports the annual growth rate of the

population in each Federal Reserve district.

3.5     Growth in Per Capita Retail Trade

        The Federal Reserve protected manufacturers‟ proprietary information by reporting retail

sales as an index, rather than in dollar terms. Lack of information about the volume of sales

prevents us from calculating the volume of retail trade per person. The growth rate of retail trade

per person, however, can be calculated. The growth rate of per capita trade per year, gt, is given

by the following formula




                                                   12
                       
                                    r                               rt 1
                 rt       f t     t    t 1                                
                                                       r
        gt                                                                        
                                    t  f               f t 1          f  t 1 

                                    r                               ft
                                    t    t                                 
                                                         f
                                                                    f 
                                        r t 1         f t 1           t 1 
                                    r b                                    f
                                    t                  ft
                                                          f   t f 
                                                                                             
                                             r t 1 b            t 1            t 1 

                                    i                               ft
                                    t    t                                 
                                                         f
                                                                    f 
                                     t 1  
                                          i                f t 1          t 1 

                                    it   f t                   
                                                                  1
                                                            
                                    it 1   f t 1 

where the volume of retail trade (in dollar terms), rt, is unknown. The volume of retail trade in

the base year (in dollar terms), b, is also unknown. But, the index of retail trade, it, which equals

rt / bt, and the population, ft, are known. Knowledge of it, ft, and the relationship between those

variables and gt, enables us to calculate the growth rate of per capita retail trade. Table 8 reports

the growth rate of per capita retail trade.



Section 4: Patterns in Levels of Retail Trade

        Retail trade indices display striking patterns between 1919 and 1939, which Figure 2

illustrates. The figure plots the indices for all twelve Federal Reserve districts grouped into five

regions. The North East contains the Boston (1), New York (2), and Philadelphia (3) districts.

The Great Lakes contains the Cleveland (4) and Chicago (7) districts. The Great Plains contains

the St. Louis (8), Minneapolis (9), Kansas City (10), and Dallas (11) districts. The Pacific

contains the San Francisco (12) district.

        Figure 2 reveals several patterns common across the series. In 1919, consumption appears

suppressed. A plausible explanation is the First World War. The armistice halted combat in

November 1918. The Treaty of Versailles officially ended the war in June 1919. Wartime

rationing ceased earlier that year. It took many months to shift resources from wartime



                                                                      13
employment back to civilian uses, for soldiers to return home, and for peacetime patterns of

consumption to reemerge. In 1921, consumption fell across the board, in all months in all

regions, as the economy suffered from a severe but short recession. From 1922 to 1928,

consumption increased steadily. The peak for most districts occurred during the 1920s. The peak

for the United States as a whole occurred in 1928. From 1929 to 1932, consumption declined

rapidly. In 1933, the decline ended. In 1934, the recovery began. Recovery continued throughout

the 1930s, with a brief and mild hiatus during the double-dip recession in 1937 and 1938. At the

end of the decade, however, consumption in most districts had not returned to the peak

experienced during the Roaring 20s. The exception was the South, where consumption in 1939

exceeded levels that it had reached in the past.

       A series of tables and figures illuminates these patterns in detail. Table 9‟s top half

provides summary statistics for retail trade in the twelve Federal Reserve districts and the United

States as a whole. The table indicates the maximum value of the index and the year in which the

maximum occurred. All maxima occurred in the month of December. The maximum for most

districts occurred during the 1920s. The maximum for Richmond, Atlanta, and Dallas, however,

occurred during 1939. The table also indicates the minimum value. The minimum occurred

either during the summer (July) or the winter (January, February, and March). The minimum for

all districts occurred during 1932 or 1933.

       Table 10‟s bottom half provides the same statistics for the seasonally adjusted indices.

Now, the month of the maxima vary. The United States as a whole reached the maximum twice,

in August of 1927 and 1929. The maximum for Atlanta remains in the year 1939. The maxima

for Richmond and Dallas, however, shift to March 1937 and August 1926. The minima of the

seasonally adjusted series clearly cluster at the trough of the contraction. For Boston and New




                                                   14
York, the minimum occurred in January 1933. For all other districts, the minimum occurred in

March 1933.

        Table 11‟s top half indicates the correlation coefficients between the series for each

Federal Reserve districts and for the United States as a whole. Boxes enclose correlation

coefficients less than 0.70. All of the series are highly correlated. The correlation between the

United States and four of the series – Boston, New York, Chicago, and Kansas City – equals

0.97. Kansas City appears to be the district which is most correlated with other districts, with

New York and Boston as close seconds. Minneapolis appears to be the least correlated with other

districts. Its correlation with the United States is the only one approaching 0.8. Minneapolis is

also the only series with correlation coefficient relative to another district of less than 0.7.

        The overall patterns of correlation appear to be what one would expect given the

economic realities of the United States circa 1929. The financial centers of New York and

Chicago are highly correlated. So are the grain-growing regions of Minneapolis, Kansas City,

and St. Louis; and the southern regions of Dallas, Atlanta, and Richmond; and the Great Lakes

industrial regions of Cleveland and Chicago.

        Table 11‟s bottom half displays the correlation between seasonally adjusted indices.

Extracting the seasonal cycle reduces the correlation across the series, obviously, because the

series shared a common seasonal component. All of the series, for example, experienced a boom

during December (Christmas) and a bust afterwards. Minneapolis remains the least correlated

district. Its coefficient of correlation with the United States is just 0.65. The southern region (5,

6, 11) also has a relatively low correlation with the United States. The average coefficient is just

0.76. This coefficient is small, considering that the coefficients of correlation between the

United States and other districts are over 0.9.




                                                  15
       The patterns in Tables 10 and 11 inspired the groupings that we use when displaying our

data. We grouped into regions districts that were (a) highly correlated in Table 11, (b) shared

years of maxima and minima in Table 10, and (c) had a common concentration in a particular

economic sector, such as agriculture or industry.

       Figure 3 illustrates an important pattern. Figure 3(a) plots the indices of four regions

divided by the index of the southern region. The dots in the figure indicate this ratio for each

month for each district. The lines in the figure indicate a twelve-month moving average of these

monthly observations. Figure 3(b) plots the same ratio with seasonally-adjusted data. No matter

how you look at the data, the pattern is clear. Consumption in the south rose relative to all other

regions. The rise began in 1925 relative to the Great Plains; in 1929 relative to the Great Lakes,

and in 1933 relative to the North East. By the end of the 1930s, consumption in the South had

risen over 20 percent relative to the national average.



Section 5: Patterns in Growth Rates of Retail Trade

       Table 12 summarizes growth rates of retail trade at the district level. Rows (1) to (6)

present average growth rates for years indicated. Splitting the 1930s into two periods illuminates

the severity of the contraction and rapidity of the recovery. Rows (7) to (9) present standard

deviations for the periods 1919 to 1939, the 1920s, and the 1930s. Rows (10) to (11) indicate the

maximum and minimum growth rates of retail trade for the districts and the U.S. as a whole and

the years of occurrences.

       Retail trade for the U.S. grew at an average annual rate of 1.43 percent from 1919 to

1939. In the 1920s, the annual growth rate averaged 1.19 percent. Average growth rates were

positive in all districts except for Minneapolis and Kansas City. In the 1930s, the annual growth




                                                 16
rate averaged -0.69 percent. Average growth rates were negative except for Cleveland,

Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and Dallas.

       Growth rates varied during the 1930s. The decade began with a tremendous contraction.

From 1930 to 1933, retail trade declined on average 12.5 percent. Cleveland, Chicago, and San

Francisco performed much worse than the rest of the nation. In all three districts, retail sales

declined more than 13 percent per year. From 1933 to 1939, consumption in the United States

expanded by 5.21 percent per year. Consumption grew most rapidly in Atlanta, Dallas, Chicago

and Cleveland.

       Rows (7) to (9) indicate standard deviations. The standard deviations reveal the volatility

of growth varied across districts. From 1919 to 1939, the standard deviation of the United States

was 9.80. Retail trade fluctuated by more than national average in Cleveland, Chicago, Atlanta,

St. Louis, and Dallas. During the 1930s, volatility increased in all districts. The standard

deviation for the United States as a whole rose from 5.38 to 11.48.

       Rows (11) to (13) indicate the maxima and minima. For most districts, the highest

growth rate occurred in 1934 or 1936 during the recovery from the great contraction. The

maximum for Philadelphia and San Francisco, however, occurred in 1923 during the recovery

from the contraction of 1921. The minimum occurred in all districts in 1932. The max and min

were larger in the South districts and the Great Lakes districts. The largest value appeared in

Atlanta whose retail trade grew by 26.8 percent in 1934. The lowest value appeared in

Cleveland whose retail contracted by 26.7 percent in 1932.



Section 6: Patterns in Growth Rates of Per Capita Retail Trade




                                                 17
       Table 13 summarizes growth rates of per capita retail trade. In the 1920s, per capita retail

trade increased at an annual average rate of 0.7 percent. Per capita retail trade expanded in

Boston, New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco. In the 1930s,

per capita retail trade declined by an annual average rate of 1.48 percent. Per capita retail trade

declined in all districts except for Atlanta and Dallas.

       Per capita retail trade typically moved in the same direction as aggregate retail trade, but

not in all cases. In the 1920s, in San Francisco, for example, retail trade increased, but per capita

retail trade decreased. In St. Louis, retail trade declined, but per capita retail trade increased.

Aggregate and per capita trade moved in opposite directions, of course, due to population

movements that increased (or decreased) aggregate sales while per capita sales fell (or rose).

       The statistical characteristics of per capita retail trade resembled the characteristics of

aggregate retail trade in many ways. Growth rates in Cleveland and Chicago fluctuated more

than those in Atlanta, Richmond, and Dallas. The maximum for most districts occurred in 1934.

The minimum for most districts occurred in 1932. Cleveland was the only exception.

       Table 14 illuminates differences between growth in aggregate retail trade and growth in

per capita retail trade by region. From 1919 to 1939, retail trade increased in all regions, but per

capita retail trade increased only in the Great Lakes and the South. In the 1920s, the level of

retail sales decreased in the Great Plains and the South, but per capita sales decreased in all

districts. In the 1930s, retail trade increased in the Great Lakes and the South, but per capita trade

increased only in the South. All regions reached the highest growth during the recovery from the

Great Depression and the lowest growth during the contraction in the early 1930s.

       \

           Section 7: Retail Trade and NBER Business Cycles




                                                  18
       The National Bureau of Economic Research determined that five business cycles

occurred in the United States between 1919 and 1939. The cycles are summarized in Table 15.

Columns (1) and (2) indicate peaks and troughs in each of the cycles. Column (3) indicates the

length of the contraction. Column (4) indicates the length of the expansion. Column (5) indicates

the time between the troughs. Column (6) indicates the time between the peaks. Up until 1929,

recessions lasted on average a little over one year except. The Great Depression, obviously,

lasted longer.

       Figure 4 plots NBER cycles on top of retail trade for each Federal Reserve district. The

start of each shaded area indicates a business cycle peak. The end of each shaded area indicates

a business cycle trough. The figures show that fluctuations in business cycles coincided closely

with fluctuations in retail trade. Generally, retail trade fell from peak to trough and grew from

trough to peak.

       Table 16 and Table 17 illuminate these patterns. Table 16 indicates statistical

characteristics for monthly growth rates for each recession. Row (1) provides averages for

monthly growth rates in the Federal Reserve districts and the United States as a whole. Rows (2)

to (5) provide the maximum and minimum growth rates and the year in which they occurred.

Table 17 provides the same information for retail trade indices.

       During the business cycle in 1920-1921, the United States as a whole reached the

maximum in May, July, and August 1920 and the minimum in September of 1921. Most districts

reached the maximum in May or Ju1y 1920, except for Chicago and St. Louis, which peaked in

January 1920. Most districts reached their minima after the national trough. Near the national

trough, plummeting agricultural prices and strikes of steelmakers, coal mines, and railroad




                                                19
weakened the economic activity.9 The Federal Reserve‟s decision to increase the discount rate

from 4.75 to 6 percent in January and to 7 percent in June 1920 exacerbated the situation. By the

middle of 1920, economic activity and employment were rapidly falling, and prices had begun

one of the sharpest declines in American history. The Federal Reserve System, however, did not

lower the discount rate until May 5, 1921.10

           During the business cycle of 1923-1924, retail trade appears to have lagged the NBER

business cycle, although experiences varied across districts. Boston, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis,

Dallas, and San Francisco peaked in late 1923. New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond

peaked in early 1924. Nine districts bottomed out in March 1924. This variation seems consisted

with the reported trigger of this cycle, which was new oil strikes in California, Texas, and

Oklahoma, which lowered incomes and reduced investment in older oil-producing regions, such

as Pennsylvania.

           During the business cycle of 1926-1927, fluctuations in retail trade did not coincide with

NBER business cycle dates. Federal Reserve districts appear to have had varied experiences.

Some lead the national cycle. Others followed the national cycle. Some saw steep declines in

retail trade. Others experienced little hardship. This pattern seems consistent with the reported

trigger to the cycle, which was Henry Ford‟s decision to close his factories for 6 months, cease

production of the Model T, and retool for production of the new Model A. Sales of the Model T

amounted to 40 percent of all automobiles sold in the United States. Ford and its suppliers

employed a sizeable share of the high-wage industrial labor force. Idling these workers for six

months (without pay) noticeably reduced aggregate demand.




9
    Romer (1988)
10
     Friedman and Schwartz (1963)


                                                   20
        During the contraction from 1929 to 1933, retail trade declined at an average annual rate

of 11 percent. Consumption contracted severely in all districts. Cleveland, Atlanta, Chicago, St.

Louis, and Dallas performed worse than the national average. Richmond performed the best; retail

sales in the Richmond district declined at an annual rate of only 7.6 percent. At the national level,

the contraction in retail trade began in August 1929, and lasted until March 1933. Most districts

coincided closely with this national pattern.



Section 8: Growth in Population

        Aggregate retail sales may provide a misleading measure of the health of the economy if

changes in aggregate sales are due to changes in the population, rather than changes in

consumption per capita. Determining changes in per capita consumption requires data on

population (and population growth) at the Federal Reserve district level. That data does not

exist. So, we estimate the population in each district in each year. Table 18 presents our

estimates.

        From 1919 to 1939, population in the U.S. grew by an annual average rate of 1.12

percent. The district with the quickest population growth was San Francisco, where population

grew twice as quickly as the national average, principally due to the arrival of migrants from

other states. The rapid growth of San Francisco‟s population is one reason for that district‟s rapid

retail-sales growth.

        The pattern of population growth differed during the decades that we examine. During

the 1920s, the national population grew 1.54 percent per year. Population growth exceeded the

average in the New York, Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco. This pattern reflects the ongoing

urbanization of America, as population shifted to growing urban areas; the beginnings of the

Great Migration, as African Americans began to leave the segregated South and seek


                                                  21
opportunities in Northern cities; and the expansion of new industries, such as coal mining in

West Virginia and Pennsylvania.

       During the 1930s, the national population grew 0.69 percent per year. The low rate

reflects the decline in marriage and procreation due to the depression as well as the decline in

immigration due to legal barriers raised during the mid-20s. Rates were particularly low in areas

afflicted by the Dust Bowl, such as Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado, and New Mexico,

where droughts destroyed crops, forcing farmers to flee to places where they could earn a living.

       Table 19 compares growth in regional populations and shares of total population. From

1919 to 1939, regional shares of total population shifted considerably. Population grew rapidly in

the Pacific and South. Population grew slowly in the Great Plains. Population gradually shifted

towards the Sun Belt and the West Coast. The population share of other regions declined. The

Great Lakes‟ share of the population fell 0.02 percent per year. The Northeast‟s share declined

0.11 percent per year. The Great Plains‟ share declined most, by 0.58 percent per year. These

changes are illustrated in Figure 5.



Section 9: The Seasonal Cycle

       Economic activity varies dramatically over the twelve months of the year, particularly for

retail sales. Christmas – as well as planting, the harvest, winter snow, and summer heat – are

obvious explanations. The retail-trade indices that we have constructed exhibit strong seasonal

patterns. These rhythms need to be removed for the data to be used in many applications. The

patterns themselves may be of interest. Barsky and Miron‟s (1989) essay illuminates the

relationship between seasonal and business cycles in post-war data. Bealieu, Mackie-Mason, and

Miron‟s (1992) essays demonstrates that countries which experience substantial seasonal cycles




                                                22
also experience substantial business cycles. To facilitate analysis of such issues, this section

describes seasonal cycles in retail sales.

       Figure 6 displays the seasonal component extracted by the algorithm described in Section

3. The pattern is obvious. Retail trade is lowest during the winter months of January and

February. Trade rises during the spring, falls during the summer, rises again during the fall, and

peaks during December. The figure plots the data for all twelve Federal Reserve districts

grouped into five regions. The North East contains the Boston (1), New York (2), and

Philadelphia (3) districts. The Great Lakes contains the Cleveland (4) and Chicago (7) districts.

The Great Plains contains the St. Louis (8), Minneapolis (9), Kansas City (10), and Dallas (11)

districts. The Pacific contains the San Francisco (12) district. The lines for the regions appear

nearly indistinguishable. The seasonal cycles across these regions appears to have a substantial

common component.

       Figure 7 plots a measure of the common component. It is the seasonal variation for each

month averaged over all years and all districts. Sales fall below average in January, February,

July, and August. Sales rise increasingly above average during the fall and peak in December.

The Christmas-season surge produces almost all of the above average retail activity. Depending

on the year, the surge amounted to 5 percent to 10 percent of annual retail sales.

       Figure 8 plots seasonal averages for each region. The common pattern is clearly evident,

but idiosyncrasies for certain regions can be discerned. In the South, sales appear to have been

higher during Christmas and lower during the winter. In the Great Plains and Great Lakes, the

seasonal surges and shortages seem smaller.

       Table 20 examines the statistical characteristics of the seasonal cycle in all of the Federal

Reserve districts. The first row indicates the standard deviation of the seasonal component for




                                                 23
the entire sample period. It shows that New York and Richmond experienced the largest seasonal

cycles. Minneapolis experienced the mildest seasonal cycle. The experience of the other districts

resembled the national average. The second and third rows indicate the standard deviation during

the 1920s and 1930s respectively. At the national level, the standard deviation changed little, but

in five districts – Philadelphia, Cleveland, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Kansas City – the

seasonal cycle moderated, while in the Richmond district, the seasonal cycle accentuated. The

fourth and fifth rows indicate the maximum and minimum seasonal values. The maximum for

each district occurred in the month of December. In New York, Richmond, and Atlanta, the

December maximum amounted to 90 percent or more of average monthly spending.

       The sixth through tenth rows examine the Christmas-season spending surge. The sixth

row (Average Xmas) indicates how much December spending exceeded average spending during

the months of March through June. December spending exceeded average by the greatest extent

in New York and Richmond. Those districts appear to have had consistently merry Christmases.

The seventh row (Maximum Xmas) indicates the maximum amount by which December

spending exceeded the average of March through June. The highest values appear for New York

and Richmond. High values also appear in San Francisco, Atlanta, and Dallas. The eight row

(Maximum Xmas Year) indicates the year of the maximum. For most districts, the maximum

occurred during Roaring 20s, but for the districts that recovered most rapidly during the Great

Depression, the maximum occurred during 1939. The ninth row (Minimum Xmas) and tenth row

(Minimum Xmas Year) indicate the magnitude and year of the minimum. The minimum

occurred in 1932 in all districts. In Boston, the minimum reoccurred in 1933. On average, the

minimum amounted to just over two-thirds of the average Christmas and one-half of the

maximum.




                                                24
Section 10: Difference between the Initial and Final Series

        Table 21 illuminates difference between the initial and final series. The table‟s first four

rows indicate the average difference for each Federal Reserve district for the full sample period,

for the years 1919 to 1922, the years 1923 to 1927, and the years 1928 to 1929. These periods

reflect changes in reporting methods. The remaining rows indicate the standard deviation of the

difference for the same periods. The difference is calculated by subtracting the monthly value of

the initial series from the final series. A negative value indicates that the initial series

overestimated the volume of retail trade, and the initial estimate was lowered to create the final

series. A positive value indicates that the initial series underestimated the volume of retail trade,

and the initial estimates had to be increased to create the final series.

        The table reveals patterns of measurement errors in the initial indices. The average error

for the entire United States was -1.15. The negative value indicates that the initial indices

consistently overestimated retail trade. The magnitude and direction of the errors differed from

district to district. The Boston, Richmond, and Chicago districts typically overestimated retail

trade. The overestimation was especially large for Richmond and Chicago, as reflected in errors

of -1.69 and -2.56. Under-estimation occurred in Cleveland, Minneapolis, and Dallas, whose

errors averaged 3.20, 1.67, and 1.16 respectfully.

        The direction of the errors changed over time. In six of the nine districts for which data

spans the enter sample period, the direction of the bias changes over time. Chicago for example,

overestimated retail trade during the first and third periods and underestimated retail trade during

the second period.




                                                   25
       The magnitude of the errors also changed over time. For the United States as a whole, the

mean error decreased from 2.01 in the first period to 0.57 in the second period, and rose slightly

to 0.73 in the third period. Among the nine districts with index values available for the full

sample period, Richmond, Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas exhibited large measurement errors

in the first period, but the magnitude of these errors decreased substantially in subsequent

periods. The shrinking errors reflected improving quality of information, especially after 1922.

       Table 21‟s bottom four rows report the standard deviation of measurement errors

imbedded in the initial index. For the United States as a whole for the entire sample period, the

standard deviation was 5.64. The standard deviation fell over time. In the first period, the

standard deviation was 7.58. In the latter periods, it was 3.86 and 4.34. This pattern held in

almost all Federal Reserve districts. The pattern indicates that over time, the initial estimates

improved, in the sense that the initial estimates increasingly resembled the final series.

       Figure 9 illustrates this improvement. The figure plots the difference between the initial

and final series for each of the twelve districts in each month from January 1919 through August

1929. While discerning the pattern for an individual district is difficult, the overall pattern

appears clear. Errors shrink over time. Beginning in 1924, the measurement error i was small,

usually only a few percent and rarely exceeding 10 percent. By 1928, the measurement error had

fallen near zero.

       Figure 10 provides insight into what did (and what did not) influence the quality of the

initial estimate. The figure plots the final index for the entire United States and the measurement

error for each month from 1919 to 1929. The errors appear uncorrelated with the index. The

correlation coefficient between the measurement error and the final index, 0.04, corroborates this

conclusion. The correlation coefficients between the error and the growth of the index from the




                                                  26
preceding month, 0.039, and between the error and growth of the index from the same month in

the preceding year, 0.22, also indicate little (or no) relationship between measurements errors

and cyclical movements in retail trade. These facts suggest big changes in the retail trade index

did not result in big errors in measurement. The improvement in the quality of the initial

estimates, in other words, stemmed primarily from improvements in data collection and

processing, not from changes in the seasonality or cyclicality of the economy.

       Table 22 indicates measurement errors by month of the year. Columns (1) through (3)

indicate the average difference (i) for each month for the full sample period, (ii) for the years

1919 to 1922, and (iii) for the years 1923 to 1929. Columns (4) through (6) indicate the standard

deviation for the same periods. On average, the initial indices were overestimated in January,

March, April, May, August, October, and December. The initial indices were underestimated in

February, September, and November. After 1923, the standard deviation of errors declined. The

largest declines were for January, which fell from 10.41 to 0.062, and for March, which fell from

15.00 to 4.43.

       To understand revisions, we examine the Seventh (Chicago) Federal Reserve District.

Chicago‟s retail trade index was revised in April 1923, December 1923, February 1926, February

1928, and February 1929. The February 1929 revision accompanied a special report that

explained the process. The Chicago Fed revised the series to improve the accuracy of the data

and increase the number of reporting stores. The Chicago Fed gathered data from department

stores being added to the index for all years back to 1919, and recalculated the index for previous

years to make it comparable to the new index.

       The three revisions corrected errors in the initial indices, although the magnitude of

corrections differed from revision to revision. For example, the initial revision determined the




                                                 27
errors between April and November 1926 were small. The 1928 revision indicated those errors

were large (and gargantuan in September 1926). The 1929 revision detected errors lying between

the initial and 1928 revisions. The direction of correction also differed from revision to revision.

For example, for December 1924 and January 1925, the 1928 revision reported the initial values

to be overestimated, but 1929 revision found them to be correct.

       This case study illustrates the Federal Reserve‟s struggle to accurately asses the state of

the economy during the early 1920s, as the Fed constructed a reporting system and learned to

process data. The Fed knew about the problems with its series. Uncertainty about economic

activity may have been one reason the Fed was reluctant to act during the 1930s.



Section 11: Conclusion

       Retail trade is an important indicator of the state of the economy. The Federal Reserve

realized this fact and began collecting data on retail sales in 1919. The Federal Reserve published

some, but not all, of this information. This essay completes that task, by reconstructing the

Federal Reserve‟s statistical series on retail sales for each Federal Reserve district from 1919 to

1939. The reconstructed data illuminate important economic trends.

       Retail trade followed business cycles closely. Retails sales increased during expansions

and decreased during contractions. Retail sales did not consistently lead or lag the cycle, but it

clearly commoved with industrial production, which the NBER used to date peaks and troughs in

business activity. Retail sales peaked in August of 1929, a month prior to the crash, and declined

precipitously during the next two years. Retail trade troughed in March of 1933. Retail sales

recovered rapidly during the New Deal, only to decline during the contraction of 1937, and

rebound the next year when economic expansion resumed.




                                                 28
       Retail trade also exhibited a seasonal cycle, similar to that of our contemporary economy.

Trade peaked in December and troughed in the winter and summer. Christmas caused the surge

in December. Christmas spending plummeted during the contraction in the early 1930s and failed

to recover during the next decade. Christmas during the 1930s involved, as Gary‟s grandmother

frequently asserted, much less gift giving than Christmas did before or after.

       Economic experiences varied across districts during the Roaring 20s and Great

Depression. During the 1920s, retail sales increased in New England, the Great Lakes, and the

Pacific Coast. During the 1930s, retail trade increased in the South and the Pacific. At that time,

however, consumption declined in the Great Plains, extending a trend that began in the middle of

the 1920s, when droughts began and the Dust Bowl formed.

       The Federal Reserve‟s initial estimates of retail trade contained substantial measurement

error. The largest errors occurred between 1919 and 1922, as the Federal Reserve struggled to

construct an effective reporting system and increase the number of firms from which it collected

data. After 1923, quality improved. The magnitude of errors decreased. And, the initial reports

became a better indication of the state of the economy.

       The data that we introduce in this essay enhances our understanding of consumption

during the Great Depression. Temin (1976) asserts that a collapse of autonomous consumption

caused the initial contraction in output, which subsequently decreased the demand for money and

the equilibrium money stock. Romer (1990) argues that the stock market crash created

immediate income uncertainty resulting in a decline in the purchase of consumer durables.

Greasly, Madsen, Oxley (2001) argue that uncertainty reduced nondurable spending as well. Our

new data series seems consistent with these claims and provides data needed to test these




                                                 29
theories and other hypothesis with the inter-district variation that existed during the Great

Depression.




                                                 30
Table 1: Reporting Firms, Classified by Size of City and Volume of Sales

 Population of City        # of      # of Firms Annual Sales,
                          Cities     Reporting         1925,
                                                   ($ 1,000)
 Over 1,000,000               4             29       459,061
 500,000 to 1,000,000         9             58       654,943
 100,000 to 500,000          50            197       644,856
 25,000 to 100,000           99            153       227,334
 10,000 to 25,000            60             67        31,944
 Under 10,000                31             31         7,463
 Total                      253            565      2,025,601


Source: Federal Reserve Bulletin, February 1929.




                                              31
Table 2: Retail Trade Final Index, Average 1923 to 1925 Equals 100

                                          Federal Reserve District
Year   Month        1    2     3     4      5      6      7      8    9    10     11    12   US
1919      Jan      60    57    68    61    67    68     64     (a)    84   (b)    78    50    60
         Feb       54    52    63    54    61    71     60            69          69    44    59
         Mar       66    62    64    66    79    87     75            93          96    57    65
         Apr       79    75    88    76    87    90     76            98          89    62    77
         May       80    73    70    74    83    92     77            96          91    64    73
          Jun      76    72    73    74    82    83     71            95          89    61    76
           Jul     58    56    57    62    63    76     56            76          71    59    59
         Aug       62    54    57    67    59    72     60            81          73    66    60
         Sept      74    73    71    73    78    91     69            89         103    70    76
          Oct      96    97    92    89    95   108     81           104         118    83    89
         Nov       93    96   110    91   100   115     81            98         120    75   101
         Dec      138   142   135   134   150   174    114           135         177   126   137
1920      Jan      84    85    81    85    73    93     79            96         103    75    82
         Feb       63    68    72    71    65    81     74            75          90    60    74
         Mar       92    92    93    99    96   112     96           105         127    79    90
         Apr       96    88    92    93    91   118     94           103         116    79    91
         May       96   100   107   101    92   122     96           106         121    84   101
          Jun      98    93   100   101    98   110     90           110         116    80    96
           Jul     71    69    69    82    74    90     69            88          89    72    73
         Aug       68    63    67    83    70    90     74            90          88    82    73
         Sept      84    79    79    92    83   102     84           105         113    81    88
          Oct      98   103   102   106   105   136     96           113         135    90   102
         Nov      103   108   118   111   112   130     97           113         137    85   112
         Dec      139   145   139   148   159   175    136           150         174   130   146
1921      Jan      84    81    82    88    76    86     71     76     88          91    74    83
         Feb       67    70    76    77    69    83     67     70     75          85    64    75
         Mar       95    89    92    97    98   110     86    100    102         110    79    88
         Apr       92    88    93    92    89    95     84     90    110          96    75    87
         May       92    85    89    91    88   100     86    101    100         101    79    91
          Jun      96    87    89    87    93    91     81     85     99          97    74    86
           Jul     62    60    63    63    65    70     66     62     78          70    64    64
         Aug       64    60    67    65    64    72     67     66     84          69    78    63
         Sept      77    70    69    69    70    79     76     77     92          90    74    75
          Oct     100   105    98    91   101   115     87    102    103         112    85    95
         Nov       96   100   106    87   100   103     87    102     99         103    79    97
         Dec      147   148   145   128   152   148    122    149    131         147   125   135
1922      Jan      79    75    77    67    64    71     67     69     76          74    67    73
          Feb      65    67    71    62    63    70     59     67     63          71    57    69
         Mar       87    83    84    78    80    81     73     84     83          89    75    77
          Apr      97    90    94    90    89    94     86     87     99          86    76    90
         May       96    89    90    90    87    93     89     92     95          95    89    89
         June      97    87    89    86    86    84     84     86     90          86    77    85
         July      64    60    60    65    59    66     64     62     73          64    67    64
         Aug       69    63    68    72    63    71     70     69     83          66    83    66
         Sept      89    82    79    82    78    82     87     92     94         101    78    85
          Oct     105   110   103   102   102   110     95    107    105         102    95   102
         Nov      106   107   118   100   106   107    100    108    102         103    92   108
          Dec     153   154   156   147   158   155    142    151    148         147   142   152




                                                32
Table 2 (Continued)

                                            Federal Reserve District
Year    Month                                                                                   US
                      1    2     3     4      5      6      7       8    9     10    11    12

1923      Jan      83      82    82    79    75     78     81     76     83   (b)    80    79    79
          Feb      71      68    80    74    68     75     72     76     69          71    70    77
         Mar       96      93   105   105   106    101     97    105     96          97    92    93
          Apr      99      92    92    99    90     97     97     96    106          89    85    97
         May      102      97   102   106    99    104    101    100    105         105   101   100
         June     106      97   105   106   102    101    103    102    100          91    88    99
         July      69      66    68    74    68     74     71     70     75          67    81    73
         Aug       77      69    75    87    68     79     86     76     91          68    94    75
         Sept      89      85    83    91    81     91     94    101     97         101    88    94
          Oct     111     121   118   116   118    128    116    117    112         121   110   111
         Nov      112     115   129   109   117    117    112    111    105         111   100   117
          Dec     164     164   166   158   170    162    156    157    148         154   163   164
1924      Jan      95      89    86    84    81     83     85     81     83    84    85    91    86
          Feb      79      78    87    86    76     83     80     82     72    77    78    83    84
         Mar       90      88    94    93    89     90     90     94     88    85    91    92    88
          Apr     109     101   108   111   105    103    106    100    111    96    98    95   103
         May      103      99    99   102    98    104     99     96    105    94   105   101    98
         June     101      96    97    96    98     90     93     92     94    88    92    87    97
         July      73      71    69    72    71     70     71     69     78    69    70    80    71
         Aug       69      65    69    78    64     71     77     71     85    73    68    96    72
         Sept      90      95    84    91    89     91     95    100     98   100   112    90    96
          Oct     110     122   110   103   114    118    102    111    105   107   122   108   105
         Nov      108     116   118   107   118    107    113    110    109   104   111   100   117
          Dec     171     174   172   161   182    165    163    167    157   160   166   167   156
1925      Jan      91      90    83    83    79     80     84     83     87    83    91    90    84
          Feb      77      81    81    81    78     81     77     80     76    80    87    79    85
         Mar       91      92    96    96    99     95     92     99     93    97   104    98    94
          Apr     107     104   105   110   109    104    107    110    112   105   104   102   105
         May      100     100    95   101    99    103    101     95    103    96   105   105   103
         June     105     100    99    99   102     93    101     93     99    94    94    95    98
         July      75      73    69    76    76     74     76     71     77    73    71    87    75
         Aug       71      71    69    80    72     74     81     78     88    81    73   100    76
         Sept      93      97    85    89    88     84    100    100    100   100   103    97    97
          Oct     124     140   124   124   133    135    131    139    130   123   133   118   122
         Nov      110     121   122   104   124    116    114    113    102   104   110   110   122
          Dec     179     188   174   169   194    179    178    177    161   164   173   178   176
1926      Jan     101      94    86    83    87     86     85     85     85    79    91    91    90
          Feb      74      83    78    81    78     87     83     85     76    73    90    82    87
         Mar       95      98   103    98   107    103    104    105     93    92   107   108    97
          Apr     104     103    98   102   103    106    105    108    107    94   103   104   102
         May      104     106   105   106   108    114    115    105    101    92   112   107   109
         June     105     104    98    97   102    101    106     86     92    90   103    99   100
         July      77      76    70    78    78     77     88     72     81    72    76    91    77
         Aug       76      78    71    85    77     80     87     81     84    76    87   107    82
         Sept      97     104    88    97    91     89    111    105    103    98   109   109   104
          Oct     120     134   119   121   127    124    121    126    109   103   127   118   120
         Nov      119     129   124   113   132    123    120    122    101   107   121   116   124
          Dec     182     196   180   177   197    181    182    172    152   164   178   193   184



                                                  33
Table 2 (Continued)

                                            Federal Reserve District
Year   Month          1    2     3     4      5      6      7       8    9     10    11    12   US
1927      Jan     103      96    80    85    84     85     85     79     81    80    87    96    91
          Feb      78      85    78    83    78     88     89     83     76    76    86    85    89
         Mar       97      99    94    98    99     99    104     98     92    89    97   109    95
          Apr     111     112   103   116   110    109    115    108    104    98   109   115   100
         May      101     102    94   105   103    108    106     96     91    88   112   107   105
         June     110     109    97    99   100     99    107     93     91    86    95    95   101
         July      74      74    65    78    72     76     79     68     75    68    69    89    76
         Aug       84      84    73    93    80     86     95     90     92    83    80   114    85
         Sept      99     106    83    95    91     97    107     97     93    96   105   111   103
          Oct     115     128   109   113   121    128    122    127    109   106   125   119   117
         Nov      120     134   120   112   125    119    125    120    100   110   120   121   126
          Dec     182     201   174   176   195    191    188    177    155   165   189   195   182
1928      Jan      98      94    75    85    81     85     90     82     72    80    89    96    91
          Feb      78      89    76    85    82     91     92     85     72    77    88    92    88
         Mar       96     102    96   101   105    110    109    105     91    93   109   110    97
          Apr      99     103    91   101    99    102    109     99     82    93   102   114   105
         May      101     109    95   106   106    114    118    104     90    94   116   116   107
         June     111     112    96   100   102     98    113     94     84    84    98   101   102
         July      76      77    65    78    75     77     86     73     68    71    71    94    80
         Aug       78      78    65    85    78     86     96     83     80    85    80   116    81
         Sept      97     111    89   101    96     98    124    107     99   102   112   113   113
          Oct     119     135   115   112   125    123    130    119     90   110   125   129   118
         Nov      119     134   114   110   127    120    132    119     91   108   126   118   125
          Dec     181     207   174   174   197    180    200    175    140   168   184   200   192
1929      Jan      96      97    78    86    82     89     97     81     70    83    90   106    90
          Feb      76      90    75    83    78     87     95     85     68    76    85    91    91
         Mar      101     111    99   105   114    113    120    110     92   102   115   115   107
          Apr      97     108    90   105   102    104    113     99     93    99   105   111   103
         May      108     113    93   108   109    107    121    105     88    96   115   120   109
         June     108     116    95   103   107     93    117     96     82    87    97   103   108
         July      76      80    62    80    76     75     87     76     65    72    74   100    79
         Aug       83      82    69    92    81     85    100     87     78    85    85   120    84
         Sept      99     116    89   100   100     98    129    108     94   108   111   112   115
          Oct     127     145   121   113   131    118    129    115     80   113   127   130   122
         Nov      119     133   112   110   133    114    132    118     90   115   129   124   126
          Dec     178     211   169   172   201    170    186    164    129   163   176   200   189
1930      Jan     103     101    74    79    83     75     90     74     61    76    79   104    88
          Feb      78      89    73    79    80     84     88     82     69    77    88    89    89
         Mar      103     110    96   100   117    108    112    106     93   103   118   113   105
          Apr     105     119   101   111   112    116    111    104    102   100   107   110   108
         May      109     119    92   105   112    102    113     96     89    94   104   115   108
         June      99     113    83    90   102     85     97     83     71    83    90    97    98
         July      71      78    57    72    72     66     71     66     55    67    67    91    72
         Aug       76      77    62    80    76     62     79     72     71    78    77   109    75
         Sept      90     114    82    90    91     94    111     96     91   100   103   107   107
          Oct     116     137   113   100   133    111    108    103     79   112   112   122   112
         Nov      110     124   107    92   118    100    107     94     79   102   105   106   111
          Dec     166     200   152   151   193    153    167    141    117   148   160   182   172



                                                  34
Table 2 (Continued)

                                            Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month         1    2     3     4      5      6      7       8    9     10    11    12   US
1931      Jan      93      95    66    74    80     69       86    69    60    76    73    95    82
          Feb      71      85    66    71    76     70       81    67    66    71    77    80    81
         Mar      108     110    96    96   126    101      103    94    98    95   101   105   102
          Apr      97     109    87    98   103    103      102    90    96    91    94    99    98
         May       93     100    79    88   102     94       95    84    77    85    91   100    93
         June      93     113    81    85   104     83       93    79    67    80    78    90    95
         July      64      72    53    66    69     59       66    58    49    57    56    84    66
         Aug       66      68    54    67    70     55       72    66    64    65    65    98    66
         Sept      92     100    69    67    86     73       90    76    74    80    75    94    92
          Oct     106     124    88    80   117     88       91    87    70    90    86   106    95
         Nov       95     111    84    76   103     81       89    85    69    79    84    90    94
          Dec     146     182   128   127   176    127      141   123   102   119   126   151   149
1932      Jan      70      77    52    54    65        54    64    60    47    57    54    74    64
          Feb      60      71    55    60    67        56    66    60    55    60    59    69    68
         Mar       88      88    76    75   103        79    81    78    79    78    80    84    81
          Apr      76      85    70    71    81        73    75    66    75    66    65    71    75
         May       75      77    63    65    84        66    72    62    58    61    62    71    71
         June      72      83    59    60    80        58    69    57    52    56    54    66    71
         July      47      51    38    43    50        40    45    40    36    41    38    59    46
         Aug       51      58    42    44    54        42    51    47    49    49    47    76    50
         Sept      78      84    54    48    76        65    69    63    66    70    70    73    76
          Oct      83      98    74    59    93        67    69    68    58    72    73    83    75
         Nov       78      90    70    58    86        63    70    68    56    63    67    67    75
          Dec     118     140   101    93   137        96   101    92    77    89    98   121   115
1933      Jan      51      58    41    42    53     41       48    46    37    46    44    54    49
          Feb      46      56    40    45    51     43       45    43    43    47    47    52    51
         Mar       59      69    56    51    73     54       58    59    61    60    62    59    59
          Apr      67      77    77    63    76     63       66    58    71    62    64    67    68
         May       72      75    60    63    80     69       71    60    60    61    65    74    69
         June      68      79    57    60    74     56       66    58    50    56    55    66    68
         July      48      50    39    49    50     42       45    43    36    44    44    67    48
         Aug       59      63    49    63    66     53       62    58    55    60    60    77    58
         Sept      78      82    61    56    77     63       73    56    64    67    64    73    77
          Oct      82      96    72    64    94     75       72    71    54    75    79    75    75
         Nov       77      89    69    62    87     73       73    74    57    65    76    69    77
          Dec     118     146   105   104   148    117      113   101    85   109   121   128   123
1934      Jan      63      65    46    56    61     53       58    58    42    57    60    62    57
          Feb      50      60    43    58    57     59       60    53    51    57    65    59    59
         Mar       84      92    80    85   111     93       89    87    78    85    98    82    86
          Apr      67      77    73    69    79     81       77    64    68    70    75    68    71
         May       74      80    67    78    96     84       83    75    67    73    79    75    77
         June      73      82    64    71    90     75       71    63    53    63    68    66    74
         July      47      50    41    51    58     51       49    45    36    47    50    61    50
         Aug       56      63    50    63    72     56       65    58    55    63    62    81    59
         Sept      72      80    60    56    84     75       81    68    73    80    86    76    80
          Oct      87     103    79    69   112     88       80    75    58    80    86    90    83
         Nov       76      95    73    72   102     90       84    82    68    75    92    82    85
          Dec     128     155   117   117   173    135      132   111    97   122   142   142   137




                                                  35
Table 2 (Continued)

                                              Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month          1     2     3     4      5      6      7      8      9     10    11    12   US
1935       Jan         60    65    46    64    64         56    64    59    42    60    66    69    60
           Feb         51    60    45    57    63         63    65    54    54    63    69    64    62
          Mar          71    80    69    76   105         89    90    84    75    82    94    77    79
           Apr         72    81    85    78    95         91    86    64    76    73    86    82    80
          May          73    77    65    71    96         85    83    69    69    67    80    83    77
          June         72    83    64    73    94         74    74    65    58    70    71    74    77
          July         51    55    45    58    67         60    57    52    42    54    58    72    57
          Aug          54    62    50    64    77         62    70    59    61    69    66    88    62
          Sept         79    89    67    62    96         77    86    63    75    80    91    83    87
           Oct         88   102    82    76   117         98    90    82    65    89    94   101    88
          Nov          82   101    81    80   113        102    96    86    76    82    99    90    94
           Dec        131   161   125   128   185        147   143   113   102   125   153   152   145
1936       Jan         65    71    49    61    72         62    65    62    44    64    75    75    64
           Feb         58    67    51    70    70         75    72    60    56    68    81    73    70
          Mar          78    86    78    77   113         97    98    88    81    87   103    87    86
           Apr         78    87    89    87   101         99    95    74    84    79    95    88    86
          May          79    84    72    86   109         96    94    76    78    76    95    89    86
          June         81    92    72    85   105         92    91    72    65    77    91    86    88
          July         57    64    50    67    77         67    66    56    46    57    71    81    64
          Aug          56    64    54    73    79         70    76    59    66    69    78    95    66
          Sept         89    96    73    74   102         93   102    75    84    87   108    96    99
           Oct        100   116    91    94   136        113   109   102    76   100   126   112   102
          Nov          89   110    86    91   119        113   109    93    78    86   112    92   101
           Dec        146   180   143   159   205        175   172   133   115   140   184   178   166
1937       Jan         73    76    54    69    78         72    79    68    47    69    84    82    71
           Feb         62    72    54    83    75         81    81    65    62    73    90    79    77
          Mar          88    97    91   107   134        120   123   107    94   100   122   108   103
           Apr         80    90    89    95    98        106   105    82    83    83   107    90    90
          May          82    91    77    95   113        110   103    84    79    81   107    98    93
          June         84    98    75    95   110        101   102    79    69    79    91    87    94
          July         56    65    49    74    75         70    73    61    50    61    76    84    67
          Aug          56    67    53    78    81         77    79    63    66    74    86   101    68
          Sept         89   102    78    84   113        103   112    82    90    94   122    96   105
           Oct         98   113    89    95   133        118   110   100    75    96   122   110   101
          Nov          89   110    91    88   119        120   108    91    79    89   127    95   102
           Dec        140   178   136   152   208        182   169   126   110   135   193   171   163
1938       Jan         70    73    50    68    78         73    72    70    47    67    92    78    68
           Feb         58    68    51    72    75         84    71    63    58    68    92    71    71
          Mar          79    86    70    86   116        110   106    94    88    91   118    89    89
           Apr         82    89    80    88   108        110    91    79    89    83   107    92    87
          May          72    77    57    72    98        102    81    73    71    70   102    89    77
          June         80    89    60    74   102         94    83    70    65    71    88    80    83
          July         50    56    41    60    70         68    61    57    47    56    71    76    59
          Aug          57    63    46    67    81         78    73    61    67    70    85    95    64
          Sept         79    96    68    72   108        100   102    76    87    84   114    82    95
           Oct         96   101    78    81   125        118    94    93    69    89   109   100    91
          Nov          92   104    83    85   117        125   102    94    80    88   121    96    99
           Dec        146   175   134   152   210        193   169   131   113   135   189   171   163




                                                    36
Table 2 (Continued)

                                              Federal Reserve District
 Year    Month         1     2     3     4      5      6      7      8      9     10    11    12   US
 1939      Jan         69    66    48    66    76         77    71    73    48    68    91    79    67
           Feb         59    64    48    72    73         87    68    62    56    64    88    74    70
          Mar          80    89    78    93   126        123   112    99    91    90   120    93    94
           Apr         79    84    81    89   101        115    95    80    88    82   106    88    86
          May          80    83    70    85   114        119    92    85    79    75   109    93    87
          June         82    92    61    81   105        106    90    75    67    73    88    82    87
          July         53    57    42    64    71         74    64    60    47    57    71    78    61
          Aug          57    66    48    75    86         90    78    69    74    75    86    98    69
          Sept         91   100    75    79   116        107   108    79    94    86   112    93   103
           Oct         96   105    81    91   130        128   105    98    73    89   113   104    97
          Nov          93   113    96    97   130        140   106   101    80    87   119    92   105
           Dec        148   177   138   166   218        209   179   137   123   139   195   173   170


Notes: (a) Not available for January 1919 through December 1920.
       (b) Not available for January 1919 through December 1923.
Source: Federal Reserve Bulletin issues from Feb 1928 to August 1930, and Federal Reserve
Board archival data from December 1924 to December 1939.




                                                    37
Table 3: Retail Trade Initial Index, 1923 to 1930, Average 1923 to 1925 Equals 100

                                          Federal Reserve District
Year    Month       1     2     3    4      5      6      7      8     9   10     11    12   US
1919      Jan      61    59    69   (a)    64    79     64     (b)    87   (c)    84    51    60
         Feb       53    52    56          59    69     61            73          75    46    55
         Mar       67    63    81          82    89     78            96         105    59    68
         Apr       79    77    79          94    97     77           102          96    64    78
         May       81    75    84          86    95     79            98          99    65    78
          Jun      77    72    74          84    88     74            99          95    62    74
           Jul     59    56    63          65    82     57            79          74    61    60
         Aug       61    53    63          60    71     60            85          75    69    60
         Sept      74    72    69          81    92     70            93          96    71    77
          Oct      95    99    87          98    96     78           101         112    84    99
         Nov       94    97    90         103   115     79            99         113    76    97
         Dec      141   139   110         154   174    110           135         145   127   144
1920      Jan      83    91    84          76    97     78           100         101    77    85
         Feb       63    67    65          64    86     92            79          91    60    68
         Mar       93   103   112         101   113    135           107         126    81    95
         Apr       94    89    89          96   120    103           119         115    73    93
         May       97    77   126          96   124    118           102         119    86    99
          Jun      99    93   100         102   109    117           111         114    80    95
           Jul     71    69    78          76    91     80            88          93    74    71
         Aug       68    61    77          73    91     80            93          94    84    70
         Sept      86    75    79          87   103     90            93         108    81    84
          Oct      96   105   100         111   121     85            98         130    91   104
         Nov      105   108    98         117   128     93           102         127    84   108
         Dec      143   137   116         162   179    121           136         141   121   146
1921      Jan      84    86    87          81    88     70            87          92    66   104
         Feb       67    68    68          70    87     87            73          86    59    89
         Mar       94    99   114         104   107    130            95         106    82   117
         Apr       92    88    88          95    97    100           112          95    66    89
         May       93    70   117          93   103    103            87          98    82    90
          Jun      96    86    93          97    91     97            92          94    73    85
           Jul     62    61    69          67    72     68            69          72    64    60
         Aug       65    58    74          66    72     65            83          72    79    62
         Sept      77    69    67          73    80     76            77          83    69    72
          Oct     100   108    97         104   102     76            86         108    85    97
         Nov       97    99    89         102   101     77            83          94    78    94
         Dec      151   139   118         154   149    112           111         118   118   138
1922      Jan      82    79    76          67    71     66            74          74    58    91
          Feb      65    65    63          61    73     78            64          70    54    79
         Mar       85    91    98          84    81    110            79          85    77   100
          Apr      96    90    93          94    95     99           105          84    65    88
         May       96    72   117          91    96    106            85          92    95    91
         June      95    87    91          90    83    101            87          84    76    84
         July      65    61    67          63    67     70            68          66    66    60
         Aug       68    61    75          66    70     70            83          69    84    64
         Sept      91    80    77          81    83     88            80          92    72    80
          Oct     104   113   102         105    96     83            93          99    94   102
         Nov      105   107    99         108   104     89            83          94    89   102
          Dec     158   146   128         162   156    131           124         117   132   150




                                                38
Table 3 (Continued)
                                            Federal Reserve District
Year   Month          1     2     3     4     5      6      7      8     9   10     11    12   US
1923      Jan     83       85    82   (a)    72    81     73     (b)    73   (c)    77    79    79
         Feb      73       69    75          68    75     68            74          73    71    71
         Mar     100       98   115          99   102     90           101          97    94    98
         Apr     101       92    98          86    98     88           109          87    87    92
         May     105       98   116          96   105     90           109         103   102   100
          Jun    107       97   101          98    98     97           105          90    89    97
           Jul    71       64    86          71    73     68            81          65    81    72
         Aug      78       66    88          71    79     87            93          68    95    80
         Sept     91       85    89          83    89     94           103          99    88    90
          Oct    113      121   119   116   112   128    114           114         122   104   117
         Nov     115      116   130   107   107   116    108           105         109   102   113
         Dec     165      162   156   156   162   162    157           147         154   164   161
1924      Jan     94       90    85    85    76    82     81            83          84    92    86
         Feb      79       77    85    86    74    80     83            71          77    84    81
         Mar      89       89    92    92    90    92     90            89          92    93    91
         Apr     108      103   105   108   107   103    105           104          98    97   105
         May     104       99    95    99    96   100     98           102         103   102   100
          Jun    103       96    95    99   100    92     91            91          92    88    95
           Jul    70       69    64    70    70    70     72            75          69    81    72
         Aug      68       63    65    75    67    69     80            85          68    95    74
         Sept     90       97    84    87    91    91     98            98         110    90    94
          Oct    108      117   111   100   118   116    101           111         123   109   112
         Nov     110      116   118   103   118   109    114           106         112   100   112
         Dec     169      172   160   154   184   164    162           155         166   166   166
1925      Jan     89       91    81    79    80    80     84            88          90    89    86
         Feb      74       81    78    79    76    81     75            77          87    79    79
         Mar      86       94    93    93   102    95     95            93         104   100    96
         Apr     107      106   100   105   113   105    109           105         107   102   107
         May      98      100    93    98   101   100    105           102         105   103   101
          Jun    105      100    98    95   106    95    103            98          92    93   100
           Jul    72       71    65    73    80    75     79            77          70    86    76
         Aug      69       68    68    77    75    75     84            88          76    97    78
         Sept     93       99    85    85    90    86    106            99         107    97    97
          Oct    123      141   129   119   138   134    128           129         137   117   131
         Nov     112      120   129    99   125   118    113           100         112   110   115
         Dec     177      185   166   162   198   183    180           160         175   176   178
1926      Jan    103       98    88    80    89    86     88            81          92    90    91
          Feb     73       82    79    79    79    89     88            73          91    81    82
         Mar      94      100   106    94   112   104    107            90         108   110   103
          Apr    105      105    99    98   108   110    108           102         105   104   105
         May     105      106   105   102   111   110    117            98         113   106   109
         June    105      104    99    96   106   100    108            88         101    99   103
         July     74       75    67    74    83    77     85            77          77    86    78
         Aug      76       75    69    80    80    79     90            80          85   105    83
         Sept     96      103    89    91    95    89    120           101         111   110   103
          Oct    121      135   123   113   132   121    126           104         130   118   125
         Nov     124      129   128   109   133   124    126            97         123   117   124
          Dec    185      193   176   166   202   182    171           150         180   193   185




                                                  39
Table 3 (Continued)
                                            Federal Reserve District
Year   Month          1     2     3     4     5      6      7      8     9    10    11    12   US
1927      Jan     110      97    82    79    88    83     86     (b)    78   (c)    81    96    90
         Feb       77      84    77    78    77    88     94            75          87    86    84
         Mar       95     100    95    92   102    96    111            89         107   110   101
         Apr      113     113   102   109   115   110    119            98         111   116   113
         May      102     102    95    98   106   104    112            88         110   106   104
          Jun     109     109    97    92   103    98    109            88          97    95   103
           Jul     71      73    62    73    76    76     85            73          70    88    77
         Aug       83      81    71    86    83    84    102            85          81   111    90
         Sept      97     105    85    88    94    97    118            93         106   112   103
          Oct     114     128   112   105   121   124    122           104         128   119   120
         Nov      123     134   123   103   128   120    130            97         121   122   124
         Dec      181     198   170   163   196   194    193           149         192   194   188
1928      Jan      98      94    75    85    82    85     85     82     80    79    89    98    88
         Feb       78      88    71    85    82    91     89     85     75    77    88    92    85
         Mar       96      12    95   101   105   110    109    105     94    92   109   110   103
         Apr       99     103    90   101    99   102    113     99     83    92   102   114   102
         May      101     109    94   106   106   114    122    104     95    93   116   116   107
          Jun     112     112    94   100   102    98    113     94     84    84    98   101   103
           Jul     75      76    64    78    75    77     92     73     68    71    71    92    78
         Aug       78      78    65    85    78    86    100     83     80    85    80   115    85
         Sept      99     106    83    95    91    97    114     97     93    96   105   111   106
          Oct     119     135   114   112   125   123    133    119     88   110   125   129   123
         Nov      119     134   113   110   127   120    136    119     89   111   126   118   122
         Dec      181     206   172   174   197   180    203    175    137   166   186   195   187
1929      Jan      97      97   100    86    82    89     95     81     77    83    88   106    94
         Feb       76      88    75    83    78    87     93     85     76    76    84    91    85
         Mar      101     110    99   105   114   113    119    110    101   102   115   115   110
         Apr       97     108    90   105   102   104    110     99     93    99   105   111   104
         May      108     113    93   108   109   107    122    105     97    99   115   120   110
          Jun     108     116    95   103   107    93    117     96     90    87    97   100   106
           Jul     76      80    62    80    76    75     87     76     72    72    74   100    80
         Aug       83      82    69    92    81    85    100     87     86    85    85   120    89
         Sept      98     118    84   101   103    97    128    120     97   105   110   113   109
          Oct     127     146   122   118   131   121    129    117     87   112   129   129   128
         Nov      119     133   114   108   133   112    135    119     91   112   129   125   123
         Dec      176     206   173   171   204   171    187    164    132   165   179   203   185
1930      Jan     104      99    80    78    85    76     88     72     70    74    80   104    89
          Feb      77      89    73    77    81    83     88     83     73    75    85    90    83
         Mar       88     103    83    88    98    93     96     93     87    89    99   112    95
          Apr     107     120    95   112   113   104    119    109     99    97   106   114   112
         May      108     119    91   104   112   101    113     96     90    94   106   114   108
         June      89     109    84    89   100    83     98     84     80    82    89    97    95
         July      71      77    58    70    73    67     72     66     61    68    69    91    72
         Aug       74      77    63    78    77    77     84     73     73    79    78   108    79

Notes: (a) Not available for January 1919 through September 1923.
        (b) Not available for January 1919 through December 1927.
        (c) Not available for January 1919 through December 1927.
Source: Federal Reserve Bulletin. Various issues.


                                                  40
Table 4: Retail Trade Final Index, Seasonally Adjusted

                                          Federal Reserve District
Year    Month       1     2     3    4      5      6      7      8    9    10     11   12   US
1919      Jan      65    64    76    69    83    85      75    (a)    97   (b)    91   56   68
         Feb       73    67    77    69    82    89      74           94          88   58   71
         Mar       67    62    64    66    76    89      73           93          91   59   67
         Apr       75    74    84    72    86    87      73           91          92   65   78
         May       76    72    70    71    83    89      73           94          90   64   70
          Jun      71    72    72    73    80    88      72           92          92   65   76
           Jul     81    78    79    79    84   101      74           93          97   70   79
         Aug       83    78    78    82    81    93      74           94          99   68   80
         Sept      82    82    84    82    90   103      74           92         104   73   82
          Oct      86    82    84    81    84    88      75           95         100   76   82
         Nov       84    82    88    84    85   100      74           91         107   73   86
         Dec       86    85    85    86    86   106      73           93         111   79   86
1920      Jan      92    95    91    96    90   117      93          111         121   85   93
         Feb       85    87    88    90    88   101      93          103         115   79   90
         Mar       93    92    93   100    93   114      93          105         121   82   93
         Apr       91    87    87    88    90   114      91           95         120   83   92
         May       91    98   107    97    92   117      91          104         119   83   97
          Jun      92    94    99   100    96   117      91          108         120   85   96
           Jul     99    97    97   105   100   120      92          108         122   86   97
         Aug       92    91    92   101    97   116      90          104         120   84   97
         Sept      93    89    93   103    96   116      89          107         114   86   94
          Oct      88    87    92    97    92   111      89          103         114   82   93
         Nov       93    92    94   102    95   114      89          105         122   83   95
         Dec       87    87    87    95    92   107      87          103         109   81   91
1921      Jan      92    91    92   101    94   107      83    94    102         107   84   95
         Feb       90    90    93    98    93   104      84    90    103         108   84   91
         Mar       96    90    93    98    95   113      85   100    103         105   81   91
         Apr       87    87    88    87    88    92      81    90    101         100   79   88
         May       88    84    89    87    88    96      82    99     97          98   78   87
          Jun      90    88    88    86    91    96      82    88     98         101   79   86
           Jul     87    85    90    82    89    94      88    88     97          97   77   86
         Aug       87    86    92    79    89    93      82    87     96          95   80   84
         Sept      85    79    82    77    81    90      80    76     94          91   79   80
          Oct      90    88    88    82    88    94      80    88     94          94   78   87
         Nov       87    85    85    80    85    90      79    89     92          92   77   82
         Dec       91    88    90    82    87    91      78    90     89          92   78   84
1922      Jan      86    84    88    78    79    88      78    85     89          87   75   84
          Feb      87    85    87    79    84    88      75    86     87          90   75   83
         Mar       89    85    85    79    78    83      73    84     86          86   77   80
          Apr      92    89    89    85    88    90      82    87     90          89   79   91
         May       92    88    90    86    87    89      85    90     91          91   87   86
         June      91    88    88    85    84    88      84    89     90          90   83   86
         July      90    86    86    86    81    89      86    88     92          89   81   87
         Aug       95    90    93    88    88    93      86    91     94          91   85   88
         Sept      98    92    94    91    91    93      91    91     96         101   84   90
          Oct      94    91    92    91    88    90      87    92     95          85   86   93
         Nov       96    92    95    92    90    94      90    95     95          92   90   92
          Dec      93    91    95    93    90    94      90    91     99          92   88   93




                                                41
Table 4 (Continued)

                                            Federal Reserve District
                                                                                                US
Year    Month         1    2     3     4      5      6      7       8    9     10    11    12
1923      Jan      90      92    95    93    93     96     95     93     97   (b)    93    89    91
          Feb      95      87    98    93    91     93     92     97     96          89    91    93
         Mar       99      97   107   107   104    104     99    106    100          95    95    97
          Apr      94      91    86    92    88     93     92     95     96          92    88    97
         May       98      97   102   101    99     99     97     99    100         100    99    97
         June     101      98   105   105   101    106    104    106    101          96    96   100
         July      97      95    99    99    95    101     96    100     95          95    98   100
         Aug      107      99   104   107    96    104    106    101    103          94    96   101
         Sept      98      94    99   101    95    104     97    100     99         101    95    99
          Oct      99     100   104   103   101    105    106    100    101         101   100   101
         Nov      101      99   105   101    99    103    101     98     99         100    98   100
          Dec      98      96    99    98    96     98     97     95     97          96    99    99
1924      Jan     103     100   101   100   101    102    101     99     98    99    99   103   100
          Feb     105      99   107   108   101    102    102    103     98    97    96   108   101
         Mar       95      93    96    96    88     93     93     95     93    87    90    95    93
          Apr     104     101   101   103   103     99    100     99    101    94   101    98   103
         May      101      99   100    98    98     99     96     96    100    98   100   100    96
         June      97      98    97    96    98     95     94     97     97    94    98    96    99
         July     102     103   101    97    99     96     96     99     99    94   100    98    97
         Aug       96      93    97    96    91     94     96     93     97    91    94    99    97
         Sept      99     104    99   101   104    104     98     99     99    97   111    97   101
          Oct      98     100    96    91    97     98     93     94     95    96   102    99    95
         Nov       98     100    96   100    99     95    102     97    103    94   100    97   100
          Dec     101     100   101    99   101     99    100    100    101    94   102   100    93
1925      Jan      97     101    99   100    98     98    101    102    102    98   106   102    98
          Feb     102     103   101   101   104     99     98     99    102   101   107   103   101
         Mar       97      99    98   100    99     97     97    100     99   100   103   101   100
          Apr     102     105    99   102   108    100    101    107    102   103   107   105   106
         May       99     101    96    97    99     98     98     96    100   100   100   104   102
         June     102     102   100   101   103     99    102     99    103   101   101   106   101
         July     104     105   101   102   106    102    103    102     98    99   103   106   103
         Aug       99     102    98    98   102     97    101    102    101   101   100   103   102
         Sept     101     105    99    98   102     96    102     99     99    97   102   104   101
          Oct     111     115   108   111   113    113    120    118    117   111   112   108   111
         Nov       99     104   100    97   104    104    102    100     98    94    99   107   104
          Dec     104     107   100   102   107    106    108    106    102    96   105   106   104
1926      Jan     107     107   104   100   109    106    104    106    101    94   107   104   105
          Feb      99     105    98   101   104    105    104    105    100    92   110   106   104
         Mar      102     106   105   102   106    104    109    106     99    94   106   111   103
          Apr     101     105    92    95   104    102    100    105     98    93   106   108   103
         May      104     108   107   103   109    109    113    107     99    96   106   107   108
         June     102     106    99    99   104    108    108     93     97    98   112   112   104
         July     106     110   103   104   109    107    120    103    103    98   112   112   106
         Aug      105     112   102   104   108    104    109    104     96    93   118   110   109
         Sept     105     111   102   106   105    101    112    104     99    95   108   115   106
          Oct     107     110   102   109   108    105    111    107     99    93   108   109   109
         Nov      107     111   102   106   110    111    108    108     98    96   109   113   106
          Dec     106     110   102   106   107    106    110    103     96    96   107   114   108




                                                  42
Table 4 (Continued)

                                            Federal Reserve District
Year   Month          1    2     3     4      5      6      7       8    9     10    11    12   US
1927      Jan     108     110    98   104   106    106    105     99     99    96   104   110   107
          Feb     105     108    99   103   105    106    112    103     98    96   105   110   107
         Mar      104     108    95   101    98     99    108     98     96    90    95   113   101
          Apr     109     115    97   108   112    105    110    104     96    97   112   119   101
         May      102     104    96   102   103    103    104     98     90    92   107   108   104
         June     108     111    99   102   103    108    110    102     97    95   104   109   106
         July     103     108    97   103   102    106    108     97     97    93   102   109   105
         Aug      114     121   106   112   111    111    119    115    104   101   107   116   113
         Sept     107     111    94   104   104    108    106     96     87    93   104   116   103
          Oct     101     106    92   102   103    109    112    109    101    95   107   110   107
         Nov      107     115   100   106   105    108    113    105     97    99   108   118   109
          Dec     106     112    98   105   106    112    113    106     98    98   113   115   106
1928      Jan     103     109    94   105   104    108    112    104     91    96   108   110   108
          Feb     106     114    97   106   112    110    115    105     92    98   107   120   106
         Mar      102     110    96   103   102    107    112    104     91    93   105   114   102
          Apr      99     106    86    94   102     97    105     95     75    92   104   119   107
         May      102     112    98   103   106    110    116    106     89    98   111   117   107
         June     109     114    98   103   105    107    116    103     90    94   109   116   106
         July     106     113    98   103   107    108    119    104     90    98   106   115   112
         Aug      105     113    94   102   108    110    120    104     89   102   105   117   108
         Sept     103     114   100   111   109    108    121    106     91    98   110   117   112
          Oct     104     111    96   103   105    106    120    103     86    98   108   118   108
         Nov      106     116    95   105   107    109    120    105     89    97   113   115   109
          Dec     106     115    98   104   107    106    121    106     90   100   110   118   112
1929      Jan     102     114    99   107   107    115    121    103     91   100   112   122   109
          Feb     104     116    97   104   107    106    118    105     86    96   104   119   110
         Mar      106     118    97   105   108    107    121    106     88   100   108   119   111
          Apr      98     111    85    97   106     98    109     95     83    98   107   117   104
         May      108     117    96   104   108    103    119    107     86   100   111   122   110
         June     108     117    97   106   110    102    120    106     89    99   108   119   112
         July     108     119    95   105   110    106    122    108     89   101   112   122   111
         Aug      112     118   100   109   112    110    125    109     87   102   111   120   113
         Sept     103     118    98   111   113    107    125    107     85   103   108   115   112
          Oct     110     119   100   105   109    102    119    100     79    99   110   118   111
         Nov      106     116    95   106   114    104    121    104     88   105   116   122   111
          Dec     105     117    96   103   109    101    113    100     85    99   105   118   109
1930      Jan     111     120    96    99   110     98    112     94     82    93   100   120   109
          Feb     107     116    95    99   111    104    110    102     85    97   107   117   109
         Mar      107     116    92    98   108    101    111    100     84    99   109   116   107
          Apr     106     122    96   102   116    108    108    101     87    99   108   117   109
         May      109     124    95   101   111     98    111     97     87    97   101   117   109
         June     100     113    85    91   104     93     99     90     79    94   102   112   101
         July     103     117    88    94   107     95    101     94     78    95   102   111   102
         Aug      102     111    89    95   105     81     99     90     80    94   100   109   101
         Sept      91     114    89   101   101    101    107     95     81    95   100   109   102
          Oct      99     113    92    94   111     96    101     90     79    96    97   109   102
         Nov       99     109    91    90   104     92     99     83     78    94    94   107    99
          Dec      97     110    87    91   105     91    102     87     79    91    95   107    99




                                                  43
Table 4 (Continued)

                                           Federal Reserve District
Year    Month         1     2    3    4      5      6      7      8   9    10   11    12   US
1931       Jan    103      115   88   94   108        92   107   87   82   94   94   110   103
           Feb     98      111   88   88   106        88   101   84   80   88   94   105    99
          Mar     112      115   90   92   113        92   100   86   86   89   91   108   102
           Apr     99      111   81   89   107        94    99   89   80   90   94   106    99
          May      92      105   81   84   101        90    93   85   75   87   90   101    94
          June     95      112   83   86   106        90    95   86   75   91   89   103    98
          July     94      111   83   87   104        86    95   84   74   82   85   102    95
          Aug      89       97   77   79    96        73    89   82   72   78   84    97    89
          Sept     91       99   74   76    94        77    86   76   65   76   72    96    87
           Oct     89      101   72   76    97        76    86   77   69   77   75    94    87
          Nov      86       98   72   74    91        74    82   75   68   74   76    92    85
           Dec     86      100   73   76    96        75    86   77   69   74   75    89    86
1932       Jan        79    94   70   69    89        72    80   74   66   71   70    87    82
           Feb        84    95   74   74    95        71    82   76   67   74   72    90    84
          Mar         90    92   71   71    92        71    77   70   68   72   71    86    81
           Apr        77    86   65   64    83        66    73   66   61   66   64    77    75
          May         74    81   64   62    82        63    70   63   56   63   62    72    71
          June        73    83   61   61    81        62    71   62   58   63   62    75    72
          July        69    79   60   56    76        59    66   58   56   59   58    73    67
          Aug         69    82   59   52    73        57    63   58   55   59   60    74    67
          Sept        75    83   58   56    82        69    66   64   58   67   67    75    71
           Oct        70    80   61   57    77        59    66   61   58   62   65    73    69
          Nov         71    80   60   58    78        58    65   60   55   60   61    69    68
           Dec        69    77   58   56    75        57    62   58   53   56   59    71    66
1933       Jan        58    72   56   54    74        56    61   56   53   57   57    64    63
           Feb        64    75   55   54    73        55    57   54   52   57   56    67    63
          Mar         60    72   52   48    65        49    55   51   52   55   55    61    59
           Apr        68    78   70   58    79        58    63   59   58   61   64    72    68
          May         71    80   60   60    77        66    69   61   57   63   65    75    70
          June        69    79   59   60    76        60    68   62   56   63   64    75    69
          July        71    78   60   64    76        63    66   62   57   64   67    82    70
          Aug         80    89   68   73    88        72    76   71   61   70   78    76    78
          Sept        74    80   65   66    82        67    70   57   56   63   60    75    72
           Oct        69    78   60   63    78        66    68   63   55   65   71    66    69
          Nov         71    78   60   62    79        66    68   64   55   63   69    71    70
           Dec        69    79   60   63    80        69    69   64   58   68   72    75    71
1934       Jan        73    82   64   71    85        73    74   70   61   70   77    75    75
           Feb        70    80   61   69    82        75    75   68   61   68   78    76    73
          Mar         86    95   74   79    99        84    82   75   67   78   88    86    84
           Apr        69    78   65   63    81        74    75   67   57   70   74    72    71
          May         74    85   68   74    94        79    81   75   62   75   80    76    78
          June        74    82   67   70    91        80    74   68   60   70   80    76    75
          July        70    79   63   66    88        76    73   64   58   69   76    74    72
          Aug         77    89   70   73    96        77    80   72   61   73   80    80    79
          Sept        68    78   63   67    88        79    77   69   63   75   81    78    75
           Oct        74    85   66   68    94        78    76   67   61   70   78    80    77
          Nov         70    83   63   71    93        80    78   72   65   73   83    84    77
           Dec        74    84   66   71    94        79    80   70   65   75   83    82    78




                                                 44
Table 4 (Continued)

                                           Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month         1     2    3    4      5      6      7      8   9    10    11    12   US
1935       Jan        70    82   66   81    91        78    82   70   63   73    82    84    78
           Feb        71    81   64   67    92        79    81   69   65   76    82    83    77
          Mar         72    83   65   71    94        81    82   71   64   74    84    81    78
           Apr        74    83   75   72    99        84    83   67   64   74    85    88    80
          May         73    82   65   69    93        81    81   69   64   71    81    85    78
          June        72    83   67   73    96        79    78   71   66   77    83    85    79
          July        75    87   70   75   102        90    85   74   67   78    87    88    82
          Aug         74    88   70   75   102        85    86   73   67   80    86    86    82
          Sept        74    86   70   73   100        81    82   65   65   75    86    86    80
           Oct        74    85   69   75    97        87    85   72   68   79    86    90    82
          Nov         76    88   70   79   103        90    89   75   72   79    90    91    85
           Dec        76    86   69   76   100        86    86   72   68   77    89    87    82
1936       Jan        76    90   70   77   101      87      85   74   68   79    93    91    84
           Feb        81    91   73   82   104      94      91   77   68   81    96    94    87
          Mar         79    89   73   71   102      89      88   74   68   79    92    92    85
           Apr        80    89   77   80   105      92      93   77   71   80    95    93    86
          May         79    90   74   85   106      92      94   77   73   80    97    92    88
          June        81    92   76   86   107      98      96   79   73   86   109    98    91
          July        85   101   79   87   117     101      98   79   72   82   105    98    93
          Aug         78    91   77   85   104      97      94   74   74   80   101    94    88
          Sept        84    93   75   87   105      98      97   79   73   82   102   100    91
           Oct        84    97   78   93   114     100     103   90   79   90   117   100    96
          Nov         82    95   75   90   109      99     101   81   74   83   101    93    91
           Dec        84    96   79   93   110     101     102   85   76   86   106   101    94
1937       Jan        85    96   77   87   110     101     104   80   74   85   103    99    94
           Feb        85    97   78   97   111     100     104   83   76   86   107   102    96
          Mar         88   100   85   99   122     110     108   90   79   90   110   114   101
           Apr        82    92   77   88   103      99     104   85   69   84   108    95    90
          May         83    98   79   94   110     106     105   86   75   87   110   101    96
          June        84    98   80   98   113     107     109   87   77   88   109   100    97
          July        84   102   78   97   113     106     108   85   78   88   113   102    96
          Aug         78    96   76   93   108     105      99   80   74   86   110   100    92
          Sept        83    97   78   97   114     109     105   86   77   89   115   100    96
           Oct        83    96   77   94   112     106     104   87   78   87   114    99    95
          Nov         81    94   78   87   109     104     100   79   75   85   114    96    92
           Dec        80    95   74   88   110     105      98   80   73   82   111    96    91
1938       Jan        82    93   73   86   111     104      95   83   74   82   112    95    90
           Feb        80    93   74   83   110     105      91   81   72   81   110    92    88
          Mar         80    88   66   79   104     101      93   79   73   82   107    93    87
           Apr        85    92   69   82   114     104      91   81   75   84   108    98    88
          May         74    84   58   72    96      99      83   75   68   75   105    92    80
          June        80    89   65   77   106     100      88   77   73   79   107    92    86
          July        75    87   66   79   107     102      91   79   74   80   105    92    85
          Aug         80    89   67   80   108     106      91   78   75   81   109    94    87
          Sept        73    90   68   83   108     106      95   80   74   80   108    85    87
           Oct        81    87   68   80   106     106      88   81   73   81   102    91    86
          Nov         83    89   70   84   106     108      95   83   76   83   108    98    89
           Dec        83    93   72   87   111     110      97   83   74   82   108    96    91



                                                 45
Table 4 (Continued)

                                          Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month         1    2    3     4     5      6      7      8   9    10    11   12   US
1939       Jan        80   85   70   85   108    110    95     85    76   83   111   96   89
           Feb        81   87   69   83   108    109    88     80    71   76   105   96   87
          Mar         81   91   74   86   114    113    98     83    75   81   108   97   92
           Apr        82   88   70   83   108    109    95     82    74   83   108   94   88
          May         82   91   72   86   112    116    95     87    75   81   112   97   90
          June        82   92   66   84   109    113    96     83    76   81   107   94   90
          July        80   89   68   85   108    112    94     84    75   82   105   94   87
          Aug         81   94   70   90   115    122    98     88    82   87   110   97   93
          Sept        84   94   75   90   115    113   100     84    79   81   106   96   94
           Oct        81   90   70   90   110    115    99     84    78   80   106   95   91
          Nov         85   97   81   96   118    121    99     89    77   82   107   94   94
           Dec        84   94   73   94   115    119   102     87    81   84   111   96   94


Notes: (a) Not available for January 1919 through December 1920.
        (b) Not available for January 1919 through December 1923.
Source: See Table 2. Seasonally adjusted as described in text.




                                                46
Table 5: Retail Trade Indices by Federal Reserve District, Seasonal Component

                                                                 Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month           1        2        3        4        5             6         7        8        9    10       11       12       US
 1919      Jan       -5.36    -6.99    -7.79    -7.69   -15.57       -17.50    -11.16       (a)   -12.62   (b)   -13.42    -6.37    -8.04
          Feb       -19.03   -14.65   -13.67   -14.52   -21.46       -17.68    -14.45             -25.19         -18.99   -13.96   -12.32
          Mar        -1.10    -0.12    -0.03    -0.36     2.99        -1.68      2.10               0.44           5.21    -2.00    -1.91
          Apr         4.40     0.98     4.33     4.03     1.23         2.90      2.59               6.55          -3.10    -3.09    -1.46
          May         3.92     1.15    -0.29     2.62    -0.39         3.44      4.28               1.90           1.24     0.44     3.36
           Jun        4.70    -0.48     0.62     0.68     1.79        -5.37     -0.94               2.51          -2.86    -3.82    -0.27
            Jul     -23.00   -22.05   -22.47   -16.84   -21.23       -24.98    -17.85             -16.56         -25.70   -11.32   -19.51
          Aug       -21.25   -24.13   -21.08   -14.66   -22.44       -21.04    -13.58             -12.82         -26.12    -1.76   -19.92
          Sept       -7.91    -9.29   -12.78    -8.82   -12.39       -12.29     -4.39              -2.54          -1.37    -3.46    -5.67
           Oct       10.05    14.89     8.29     7.50    11.31        19.60      5.44               8.52          17.64     7.21     7.25
          Nov         8.90    13.76    22.10     7.47    14.82        14.51      6.78               7.09          13.26     1.74    15.33
          Dec        51.66    56.79    49.74    47.62    63.54        67.74     40.85              42.22          66.38    47.37    51.13
 1920      Jan       -7.80   -10.48    -9.63   -11.29   -17.17       -23.67    -13.60             -14.94         -17.76    -9.69   -11.25
          Feb       -22.19   -19.10   -15.62   -19.20   -22.83       -20.40    -18.57             -27.62         -24.75   -19.08   -15.51
          Mar        -1.45    -0.46    -0.29    -0.73     3.41        -2.33      2.36              -0.13           6.49    -2.63    -2.63
          Apr         5.25     1.07     4.69     5.04     1.28         3.94      3.23               7.64          -4.19    -3.84    -1.50
          May         4.74     1.60    -0.16     3.88    -0.02         4.59      5.25               2.20           2.45     0.83     4.45
           Jun        6.14    -0.55     0.94     1.12     2.31        -6.68     -0.84               2.28          -3.93    -5.14    -0.39
            Jul     -28.46   -27.79   -28.00   -23.10   -25.67       -30.09    -22.49             -19.77         -32.85   -13.98   -24.45
          Aug       -23.50   -27.92   -24.63   -17.96   -26.84       -26.35    -16.48             -13.79         -31.96    -2.18   -24.31
          Sept       -8.87   -10.03   -14.40   -10.99   -13.29       -13.68     -5.10              -2.33          -1.05    -4.51    -6.45
           Oct       10.19    16.23     9.56     9.37    12.93        24.66      6.90               9.56          20.61     7.92     8.55
          Nov         9.96    15.58    23.79     9.05    16.71        16.40      8.38               8.12          15.18     1.96    16.93
          Dec        52.19    58.09    51.57    52.80    67.34        67.94     48.79              47.42          65.10    48.94    54.82
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                                   Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month             1        2        3        4        5             6         7           8        9    10       11       12       US
1921      Jan          -7.73    -9.90   -10.46   -12.78   -18.08       -21.32    -12.02       -18.28   -14.38   (b)   -15.74    -9.52   -11.70
         Feb          -23.44   -19.62   -16.69   -20.89   -24.02       -21.05    -17.27       -20.10   -28.32         -23.12   -20.28   -15.74
         Mar           -1.46    -1.05    -0.72    -0.95     3.19        -2.66      1.25         0.07    -1.21           4.86    -2.43    -2.69
         Apr            5.00     0.97     5.08     5.28     1.25         3.41      3.16        -0.50     8.91          -3.50    -3.51    -1.13
         May            4.40     1.23     0.28     3.90     0.27         3.96      4.44         2.39     2.67           3.14     1.16     3.60
          Jun           5.90    -0.55     0.91     1.10     2.32        -5.13     -0.52        -2.73     1.12          -3.65    -5.10    -0.43
           Jul        -25.14   -24.93   -26.74   -18.89   -23.61       -24.04    -22.07       -26.45   -18.63         -26.72   -12.84   -21.97
         Aug          -22.87   -26.32   -24.66   -14.24   -24.89       -21.35    -15.06       -21.44   -11.94         -25.62    -1.89   -21.17
         Sept          -7.94    -8.83   -12.84    -8.01   -11.31       -10.63     -4.12         0.87    -1.76          -0.55    -4.88    -5.15
          Oct          10.23    17.16     9.66     8.63    12.94        20.83      6.57        14.33     9.44          17.77     7.48     8.20
         Nov            9.46    14.58    21.11     7.07    15.09        12.86      8.10        13.04     6.84          11.26     1.79    14.61
         Dec           55.94    59.63    54.96    46.10    64.67        57.44     44.05        58.61    42.23          54.91    47.31    51.25
1922      Jan          -7.27    -9.00   -10.84   -10.68   -15.40       -17.01    -11.33       -16.24   -12.96         -12.61    -8.50   -10.77
          Feb         -22.04   -18.49   -15.55   -16.61   -21.44       -17.62    -15.79       -18.88   -24.36         -18.75   -17.71   -14.30
         Mar           -1.88    -2.03    -1.07    -1.12     2.13        -2.18     -0.09        -0.09    -2.53           3.13    -2.18    -2.67
          Apr           5.21     0.84     5.39     5.48     1.33         3.62      3.61        -0.09     8.79          -2.98    -3.34    -0.65
         May            4.09     0.75     0.26     3.97     0.29         3.79      4.00         1.65     3.76           3.80     1.62     2.85
         June           5.73    -0.71     0.74     1.14     2.06        -4.40     -0.24        -3.05    -0.30          -3.78    -5.97    -0.68
         July         -25.96   -25.72   -26.50   -20.80   -22.40       -23.35    -22.03       -26.32   -18.58         -25.46   -13.91   -22.56
         Aug          -25.84   -27.45   -25.31   -16.01   -25.20       -21.69    -15.88       -22.43   -11.33         -25.22    -2.03   -22.47
         Sept          -9.24    -9.99   -14.98    -9.43   -13.08       -11.29     -4.19         0.93    -1.55          -0.12    -6.04    -5.37
          Oct          10.85    18.90    11.00    10.57    13.97        20.02      7.70        15.07     9.93          16.81     8.55     9.09
         Nov           10.22    15.45    22.89     7.75    16.10        12.93      9.82        13.42     6.66          10.80     2.02    16.19
          Dec          59.75    62.93    60.93    54.13    68.02        60.53     52.14        59.71    49.27          55.12    54.47    58.67




                                                                        48
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                                   Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month             1        2        3        4        5             6         7           8        9       10       11       12       US
1923      Jan          -7.15    -9.82   -12.67   -13.95   -18.26       -18.12    -14.04       -17.46   -14.42      (b)   -13.39   -10.05   -12.16
          Feb         -23.59   -18.54   -17.96   -19.47   -22.63       -18.34    -19.87       -20.53   -26.55            -17.75   -21.46   -15.59
         Mar           -3.28    -3.95    -1.82    -2.42     1.82        -3.13     -2.15        -0.68    -4.42              2.23    -2.63    -3.99
          Apr           5.24     0.69     5.61     6.59     1.53         3.82      4.80         0.53     9.58             -2.70    -3.38    -0.34
         May            3.51     0.23     0.14     4.69     0.29         4.70      4.03         0.91     4.86              4.86     1.87     2.56
         June           5.32    -1.42     0.21     0.64     1.45        -5.28     -0.50        -4.27    -1.45             -4.84    -7.72    -1.49
         July         -27.59   -28.90   -31.03   -24.81   -26.71       -26.86    -24.97       -29.77   -20.20            -27.80   -17.38   -26.51
         Aug          -30.05   -29.91   -28.84   -19.81   -27.88       -24.91    -20.21       -24.55   -12.28            -26.17    -2.50   -25.69
         Sept          -8.88    -9.44   -15.55    -9.91   -13.66       -12.78     -3.47         0.91    -1.79              0.26    -7.32    -5.23
          Oct          11.62    21.48    13.54    12.76    16.84        22.79      9.60        16.78    11.00             20.13     9.76    10.15
         Nov           10.73    16.48    24.38     7.98    18.18        13.56     11.42        13.47     6.18             11.12     2.35    17.47
          Dec          65.71    68.17    67.05    59.68    74.28        64.13     58.64        62.30    50.97             58.30    63.65    64.58
1924      Jan          -7.50   -10.78   -14.71   -15.99   -19.77       -18.91    -15.64       -18.47   -14.50   -15.43   -13.96   -11.91   -13.90
          Feb         -25.88   -21.04   -19.99   -22.05   -25.04       -19.43    -22.23       -21.00   -26.32   -20.16   -18.48   -25.04   -16.53
         Mar           -4.57    -5.43    -1.88    -3.00     0.77        -2.68     -3.40        -0.92    -5.47    -2.39     1.40    -2.54    -4.66
          Apr           5.48     0.26     6.66     7.71     1.54         3.81      5.63         1.45    10.32     1.76    -2.57    -3.42    -0.28
         May            2.38    -0.43    -0.60     4.09     0.13         4.78      3.25        -0.42     4.69    -3.65     5.10     1.36     1.87
         June           4.27    -1.92    -0.42    -0.34     0.19        -4.81     -0.63        -4.70    -2.80    -6.13    -5.94    -8.89    -2.26
         July         -28.69   -31.55   -31.98   -24.57   -28.41       -26.03    -25.42       -29.63   -21.27   -24.64   -30.38   -17.50   -26.34
         Aug          -27.43   -28.14   -27.69   -17.67   -26.80       -22.73    -18.62       -22.45   -12.35   -18.24   -25.89    -2.86   -24.56
         Sept          -8.75    -9.23   -15.38    -9.52   -15.16       -12.96     -2.92         0.68    -0.80     2.69     0.66    -7.21    -4.68
          Oct          11.71    22.13    13.65    11.56    16.91        20.45      8.84        16.60    10.12    10.53    20.03     9.36     9.75
         Nov           10.34    16.50    22.02     7.24    18.80        11.64     11.49        13.03     5.67     9.79    10.74     2.60    17.44
          Dec          70.11    73.67    71.50    62.40    80.85        66.42     62.75        66.60    55.81    65.76    63.85    66.51    62.57




                                                                        49
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                                   Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month             1        2        3        4        5             6         7           8        9       10       11       12       US
1925      Jan          -5.97   -11.41   -15.69   -16.76   -19.30       -18.37    -16.93       -19.25   -15.34   -15.35   -15.13   -12.31   -13.93
          Feb         -25.37   -21.81   -19.57   -20.21   -25.85       -17.91    -20.66       -19.50   -25.62   -20.80   -19.65   -23.60   -16.44
         Mar           -6.00    -7.15    -1.92    -3.74     0.33        -2.45     -4.50        -1.35    -6.39    -2.68     1.13    -2.85    -5.82
          Apr           4.55    -0.52     6.41     7.83     0.68         3.52      5.91         2.64     9.85     1.76    -2.53    -3.38    -0.70
         May            0.97    -0.96    -1.22     3.54    -0.13         4.90      2.80        -1.41     3.16    -3.77     5.24     0.55     1.47
         June           3.49    -2.45    -1.03    -1.66    -1.41        -5.70     -1.47        -6.00    -4.02    -7.13    -7.14   -11.16    -3.18
         July         -28.80   -32.49   -32.15   -25.55   -30.46       -28.01    -27.46       -30.81   -21.32   -26.21   -32.07   -19.42   -28.18
         Aug          -28.06   -30.84   -29.30   -18.01   -29.97       -23.42    -20.19       -23.94   -12.95   -19.58   -26.86    -2.91   -25.68
         Sept          -8.43    -7.76   -14.42    -8.63   -14.29       -11.73     -2.00         0.78     0.93     2.71     0.71    -6.59    -3.53
          Oct          13.31    25.08    16.31    13.41    19.73        22.15     11.25        21.13    12.75    12.18    20.95     9.67    11.09
         Nov           11.03    17.39    22.33     6.77    20.30        11.95     11.54        13.36     4.06     9.94    10.72     3.01    18.04
          Dec          74.52    80.89    74.13    66.66    87.43        73.14     70.01        70.96    58.72    67.51    67.72    72.02    71.73
1926      Jan          -5.86   -12.81   -17.92   -17.38   -21.86       -20.31    -18.83       -20.67   -16.42   -14.84   -15.89   -12.83   -15.42
          Feb         -24.83   -22.34   -19.70   -19.82   -26.28       -18.48    -21.50       -20.22   -23.70   -19.05   -19.78   -24.23   -16.83
         Mar           -7.17    -8.35    -1.64    -3.69     0.66        -1.48     -5.11        -0.99    -5.91    -2.10     1.43    -3.36    -6.35
          Apr           3.15    -1.58     5.61     7.02    -0.90         3.51      5.43         3.25     8.75     1.34    -2.63    -3.56    -1.14
         May           -0.25    -1.77    -2.31     3.04    -0.56         4.97      2.41        -2.43     1.81    -3.79     5.54    -0.40     0.93
         June           3.08    -2.39    -1.31    -2.47    -2.45        -7.29     -2.19        -6.82    -5.19    -7.89    -8.91   -13.06    -3.94
         July         -29.40   -34.15   -33.13   -25.62   -31.42       -29.57    -32.15       -31.33   -22.41   -26.17   -35.55   -20.61   -29.19
         Aug          -29.04   -34.14   -31.18   -18.57   -31.27       -24.26    -21.83       -23.49   -12.10   -17.25   -30.59    -2.60   -27.47
         Sept          -8.38    -6.51   -13.58    -9.03   -14.02       -11.73     -0.90         0.89     3.90     2.77     0.75    -5.95    -2.38
          Oct          13.47    23.73    16.90    12.26    19.00        19.16     10.39        19.03     9.72    10.27    19.22     9.29    10.75
         Nov           12.28    18.43    21.88     6.96    21.85        12.10     11.92        14.49     3.18    10.54    12.10     3.43    17.89
          Dec          76.39    85.58    77.98    70.83    89.71        74.59     72.39        69.10    55.97    67.57    70.76    78.90    75.95




                                                                        50
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                                   Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month             1        2        3        4        5             6         7           8        9       10       11       12    1      US
1927      Jan          -5.46   -14.34   -18.18   -18.71   -22.30       -21.46    -20.33       -20.43   -17.87   -15.52   -16.70   -13.98       -16.27
          Feb         -27.12   -23.24   -20.84   -20.39   -27.05       -18.27    -22.65       -19.62   -22.47   -20.12   -18.67   -25.21       -17.59
         Mar           -7.38    -8.50    -0.84    -3.20     1.42         0.19     -4.30        -0.11    -3.55    -1.13     2.13    -3.66        -5.99
          Apr           1.62    -2.63     5.67     8.01    -2.49         4.01      5.26         3.62     7.77     0.91    -2.95    -4.37        -1.47
         May           -0.60    -2.19    -2.38     3.05    -0.19         4.51      2.22        -2.11     0.77    -3.55     5.28    -0.94         0.59
         June           2.35    -2.35    -1.75    -3.28    -3.42        -8.54     -3.02        -8.74    -5.66    -8.97    -9.15   -13.59        -4.58
         July         -28.55   -33.80   -31.93   -25.20   -29.65       -29.77    -29.46       -29.47   -21.87   -25.14   -33.20   -20.38       -29.35
         Aug          -30.47   -37.00   -32.65   -19.46   -31.35       -24.88    -23.99       -24.62   -11.80   -17.75   -26.61    -2.03       -28.42
         Sept          -7.62    -4.57   -11.22    -8.57   -13.04       -11.47      0.99         1.04     5.64     3.20     1.08    -4.61        -0.48
          Oct          13.69    22.39    16.78    10.50    18.37        18.59     10.05        18.47     7.82    11.03    17.99     9.25        10.41
         Nov           12.75    18.66    20.35     6.27    20.40        11.29     11.89        14.57     2.64    10.92    12.42     3.37        17.16
          Dec          76.13    88.59    75.95    70.80    89.09        78.68     74.87        70.65    56.79    67.50    75.85    80.12        75.84
1928      Jan          -5.34   -15.23   -18.70   -19.50   -22.97       -23.14    -22.14       -22.38   -19.31   -16.01   -19.11   -14.08       -17.44
          Feb         -28.18   -25.15   -21.24   -21.46   -29.51       -19.45    -23.20       -20.36   -20.46   -20.79   -19.48   -27.78       -18.05
         Mar           -6.41    -7.90     0.34    -2.00     3.38         2.75     -2.72         1.44     0.05     0.22     4.07    -3.61        -5.01
          Apr           0.30    -3.00     4.71     7.25    -3.26         4.83      4.12         3.61     6.99     0.88    -2.41    -5.10        -1.56
         May           -0.60    -2.97    -2.73     3.17     0.22         4.28      2.13        -2.10     1.13    -3.74     5.06    -1.38         0.00
         June           1.67    -1.65    -1.66    -3.20    -3.40        -9.22     -3.25        -9.39    -6.22   -10.12   -10.52   -15.29        -4.40
         July         -30.37   -36.18   -33.30   -24.73   -32.05       -31.06    -33.11       -31.33   -21.76   -27.11   -35.09   -21.29       -31.56
         Aug          -27.12   -34.55   -28.98   -16.74   -30.01       -24.22    -23.99       -21.29    -9.49   -17.31   -25.23    -1.19       -27.39
         Sept          -6.08    -3.25   -10.82    -9.66   -13.16       -10.13      2.56         0.94     8.32     3.86     1.79    -3.77         1.25
          Oct          15.15    23.73    18.98     9.09    19.61        17.03     10.39        16.39     3.65    12.47    17.19    10.55        10.47
         Nov           12.69    17.86    18.65     5.19    19.52        10.85     11.74        14.34     2.15    10.53    13.20     2.72        15.80
          Dec          75.11    91.87    75.86    70.05    90.01        73.73     79.35        68.96    49.70    67.76    74.18    82.09        80.46




                                                                        51
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                               Federal Reserve District
   Year    Month          1        2        3        4        5         6        7            8        9       10       11       12       US
   1929      Jan       -6.01   -17.05   -21.44   -20.91   -24.95   -26.40    -23.98       -22.36   -21.31   -17.41   -21.75   -15.69   -18.78
             Feb      -27.80   -26.27   -21.62   -20.99   -28.63   -19.44    -23.42       -20.46   -18.27   -20.35   -18.94   -27.65   -19.16
            Mar        -5.40    -7.26     2.11    -0.11     6.40     5.70     -0.92         3.70     4.38     2.27     6.69    -3.58    -3.65
             Apr       -0.56    -3.22     4.53     8.10    -3.90     6.36      3.56         3.52    10.20     0.78    -1.81    -6.05    -1.34
            May        -0.32    -4.15    -2.61     3.56     0.62     3.99      1.98        -1.70     1.75    -3.53     4.04    -1.55    -0.76
            June        0.47    -1.01    -1.88    -2.75    -3.35    -9.09     -3.29        -9.73    -7.09   -11.50   -11.49   -16.01    -4.02
            July      -31.76   -38.91   -32.93   -25.15   -34.24   -31.49    -34.91       -32.50   -23.97   -28.67   -37.64   -22.50   -32.27
            Aug       -28.65   -36.34   -30.69   -17.43   -31.00   -24.72    -25.03       -21.65    -8.90   -17.04   -25.80    -0.29   -29.18
            Sept       -3.90    -1.65    -9.59   -10.76   -12.61    -8.71      4.13         0.93     8.90     4.81     2.83    -2.93     3.53
             Oct       17.53    25.64    21.17     7.89    21.28    15.98      9.62        14.76     1.36    14.48    17.03    11.87    10.64
            Nov        12.61    16.93    17.74     4.18    18.67     9.87     11.00        14.13     1.67    10.49    13.49     1.18    14.63
             Dec       73.58    94.05    73.40    68.97    91.64    69.06     73.49        63.93    43.92    64.12    70.79    82.34    79.37
   1930      Jan       -8.32   -19.42   -22.39   -20.26   -27.24   -23.74    -22.01       -19.85   -21.24   -16.70   -21.14   -15.90   -20.54
             Feb      -29.08   -26.93   -21.90   -19.77   -30.23   -20.05    -21.80       -20.26   -16.63   -20.10   -19.67   -27.42   -19.36
            Mar        -4.39    -6.04     3.95     1.98     9.37     7.95      1.07         5.95     8.42     4.21     9.01    -3.37    -1.68
             Apr       -0.96    -3.12     5.23     9.29    -4.08     8.84      3.19         3.20    14.86     1.13    -0.50    -7.16    -0.85
            May         0.16    -5.51    -2.47     3.65     0.81     3.80      1.49        -1.35     2.26    -3.12     2.61    -1.48    -1.39
            June       -0.48    -0.22    -1.88    -1.63    -2.64    -8.04     -2.27        -7.90    -7.77   -11.16   -11.84   -14.89    -2.82
            July      -31.15   -39.39   -31.06   -22.17   -34.33   -28.79    -29.94       -28.31   -23.81   -27.86   -34.86   -20.11   -30.43
            Aug       -26.41   -33.92   -27.03   -14.60   -29.06   -19.25    -19.56       -17.44    -8.59   -15.47   -22.76     0.56   -26.51
            Sept       -0.86    -0.15    -7.63   -11.05   -10.04    -7.07      4.47         0.34    10.04     4.84     3.47    -2.33     4.95
             Oct       17.01    24.70    20.30     5.54    22.26    14.63      7.38        12.19     0.51    15.68    14.72    12.43     9.58
            Nov        11.23    14.94    16.10     2.37    14.76     8.29      8.18        10.99     0.80     8.00    10.36    -0.59    11.84
             Dec       68.18    89.88    65.50    60.39    87.76    61.94     65.77        54.11    38.34    57.01    64.31    75.09    72.38




                                                                   52
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                                   Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month             1        2        3        4        5             6         7           8        9       10       11       12       US
1931      Jan          -9.34   -19.84   -21.58   -19.74   -28.13       -23.12    -20.91       -17.39   -22.43   -17.39   -20.73   -15.60   -20.99
          Feb         -27.33   -26.69   -21.36   -17.10   -29.81       -17.66    -20.07       -17.06   -14.48   -17.70   -16.81   -24.57   -18.14
         Mar           -3.57    -5.27     5.65     3.72    12.44         9.15      2.90         7.66    11.83     5.60     9.35    -3.00    -0.11
          Apr          -1.43    -2.15     5.22     8.65    -3.68         8.60      2.77         1.67    16.36     1.09     0.40    -7.46    -0.25
         May            0.91    -5.19    -1.43     3.78     1.62         4.01      1.71        -0.74     1.99    -2.34     1.29    -1.23    -1.08
         June          -1.15     0.05    -2.30    -1.00    -2.43        -7.15     -2.12        -7.20    -8.07   -10.59   -10.99   -13.41    -2.31
         July         -29.30   -38.60   -29.63   -20.55   -34.91       -26.86    -29.14       -25.50   -24.51   -24.74   -29.54   -18.59   -29.22
         Aug          -23.18   -29.37   -22.89   -11.66   -26.04       -18.51    -17.43       -15.78    -7.78   -12.68   -18.80     1.22   -23.37
         Sept           1.54     0.91    -5.61    -9.54    -8.26        -4.69      4.16        -0.14     8.61     4.25     3.20    -1.68     5.35
          Oct          16.25    22.64    16.10     3.40    20.11        11.39      5.55         9.78     0.23    12.97    10.91    11.69     8.04
         Nov            9.11    13.09    12.22     1.20    11.46         6.75      6.17        10.24     0.39     5.11     7.92    -1.80     9.29
          Dec          60.13    82.27    54.70    50.46    79.74        51.40     55.00        46.35    32.68    44.85    50.88    62.75    63.11
1932      Jan          -8.40   -17.37   -18.33   -14.40   -24.07       -18.82    -15.79       -13.91   -19.04   -13.27   -15.76   -13.24   -17.58
          Feb         -24.22   -23.51   -19.35   -14.06   -27.80       -14.77    -16.33       -16.10   -11.16   -14.22   -12.67   -21.16   -15.84
         Mar           -2.46    -3.86     5.34     4.05    11.35         7.88      3.73         8.19    10.82     5.52     8.14    -2.63     0.70
          Apr          -1.23    -1.18     5.14     6.50    -2.53         6.55      2.28         0.15    13.51     0.84     0.87    -5.55     0.21
         May            1.01    -4.27    -0.71     2.99     1.77         3.16      1.52        -0.37     2.06    -1.63     0.40    -0.98    -0.72
         June          -1.01     0.24    -1.91    -0.32    -1.62        -4.43     -1.85        -4.76    -6.59    -6.91    -8.17    -9.52    -1.48
         July         -21.97   -28.28   -21.44   -13.20   -25.98       -19.04    -20.93       -17.82   -20.13   -18.31   -20.22   -13.18   -20.88
         Aug          -17.92   -24.35   -16.95    -7.28   -19.11       -15.14    -11.78       -10.94    -5.87    -9.18   -13.38     1.43   -17.45
         Sept           2.93     1.18    -3.79    -7.90    -6.19        -3.93      3.12        -0.75     8.64     3.67     3.29    -1.36     4.72
          Oct          13.08    17.92    13.16     1.61    15.79         8.51      3.71         7.27    -0.41    10.14     8.52     9.49     6.10
         Nov            6.95    10.72     9.69     0.63     8.78         5.58      4.69         8.49     0.59     3.23     6.14    -1.71     7.17
          Dec          48.98    63.75    43.20    36.68    62.29        39.23     39.54        34.18    24.67    33.46    39.91    50.42    48.68




                                                                        53
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                                   Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month             1        2        3        4        5             6         7           8        9       10       11       12    1      US
1933      Jan          -7.24   -13.90   -15.29   -11.17   -20.70       -15.15    -12.32        -9.79   -15.98   -10.71   -12.66   -10.45       -14.05
          Feb         -18.51   -19.08   -15.22    -9.60   -22.15       -11.32    -11.08       -11.57    -8.59   -10.14    -9.53   -15.41       -12.03
         Mar           -1.45    -2.88     4.20     3.27     8.27         5.56      3.59         7.30     8.61     4.82     6.69    -2.18         0.78
          Apr          -1.35    -0.93     7.02     5.80    -2.43         5.68      2.16        -1.04    12.40     0.40     0.87    -5.11         0.37
         May            0.94    -4.43    -0.39     2.99     2.16         3.48      1.71        -0.23     3.21    -1.86    -0.07    -1.33        -0.67
         June          -0.78     0.26    -2.13     0.00    -1.40        -3.82     -2.33        -4.59    -6.34    -6.39    -8.92    -9.27        -1.41
         July         -22.93   -28.66   -21.64   -15.02   -26.50       -20.59    -21.33       -19.17   -21.21   -20.10   -23.34   -15.00       -21.86
         Aug          -20.92   -26.07   -19.39   -10.02   -22.10       -19.78    -13.79       -13.48    -5.85   -10.47   -17.43     1.62       -19.90
         Sept           3.86     1.48    -3.73   -10.24    -5.25        -3.77      3.11        -1.07     8.41     3.52     3.28    -1.52         5.05
          Oct          12.99    17.47    12.52     1.12    15.95         9.22      3.61         7.40    -1.57     9.96     8.32     8.88         5.93
         Nov            6.40    11.05     9.17     0.70     8.50         7.19      5.06         9.55     1.32     2.65     6.99    -1.81         7.27
          Dec          49.43    66.67    45.30    41.14    67.42        47.77     44.38        37.25    27.52    40.95    49.56    53.85        52.32
1934      Jan         -10.05   -16.61   -18.09   -14.81   -24.54       -20.17    -15.67       -11.61   -19.40   -13.26   -16.40   -12.89       -17.34
          Feb         -20.20   -20.58   -17.66   -11.49   -25.81       -15.38    -14.85       -14.75   -10.05   -11.43   -12.86   -17.23       -14.13
         Mar           -1.83    -3.57     5.87     6.01    12.05         9.22      6.91        12.33    11.33     7.38    10.51    -3.78         1.14
          Apr          -1.63    -1.21     8.01     6.06    -2.46         6.97      2.59        -2.25    11.36    -0.09     0.88    -4.70         0.49
         May            0.68    -4.91    -0.46     3.23     2.79         4.16      1.70        -0.33     4.75    -2.81    -0.55    -1.65        -0.91
         June          -0.52     0.21    -2.76     0.11    -1.63        -4.77     -3.19        -4.92    -6.76    -6.65   -11.76    -9.29        -1.58
         July         -22.22   -29.00   -22.62   -15.39   -30.42       -25.14    -23.61       -19.44   -22.12   -21.31   -25.74   -13.36       -22.20
         Aug          -20.26   -25.91   -19.80   -10.08   -23.43       -21.14    -14.30       -13.75    -5.64   -10.29   -17.97     1.50       -20.06
         Sept           4.03     1.77    -2.84   -10.56    -4.36        -4.32      3.39        -1.82     9.60     4.16     4.59    -2.00         5.42
          Oct          13.88    18.39    12.98     0.82    18.83        10.49      3.98         7.99    -2.68     9.77     8.07    10.56         6.31
         Nov            5.84    12.08     9.33     0.67     9.66         9.86      6.16        10.73     2.73     2.50     8.54    -1.85         8.09
          Dec          53.52    71.04    50.85    46.74    79.11        55.78     51.79        40.15    32.13    46.22    58.43    60.21        58.33




                                                                        54
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                                   Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month             1        2        3        4        5             6         7           8        9       10       11       12    1      US
1935      Jan         -10.00   -16.98   -19.12   -16.82   -26.48       -22.19    -18.13       -11.26   -21.21   -13.83   -16.58   -14.69       -18.47
          Feb         -20.30   -20.95   -19.24   -10.37   -29.39       -15.78    -16.41       -15.04   -11.01   -12.24   -13.12   -18.39       -14.76
         Mar           -1.16    -2.99     4.68     5.52    10.46         8.33      8.40        12.88    11.29     7.72     9.97    -3.99         0.91
          Apr          -2.07    -1.55    10.68     6.56    -3.32         7.20      2.55        -2.68    12.13    -0.58     0.45    -5.27         0.52
         May            0.25    -4.93    -0.61     2.51     3.05         3.95      1.27        -0.60     4.87    -3.32    -1.25    -2.26        -1.14
         June          -0.24    -0.01    -3.19    -0.25    -1.84        -4.58     -4.14        -5.39    -7.18    -7.26   -12.93   -10.49        -1.84
         July         -24.08   -31.66   -25.12   -17.73   -34.86       -29.82    -27.44       -22.07   -24.97   -24.06   -28.75   -15.60       -25.07
         Aug          -19.79   -25.90   -20.16   -10.67   -24.68       -23.38    -15.55       -14.52    -6.36   -10.91   -19.44     1.29       -20.87
         Sept           4.34     2.50    -2.51   -11.35    -3.94        -4.30      3.91        -2.11     9.57     4.36     5.14    -2.60         6.03
          Oct          14.04    17.64    12.90     0.77    19.51        11.35      4.55         9.20    -3.05     9.90     7.76    11.33         6.47
         Nov            6.02    13.31    10.46     0.71    10.30        12.13      7.28        11.03     3.69     2.70     9.50    -1.41         8.99
          Dec          55.50    74.34    55.41    51.92    85.31        61.44     57.39        40.92    34.27    48.04    63.80    65.12        62.43
1936      Jan         -10.82   -18.88   -20.95   -16.06   -29.68       -25.20    -19.65       -11.38   -24.09   -14.83   -17.78   -15.98       -20.10
          Feb         -22.56   -23.71   -22.45   -12.04   -33.43       -18.61    -19.06       -17.07   -12.26   -12.93   -15.50   -20.85       -16.86
         Mar           -0.96    -2.85     4.95     5.74    10.73         8.56     10.63        14.23    12.67     8.70    10.51    -4.76         1.09
          Apr          -2.34    -2.19    11.71     6.85    -3.97         7.24      2.13        -3.05    13.41    -0.83     0.02    -5.21         0.24
         May           -0.56    -5.93    -1.18     1.74     3.02         4.06      0.13        -1.14     4.85    -4.73    -2.15    -2.88        -1.95
         June          -0.13    -0.10    -4.19    -1.11    -2.45        -5.78     -5.88        -6.50    -7.79    -8.14   -17.67   -12.41        -2.35
         July         -27.20   -36.45   -28.76   -20.46   -39.40       -33.51    -31.59       -22.97   -26.62   -24.95   -34.24   -17.12       -28.15
         Aug          -21.42   -26.84   -22.61   -12.83   -25.31       -26.03    -17.49       -15.13    -7.51   -10.65   -22.51     1.11       -22.55
         Sept           5.15     3.53    -1.64   -12.72    -2.88        -5.36      5.31        -3.23    11.18     4.64     6.13    -3.44         7.21
          Oct          15.65    18.59    13.26     0.81    21.90        12.59      5.72        12.34    -3.26    10.38     9.10    11.84         6.97
         Nov            6.84    14.98    11.78     0.96    10.55        14.49      8.29        11.66     4.14     3.19    11.07    -1.01         9.99
          Dec          61.99    83.75    64.87    65.83    95.59        73.95     70.47        48.31    38.96    54.21    77.45    76.97        72.59




                                                                        55
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                                   Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month             1        2        3        4        5             6         7           8        9       10       11       12       US
1937      Jan         -12.16   -20.47   -23.50   -18.55   -32.41       -29.89    -24.95       -12.05   -27.06   -15.85   -18.75   -17.39   -22.66
          Feb         -23.04   -25.30   -23.96   -13.59   -35.50       -19.62    -22.30       -18.37   -14.49   -13.77   -17.15   -22.69   -18.50
         Mar           -0.83    -2.87     5.58     7.98    12.65        10.09     14.50        17.61    15.72    10.44    12.09    -5.60     1.57
          Apr          -2.50    -2.84    11.95     6.78    -4.74         6.90      1.35        -2.92    13.22    -0.87    -0.82    -5.48    -0.39
         May           -1.49    -7.17    -1.85     0.80     2.73         3.99     -1.40        -1.86     3.81    -6.04    -3.11    -3.74    -2.92
         June          -0.07    -0.01    -5.06    -2.31    -3.10        -6.34     -7.00        -7.73    -8.19    -8.54   -18.39   -12.91    -2.67
         July         -27.36   -36.73   -28.77   -23.07   -38.42       -35.34    -34.73       -24.39   -28.40   -26.37   -36.78   -17.78   -29.24
         Aug          -22.24   -28.33   -23.16   -14.76   -26.60       -27.88    -19.17       -17.05    -7.82   -11.63   -24.13     1.06   -23.89
         Sept           5.55     4.80    -0.86   -13.30    -1.81        -5.94      6.93        -4.04    12.96     5.01     6.97    -3.40     8.24
          Oct          15.23    17.07    12.24     0.88    20.98        12.82      6.04        12.85    -3.06     9.53     8.33    10.87     6.49
         Nov            7.45    15.62    13.10     1.26    10.49        16.05      8.18        11.34     3.89     3.90    12.78    -0.96    10.37
          Dec          59.99    83.30    62.71    64.63    97.40        77.84     70.51        46.26    37.33    52.37    82.24    74.82    71.99
1938      Jan         -11.79   -20.13   -22.67   -18.79   -32.52       -30.82    -23.67       -12.22   -26.97   -15.46   -19.91   -16.92   -22.23
          Feb         -21.42   -24.12   -23.03   -11.43   -35.11       -20.68    -20.24       -18.19   -14.34   -12.95   -18.01   -20.65   -17.28
         Mar           -0.71    -2.30     4.31     6.42    11.06         8.97     13.19        15.52    14.98     9.62    11.36    -4.32     1.63
          Apr          -2.79    -3.33    10.52     5.72    -6.01         6.29      0.29        -2.45    14.43    -0.76    -1.38    -5.92    -0.97
         May           -1.79    -6.48    -1.59    -0.12     2.10         3.44     -2.14        -1.84     3.08    -5.72    -3.05    -3.54    -2.89
         June          -0.07     0.09    -4.55    -2.57    -3.45        -5.96     -5.57        -7.23    -8.01    -7.97   -18.53   -12.19    -2.50
         July         -24.89   -31.58   -24.76   -18.87   -36.52       -34.14    -29.34       -22.53   -26.99   -23.98   -34.25   -16.02   -25.78
         Aug          -23.52   -26.37   -20.91   -13.04   -27.07       -27.97    -18.24       -16.93    -7.70   -11.00   -23.31     1.12   -22.74
         Sept           5.53     5.41     0.15   -10.37    -0.30        -5.55      7.28        -4.00    13.53     4.49     6.55    -2.76     8.14
          Oct          14.62    14.21    10.05     0.73    19.05        12.39      5.28        12.51    -3.53     8.61     7.29     9.36     5.42
         Nov            8.30    15.29    12.54     1.30    10.31        17.00      7.44        11.67     3.71     4.19    12.19    -1.35    10.19
          Dec          62.56    81.81    62.01    65.38    98.85        83.08     71.44        48.19    38.31    52.60    81.11    75.55    72.48




                                                                        56
Table 5 (Continued)

                                                                   Federal Reserve District
 Year   Month             1        2        3        4        5             6         7           8        9       10       11       12    1      US
1939       Jan        -11.42   -18.51   -21.75   -18.66   -31.69       -32.67    -23.87       -12.46   -27.78   -15.62   -19.51   -17.26       -21.98
           Feb        -21.85   -22.75   -21.59   -11.28   -34.39       -21.63    -19.94       -18.18   -14.22   -12.40   -17.46   -21.60       -17.09
          Mar          -0.66    -2.31     4.78     6.87    12.13         9.94     14.33        16.37    15.81     9.68    11.30    -4.25         1.85
           Apr         -2.98    -3.34    10.42     5.50    -6.26         5.90     -0.33        -2.23    14.20    -0.73    -1.85    -6.02        -1.26
          May          -2.20    -7.11    -2.02    -0.43     2.48         3.88     -2.95        -2.23     3.14    -6.25    -3.20    -3.74        -3.45
          June          0.03     0.12    -4.77    -3.29    -3.74        -6.60     -6.00        -8.06    -8.40    -8.44   -18.81   -12.62        -2.71
          July        -26.87   -32.31   -25.68   -20.47   -37.26       -37.82    -30.72       -24.02   -27.51   -24.48   -34.51   -16.62       -26.74
          Aug         -23.95   -28.05   -22.14   -14.89   -28.91       -31.99    -19.72       -19.15    -8.15   -11.87   -23.26     1.40       -24.44
          Sept          6.53     6.07     0.58   -10.73     0.39        -5.53      8.41        -4.23    15.22     4.80     6.58    -3.00         9.14
           Oct         14.59    14.43    10.23     0.78    19.59        13.09      5.88        13.41    -4.16     8.34     7.50     9.37         5.55
          Nov           8.77    16.83    14.91     1.45    11.29        19.05      7.45        12.39     3.50     4.32    12.17    -1.43        10.83
           Dec         63.98    82.81    64.19    71.79    103.2        90.11     76.25        50.21    42.01    54.33    83.77    76.73        75.71


Notes: (a) Not available for January 1919 through December 1920.
       (b) Not available for January 1919 through December 1923.
Source: Seasonal component extracted from Table 2 by procedure described in text.




                                                                        57
Table 6: Growth Rate of Retail Trade by Federal Reserve District, Annual 1919 to 1939

                                                           Federal Reserve District
 Year            1       2         3        4         5             6          7          8        9       10       11       12       US
 1920        18.81    23.39    20.34     29.16    11.92         22.57        23.04       (a)   12.26       (b)    22.58   25.14    23.05
 1921        -2.22    -4.92    -4.35    -11.17    -4.55        -14.84        -9.59             -7.03             -16.78   -4.52    -7.75
 1922         3.30     2.21     1.34      0.61    -3.33         -6.19         2.78    -0.37    -4.99              -7.63    4.24     1.41
 1923         6.68     7.73    11.03     16.56    12.65         11.80        17.54    11.26     7.36               6.32   15.77    11.71
 1924         1.85     4.17    -0.59     -1.18     2.37         -2.38        -0.81    -1.19    -0.27               3.76    4.02    -0.01
 1925         1.82     4.91     0.45      2.16     5.59          3.04         5.41     5.17     3.72      5.78     4.52    5.64     4.94
 1926         2.78     4.19     1.58      2.21     3.19          5.14         6.09     1.83    -2.90     -5.05     5.17    5.09     3.33
 1927         1.96     2.02    -3.92      1.58    -2.13          1.03         1.13    -1.38    -2.18      0.46    -3.11    2.42    -0.32
 1928        -1.68     1.44    -1.79     -0.97     1.30          0.51         5.84     1.34    -8.29      1.84     2.44    3.39     2.06
 1929         1.39     3.95     0.33      1.77     3.06         -2.07         2.73     0.53    -2.60      3.17     1.15    2.61     2.06
 1930        -2.92    -1.17    -5.08     -8.42     -1.50        -8.08        -12.08   -10.17    -5.25    -4.67    -7.17    -5.75    -5.58
 1931        -8.08    -7.92   -12.08    -13.08     -5.67       -13.00        -11.17   -11.83    -8.58   -12.67   -16.42   -10.92   -10.17
 1932       -20.50   -20.83   -20.92    -26.67    -19.50       -23.92        -24.75   -22.08   -20.58   -22.67   -24.00   -23.50   -22.33
 1933        -7.42    -6.58    -3.67      0.25     -4.50        -1.17         -4.83    -4.17    -4.83    -1.58     2.17    -5.75    -5.00
 1934         7.08     6.75     9.58     18.42     17.58        26.75         18.17    16.25    10.83    16.33    24.33    10.25    12.17
 1935         0.92     1.75     4.00      5.58      8.00         7.25          8.08     1.75     6.92     5.75     7.04    10.21     5.33
 1936        10.25     9.75    10.25     14.83      9.75        14.67         14.17    11.33     9.67     8.17    18.75    10.83    11.50
 1937         2.67     4.42     3.58     10.75      4.17         9.83          9.42     7.25     4.17     5.08     9.42     5.33     6.00
 1938        -4.08    -7.58   -12.92    -12.92     -3.50        -0.67        -11.92    -4.83    -2.67    -6.25    -2.67    -7.17    -8.17
 1939         3.08     1.83     5.42      8.33      4.25         9.67          5.58     5.92     4.33     1.25     0.58     2.75     4.42


Notes: (a) Not available for 1920 and 1921.
       (b) Not available for 1920 through 1924.
Source: See Section 3.3.




                                                                        58
Table 7: Population (1,000s) by Federal Reserve District, July 1st, 1919 to 1939

                                                           Federal Reserve District
  Year          1          2       3        4         5             6           7         8       9      10      11       12        US
  1919       6,990   13,003    6,704     9,794     9,722        9,806        15,163    9,095   5,002   6,987   5,642    6,602   104,510
  1920       7,131   13,090    6,772     9,959     9,823       10,005        15,644    9,190   5,118   7,070   5,764    6,898   106,463
  1921       7,244   13,308    6,897    10,151     9,989       10,181        16,041    9,262   5,172   7,188   5,910    7,198   108,540
  1922       7,333   13,551    6,966    10,327    10,087       10,317        16,269    9,282   5,194   7,265   6,022    7,440   110,054
  1923       7,414   13,792    7,097    10,537    10,206       10,445        16,603    9,346   5,239   7,342   6,156    7,774   111,950
  1924       7,503   14,079    7,279    10,788    10,353       10,572        16,958    9,455   5,273   7,435   6,303    8,119   114,117
  1925       7,590   14,391    7,363    10,940    10,461       10,722        17,240    9,481   5,299   7,523   6,438    8,381   115,829
  1926       7,655   14,542    7,463    11,072    10,584       10,891        17,519    9,534   5,322   7,602   6,573    8,647   117,404
  1927       7,705   14,570    7,595    11,213    10,748       11,075        17,857    9,588   5,349   7,695   6,711    8,930   119,038
  1928       7,718   15,062    7,653    11,282    10,844       11,166        18,050    9,612   5,368   7,759   6,818    9,167   120,500
  1929       7,748   15,656    7,606    11,303    10,919       11,187        18,272    9,625   5,339   7,824   6,911    9,380   121,769

  1930       7,787   16,199    7,575    11,333    10,995       11,245        18,426    9,638   5,357   7,930   6,999    9,591   123,075
  1931       7,801   16,445    7,627    11,401    11,083       11,322        18,562    9,704   5,398   7,967   7,073    9,737   124,119
  1932       7,825   16,600    7,667    11,457    11,165       11,434        18,637    9,763   5,427   7,978   7,140    9,825   124,919
  1933       7,857   16,716    7,679    11,500    11,256       11,547        18,704    9,846   5,452   7,979   7,206    9,917   125,659
  1934       7,896   16,832    7,683    11,531    11,399       11,675        18,762    9,913   5,470   7,975   7,260   10,054   126,450
  1935       7,957   16,955    7,669    11,577    11,542       11,767        18,858    9,964   5,490   7,979   7,348   10,223   127,328
  1936       7,984   17,062    7,664    11,602    11,660       11,870        18,949    9,991   5,500   7,956   7,433   10,460   128,130
  1937       8,000   17,097    7,680    11,628    11,760       12,028        19,052   10,019   5,497   7,911   7,503   10,722   128,897
  1938       8,016   17,109    7,792    11,722    11,944       12,232        19,155   10,073   5,492   7,881   7,572   10,910   129,899
  1939       8,024   17,145    7,769    11,772    12,172       12,450        19,327   10,150   5,514   7,873   7,659   11,102   130,957


Source: See Section 3.4.




                                                                        59
Table 8: Growth Rate of Population by Federal Reserve District, Annual 1919 to 1939

                                                           Federal Reserve District
    Year           1         2       3        4       5            6         7          8       9      10     11     12     US
    1920         2.02      0.67    1.02    1.69     1.03        2.03       3.17       1.04    2.33   1.18    2.16   4.48   1.87
    1921         1.59      1.66    1.84    1.92     1.69        1.76       2.54       0.78    1.05   1.67    2.54   4.36   1.95
    1922         1.23      1.82    1.01    1.74     0.98        1.34       1.43       0.22    0.43   1.08    1.89   3.37   1.39
    1923         1.11      1.78    1.88    2.03     1.18        1.24       2.05       0.69    0.86   1.06    2.23   4.48   1.72
    1924         1.20      2.08    2.56    2.39     1.44        1.22       2.14       1.17    0.66   1.26    2.39   4.44   1.94
    1925         1.16      2.21    1.17    1.41     1.05        1.42       1.67       0.28    0.48   1.18    2.15   3.23   1.50
    1926         0.85      1.05    1.35    1.21     1.17        1.57       1.62       0.56    0.44   1.05    2.09   3.18   1.36
    1927         0.66      0.19    1.78    1.27     1.55        1.69       1.92       0.57    0.51   1.23    2.11   3.28   1.39
    1928         0.17      3.37    0.75    0.62     0.90        0.82       1.09       0.25    0.35   0.84    1.59   2.65   1.23
    1929         0.38      3.94   -0.61    0.19     0.69        0.18       1.23       0.13   -0.54   0.83    1.37   2.33   1.05
    1930         0.50      3.47   -0.40    0.27     0.70        0.52       0.85       0.13    0.34    1.35   1.26   2.25   1.07
    1931         0.18      1.51    0.69    0.60     0.80        0.68       0.74       0.69    0.76    0.47   1.06   1.52   0.85
    1932         0.31      0.95    0.52    0.49     0.74        0.99       0.41       0.61    0.53    0.14   0.95   0.91   0.64
    1933         0.41      0.70    0.16    0.37     0.81        0.99       0.36       0.84    0.47    0.01   0.92   0.93   0.59
    1934         0.50      0.69    0.05    0.27     1.26        1.11       0.31       0.69    0.32   -0.04   0.76   1.38   0.63
    1935         0.77      0.73   -0.18    0.40     1.26        0.78       0.51       0.51    0.37    0.05   1.21   1.68   0.69
    1936         0.35      0.63   -0.07    0.22     1.02        0.88       0.48       0.27    0.19   -0.29   1.15   2.32   0.63
    1937         0.20      0.20    0.21    0.23     0.86        1.34       0.54       0.28   -0.06   -0.56   0.95   2.50   0.60
    1938         0.20      0.07    1.46    0.81     1.56        1.70       0.54       0.54   -0.09   -0.38   0.92   1.75   0.78
    1939         0.09      0.21   -0.29    0.43     1.91        1.78       0.90       0.76    0.40   -0.11   1.15   1.76   0.81


Source: See Section 3.4.




                                                                    60
Table 9: Growth Rate of Per Capita Retail Trade by Federal Reserve District, Annual 1919 to 1939

                                                            Federal Reserve District
                                                                                                                                       US
  Year           1        2         3        4         5             6          7          8        9       10       11       12
  1920        18.81    23.39    20.34     29.16    11.92         22.57        23.04       (a)   12.26       (b)    22.58   25.14    23.05
  1921        -2.22    -4.92    -4.35    -11.17    -4.55        -14.84        -9.59             -7.03             -16.78   -4.52    -7.75
  1922         3.30     2.21     1.34      0.61    -3.33         -6.19         2.78    -0.37    -4.99              -7.63    4.24     1.41
  1923         6.68     7.73    11.03     16.56    12.65         11.80        17.54    11.26     7.36               6.32   15.77    11.71
  1924         1.85     4.17    -0.59     -1.18     2.37         -2.38        -0.81    -1.19    -0.27               3.76    4.02    -0.01
  1925         1.82     4.91     0.45      2.16     5.59          3.04         5.41     5.17     3.72      5.78     4.52    5.64     4.94
  1926         2.78     4.19     1.58      2.21     3.19          5.14         6.09     1.83    -2.90     -5.05     5.17    5.09     3.33
  1927         1.96     2.02    -3.92      1.58    -2.13          1.03         1.13    -1.38    -2.18      0.46    -3.11    2.42    -0.32
  1928        -1.68     1.44    -1.79     -0.97     1.30          0.51         5.84     1.34    -8.29      1.84     2.44    3.39     2.06
  1929         1.39     3.95     0.33      1.77     3.06         -2.07         2.73     0.53    -2.60      3.17     1.15    2.61     2.06
  1930        -2.92    -1.17    -5.08     -8.42     -1.50        -8.08        -12.08   -10.17    -5.25    -4.67    -7.17    -5.75    -5.58
  1931        -8.08    -7.92   -12.08    -13.08     -5.67       -13.00        -11.17   -11.83    -8.58   -12.67   -16.42   -10.92   -10.17
  1932       -20.50   -20.83   -20.92    -26.67    -19.50       -23.92        -24.75   -22.08   -20.58   -22.67   -24.00   -23.50   -22.33
  1933        -7.42    -6.58    -3.67      0.25     -4.50        -1.17         -4.83    -4.17    -4.83    -1.58     2.17    -5.75    -5.00
  1934         7.08     6.75     9.58     18.42     17.58        26.75         18.17    16.25    10.83    16.33    24.33    10.25    12.17
  1935         0.92     1.75     4.00      5.58      8.00         7.25          8.08     1.75     6.92     5.75     7.04    10.21     5.33
  1936        10.25     9.75    10.25     14.83      9.75        14.67         14.17    11.33     9.67     8.17    18.75    10.83    11.50
  1937         2.67     4.42     3.58     10.75      4.17         9.83          9.42     7.25     4.17     5.08     9.42     5.33     6.00
  1938        -4.08    -7.58   -12.92    -12.92     -3.50        -0.67        -11.92    -4.83    -2.67    -6.25    -2.67    -7.17    -8.17
  1939         3.08     1.83     5.42      8.33      4.25         9.67          5.58     5.92     4.33     1.25     0.58     2.75     4.42


Notes: (a) Not available for 1920 through 1921.
        (b) Not available for 1920 through 1924.
Source: See Section 3.5.




                                                                         61
Table 10: Summary Statistics for Retail Trade Indices

                                                                                    Federal Reserve District




                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Francisco (12)
                                                                                                                                                                       Kansas City (10)
                                                Philadelphia (3)




                                                                                                                                                    Minneapolis (9)
                                New York (2)




                                                                                     Richmond (5)
                                                                    Cleveland (4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                United States
                                                                                                                                   St. Louis (8)
                                                                                                                    Chicago (7)




                                                                                                                                                                                           Dallas (11)
                                                                                                     Atlanta (6)
                  Boston (1)




 Final Data, Unadjusted

 Maximum         182           211             180                 177              218             209            200            177              161                168                 195            200                   192
 Year             26            29              26                  26               39              39             28             25               25                 28                  39             29                    28
                  27                                                                                                                                                                                      28

 Minimum          46   50   38   42   50   40   45   40   36   41   38   52   46
 Month.Year     3.33 7.33 7.32 1.33 7.32 7.32 7.33 7.32 7.32 7.32 7.32 2.33 7.32
                                    7.33                7.33

 St. Dev.         27            32              28                 26                33              30             28             26               23                 24                  30             27                    28

 Final Data, Seasonally Adjusted

 Maximum        114 124 108 112 122 122 125 118 117 111 118 122 113
 Month.Year     8.27 5.30 10.25 8.27 3.37 8.39 9.29 10.25 10.25 10.25 8.26 7.29 8.27
                                                                                8.29

 Minimum          58   72   52   48   65   49   55   51   52   55   55   61   59
 Month.Year     1.33 1.33 3.33 3.33 3.33 3.33 3.33 3.33 3.33 3.33 3.33 3.33 3.33

 St. Dev.         14            13              15                 15                11              16             16             15               15                 12                  16             15                    13


Source: Authors‟ calculations.
Table 11: Correlations Across Districts, Per Capita Retail Trade Index, 1919 to 1939

                                                                         Federal Reserve District




                                                                                                                                                                                                San Francisco (12)
                                                                                                                                                             Kansas City (10)
                                                                                                                                          Minneapolis (9)
                                     Philadelphia (3)
                      New York (2)




                                                                           Richmond (5)
                                                         Cleveland (4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      United States
                                                                                                                         St. Louis (8)
                                                                                                          Chicago (7)




                                                                                                                                                                                 Dallas (11)
                                                                                           Atlanta (6)
         Boston (1)




  Final Data, Unadjusted
    1 1.00 0.96 0.96                                    0.93             0.89             0.87           0.92           0.94             0.82               0.95                0.87           0.88                  0.97
    2 0.96 1.00 0.91                                    0.90             0.94             0.87           0.94           0.90             0.72               0.94                0.87           0.91                  0.97
    3 0.96 0.91 1.00                                    0.94             0.86             0.89           0.89           0.96             0.88               0.95                0.87           0.81                  0.94
    4 0.93 0.90 0.94                                    1.00             0.88             0.93           0.95           0.96             0.87               0.96                0.91           0.90                  0.95
    5 0.89 0.94 0.86                                    0.88             1.00             0.92           0.92           0.86             0.69               0.91                0.91           0.88                  0.94
    6 0.87 0.87 0.89                                    0.93             0.92             1.00           0.91           0.91             0.83               0.91                0.97           0.82                  0.92
    7 0.92 0.94 0.89                                    0.95             0.92             0.91           1.00           0.93             0.77               0.97                0.91           0.93                  0.97
    8 0.94 0.90 0.96                                    0.96             0.86             0.91           0.93           1.00             0.91               0.97                0.91           0.87                  0.95
    9 0.82 0.72 0.88                                    0.87             0.69             0.83           0.77           0.91             1.00               0.91                0.82           0.67                  0.81
  10 0.95 0.94 0.95                                     0.96             0.91             0.91           0.97           0.97             0.91               1.00                0.94           0.94                  0.97
  11 0.87 0.87 0.87                                     0.91             0.91             0.97           0.91           0.91             0.82               0.94                1.00           0.82                  0.92
  12 0.88 0.91 0.81                                     0.90             0.88             0.82           0.93           0.87             0.67               0.94                0.82           1.00                  0.91
 U.S. 0.97 0.97 0.94                                    0.95             0.94             0.92           0.97           0.95             0.81               0.97                0.92           0.91                  1.00

 Final Data, Seasonally Adjusted
    1 1.00 0.88 0.91 0.89                                                0.54             0.61           0.82           0.93             0.73               0.91                0.59           0.81                  0.93
    2 0.88 1.00 0.70 0.80                                                0.73             0.53           0.89           0.80             0.41               0.89                0.54           0.94                  0.92
    3 0.91 0.70 1.00 0.89                                                0.39             0.64           0.71           0.93             0.88               0.92                0.61           0.62                  0.84
    4 0.89 0.80 0.89 1.00                                                0.69             0.83           0.89           0.96             0.78               0.96                0.81           0.80                  0.95
    5 0.54 0.73 0.39 0.69                                                1.00             0.72           0.84           0.58             0.23               0.75                0.72           0.82                  0.76
    6 0.61 0.53 0.64 0.83                                                0.72             1.00           0.75           0.79             0.69               0.80                0.95           0.59                  0.76
    7 0.82 0.89 0.71 0.89                                                0.84             0.75           1.00           0.86             0.51               0.93                0.74           0.93                  0.95
    8 0.93 0.80 0.93 0.96                                                0.58             0.79           0.86           1.00             0.90               0.96                0.77           0.80                  0.93
    9 0.73 0.41 0.88 0.78                                                0.23             0.69           0.51           0.90             1.00               0.91                0.67           0.35                  0.65
   10 0.91 0.89 0.92 0.96                                                0.75             0.80           0.93           0.96             0.91               1.00                0.83           0.93                  0.96
   11 0.59 0.54 0.61 0.81                                                0.72             0.95           0.74           0.77             0.67               0.83                1.00           0.59                  0.75
   12 0.81 0.94 0.62 0.80                                                0.82             0.59           0.93           0.80             0.35               0.93                0.59           1.00                  0.91
 U.S. 0.93 0.92 0.84 0.95                                                0.76             0.76           0.95           0.93             0.65               0.96                0.75           0.91                  1.00


Notes: Entries enclosed in a shaded box indicate correlation coefficients less than 0.70.
Sources: Author‟s calculations.




                                                                                                             63
Table 12: Growth in Retail Trade by District

                                                                                            Federal Reserve District




                                                                                                                                                                                                             San Francisco (12)
                                                                                                                                                                            Kansas City (10)
                                                         Philadelphia (3)




                                                                                                                                                        Minneapolis (9)
                                        New York (2)




                                                                                             Richmond (5)
                                                                            Cleveland (4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  United States
                                                                                                                                        St. Louis (8)
                                                                                                                          Chicago (7)




                                                                                                                                                                                               Dallas (11)
                                                                                                            Atlanta (6)
                         Boston (1)

     Average
 1   All               0.78            1.47             0.13 1.89                           1.96 2.00 2.24 0.37 -0.55                                                     -0.34 1.52 2.50 1.43
 2   1921 to 1939     -0.05            0.61            -0.74 1.10                           1.77 1.79 1.74 0.37 -0.90                                                     -0.34 1.37 1.64 0.74
 3   1920s             1.29            2.45            -0.10 0.32                           1.66 -1.20 1.90 0.78 -2.24                                                     0.26 -1.13 3.29 1.19
 4   1930s            -1.79           -2.05            -1.86 0.61                           1.18 3.27 0.31 -0.05 -0.08                                                    -0.73 2.13 -0.88 -0.69
 5   1930 to1933      -12.0           -11.8            -12.2 -13.2                          -9.9 -12.7 -13.6 -12.7 -11.3                                                  -12.3 -12.8 -13.4 -12.5
 6   1933 to 1939      3.32            2.82             3.32 7.50                           6.71 11.25 7.25 6.28 5.54                                                      5.06 9.58 5.37 5.21

     Standard Deviation
 7   All                7.83 8.70 9.24 12.75 8.18 12.26 11.95 9.12 8.03 9.27 12.38 10.37 9.80
 8   1920s              2.89 3.51 4.59 7.36 5.04 7.42 8.35 5.70 4.81 4.33 7.43 5.87 5.38
 9   1930s              9.36 9.53 11.11 15.09 10.82 15.08 14.22 12.00 10.14 11.75 15.41 11.79 11.48

10   Maximum           10.3 9.8 11.0 18.4 17.6 26.8 18.2 16.3 10.8 16.3 24.3 15.8 12.2
11   Year             1936 1936 1923 1934 1934 1934 1934 1934 1934 1934 1934 1923 1934

12   Minimum          -20.5 -20.8 -20.9 -26.7 -19.5 -23.9 -24.8 -22.1 -20.6 -22.7 -24.0 -23.5 -22.3
13   Year             1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932



Source: Authors‟ calculations.




                                                                                             64
Table 13: Growth in Per Capita Retail Trade

                                                                                              Federal Reserve District




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Francisco (12)
                                                                                                                                                                                Kansas City (10)
                                                                                                                                                            Minneapolis (9)
                                                         Philadelphia (3)

                                                                              Cleveland (4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            United States
                                        New York (2)




                                                                                               Richmond (5)




                                                                                                                                          St. Louis (8)
                                                                                                                            Chicago (7)




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dallas (11)
                                                                                                              Atlanta (6)
                         Boston (1)

     Average
 1   All              -0.16           -0.10            -0.79                 0.51 0.66 0.47 0.83 -0.43                                                    -1.13               -0.91                -0.33           -0.47                   0.11
 2   1921 to 1939     -0.79           -0.85            -1.47                -0.09 0.52 0.44 0.53 -0.43                                                    -1.33               -0.91                -0.29           -0.98                  -0.39
 3   1920s             0.31            0.26            -1.28                -1.26 0.42 -2.51 0.10 0.04                                                    -2.81               -0.94                -3.15           -0.17                  -0.34
 4   1930s            -2.29           -2.68            -2.20                -0.27 -0.14 1.80 -0.39 -0.91                                                  -0.46               -0.89                 0.82           -2.73                  -1.48
 5   1930 to1933      -12.4           -12.7            -12.9                -14.2 -10.8 -13.7 -14.3 -13.6                                                 -12.0               -12.8                -13.7           -14.5                  -13.2
 6   1933 to 1939       2.8             2.3              3.1                  6.7   5.2   9.6   6.5   5.4                                                   5.3                 5.0                  8.1             3.1                    4.4

     Standard Deviation
 7   All                7.24 8.26 9.03 12.25 8.02 11.71 11.48 9.03 7.88 9.30 11.89 9.19 9.34
 8   1920s              2.72 3.65 4.39 7.02 4.98 7.22 8.03 5.53 4.67 4.32 7.21 5.42 5.33
 9   1930s              9.19 9.57 11.42 14.85 10.62 14.65 14.02 11.92 10.23 11.82 15.04 11.16 11.32

10   Maximum           10.0 9.2 10.5 16.7 16.4 24.0 17.1 14.7 10.7 15.9 22.2 10.4 11.1
11   Year             1936 1936 1936 1934 1934 1934 1934 1934 1934 1934 1934 1923 1934

12   Minimum          -20.6 -21.8 -21.1 -26.9 -20.2 -24.8 -25.0 -22.7 -20.9 -22.8 -24.5 -24.1 -22.7
13   Year             1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932



Source: Authors‟ calculations.




                                                                                               65
Table 14: Regional Variation in Retail Trade

                                         Growth of Retail Trade                                                               Growth of Per Capita Retail Trade




                                                                  Great Plains (8, 9, 10)




                                                                                                                                                                              Great Plains (8, 9, 10)
                  North East (1, 2, 3)




                                                                                                                                North East (1, 2, 3)
                                             Great Lakes (4, 7)




                                                                                                                                                       Great Lakes (4, 7)
                                                                                            South (5, 6, 11)




                                                                                                                                                                                                          South (5, 6, 11)
                                                                                                               Pacific (12)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pacific (12)
 Average
 All             0.80                      2.07 0.12 1.83 2.50                                                                -0.35 0.67 -0.63 0.27 -0.47
 1921 to 1939   -0.06                      1.42 -0.16 1.64 1.64                                                               -1.04 0.22 -0.77 0.22 -0.98
 1920s           1.22                      1.11 -0.73 -0.22 3.29                                                              -0.24 -0.58 -1.55 -1.74 -0.17
 1930s          -1.90                      0.46 -0.29 2.19 -0.88                                                              -2.39 -0.33 -0.75 0.83 -2.73

 Standard Deviation
 All           8.45 12.26 8.50 10.70 10.37                                                                                    8.01 11.78 8.36 10.32 9.19
 1920s         3.46 7.74 4.89 6.32 5.87                                                                                       3.35 7.41 4.82 6.19 5.42
 1930s         9.87 14.61 11.18 13.58 11.79                                                                                   9.89 14.40 11.22 13.27 11.16

 Maximum        10.1 18.3 14.5 22.9 15.8                                                                                       9.9 16.9                                      13.8                        20.9 10.4
 Year           1936 1934 1934 1934 1923                                                                                      1936 1934                                     1934                        1934 1923

 Minimum        -20.8 -25.7 -21.8 -22.5 -23.5                                                                                 -21.1 -26.0 -22.1 -23.2 -24.1
 Year           1932 1932 1932 1932 1932                                                                                      1932 1932 1932 1932 1932



Source: Authors‟ calculations.




                                                                                                                                66
Table 15: Business Cycle Reference Dates

   Business Cycle Reference Dates                             Duration in Months
      Peak               Trough      Contraction       Expansion                     Cycle
        Quarter in Parenthesis          Peak         Previous trough       Trough            Peak
                                          to                to              from             from
                                       Trough           this peak      previous trough   previous peak
       (1)                  (2)          (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)
Jan 1920 (I)        Jul 1921 (III)       18                10                28               17
May 1923 (II)       Jul 1924 (III)       14                22                36               40
Oct 1926 (III)      Nov 1927 (IV)        13                27                40               41
Aug 1929 (III)      Mar 1933 (I)         43                21                64               34
May 1937 (II)       Jun 1938 (II)        13                50                63               93

Source: National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                67
Table 16: Summary Statistics for Moving Averages of Month to Month Growth Rates during the
Recessions, 1920 to1939
                                                                                      Federal Reserve District




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Francisco (12)
                                                                                                                                                                                Kansas City (20)
                                                                                                                                                            Minneapolis (9)
                                               Philadelphia (3)




                                                                                      Richmond (5)
                                                                    Cleveland (4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              United States
                              New York (2)




                                                                                                                                          St. Louis (8)
                                                                                                                          Chicago (7)




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dallas (11)
                                                                                                          Atlanta (6)
               Boston (1)




1921-1922
Average        5.3            5.0              5.8                  7.6               4.0              2.0                4.9             (a)               2.9                 (b)                 -0.1            6.7                       5.4
Maximum       17.4           21.2             18.9                 27.3              11.4             20.2               20.4                              20.7                                     20.0           23.1                      21.4
Month.Year    7.20           7.20             7.20                 7.20              7.20             7.20               7.20                              7.20                                     7.20           7.20                      7.20
Minimum       -3.9           -5.8             -6.1                -16.1              -8.8            -17.9               -9.7           -20.0             -11.2                                    -18.3           -6.6                      -9.8
Month.Year    9.21           9.21             9.21                 9.21              9.21             9.21               9.21            9.21              9.21                                     9.21           9.21                      9.21
1923-1924
Average        5.1            6.4              6.1                  8.2               7.5             5.6                 8.8             4.8               3.2                                      5.3           20.7                       6.7
Maximum        8.3            8.3             11.4                 17.8              12.4            11.4                18.0            11.6               8.2                                      6.4           16.0                      12.4
Month.Year    2.23           8.23             5.23                 3.23              7.23            7.23                5.23            3.23              5.23                                     8.23           4.23                      3.23
Minimum       -1.2            2.9             -3.1                 -3.2               1.4            -3.5                -2.0            -1.8              -3.0                                      2.1            1.2                      -0.8
Month.Year   11.24          11.24            11.24                11.24              9.26            9.24                9.24            9.24              9.26                                    20.25           9.24                   9-10.24

1926-1927
Average        2.0            2.6             -2.4                  2.4              -0.6             1.4                 2.2            -0.7              -3.4               -0.7                  -0.5            3.4                       0.7
Maximum        3.8            5.8              2.8                  4.2               6.7             6.7                 9.0             5.9               4.0                6.7                   5.7            6.9                       5.8
Month.Year    3.26           2.26             2.26                 2.27              9.25            4.26                3.26            9.25              5.25               4.25                 20.24           9.25                      9.25
Minimum       -1.9            0.9             -4.0                 -1.4              -2.0            -3.7                 0.5            -1.7              -7.5               -2.7                  -2.7            1.4                      -0.4
Month.Year    3.28           3.28            11.27                 3.28              7.27            8.29                4.27            4.27              6.28               7.26                  6.27           7.29                      9.27
1929-33
Average       -9.4           -8.5            -11.1                -13.7              -7.6            -13.4              -14.0           -13.0             -20.5               -11.3                -13.2           -11.5                    -11.0
Maximum        2.9            4.2              0.8                  1.9               3.8              2.7                6.8             1.8              -2.2                 3.3                  2.9             4.0                      2.9
Month.Year   11.29           4.29             3.29                 3.29             20.29             2.28              11.28           12.27             10.29                1.29                 6.28            7.28                     9.28
Minimum      -22.3          -21.7            -22.2                -27.7             -21.1            -24.8              -26.0           -24.7             -21.1               -23.0                -25.5           -25.2                    -23.6
Month.Year    9.32           9.32             9.32                 9.32              9.32             9.32               9.32            9.32              9.32                9.32                 7.32            9.32                     9.32

1937-38
Average       -1.5           -1.3             -4.3                 -1.3               0.3             4.5                -1.6             0.7               0.4               -0.6                   4.6           -1.2                      -1.2
Maximum       20.4            9.6             20.6                 21.7              16.9            26.3                17.6            15.8              20.7               16.7                  24.1           12.1                      12.2
Month.Year    7.36           7.36             9.36                12.33              6.34            6.34                6.34            6.34              6.34               6.34                  6.34           4.35                      9.36
Minimum       -4.7           -7.8            -12.3                -12.4              -3.5            -0.3               -11.1            -5.8              -3.0               -6.1                  -3.6           -6.9                      -7.7
Month.Year    4.38           8.38             6.38                 5.38              8.38            6.38                6.38            4.38              4.38               6.38                  9.38           6.38                      6.38


Notes: (a) Not available for 1920 and 1921.
       (b) Not available for 1920 through 1924.
Source: Authors‟ calculations.


                                                                                                     68
Table 17: Summary Statistics for Retail Trade Indices during Recessions, 1920 to1939
                                                                                                   Federal Reserve District




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Francisco (12)
                                                                                                                                                                               Kansas City (20)
                                                                                                                                                           Minneapolis (9)
                                             Philadelphia (3)




                                                                                    Richmond (5)
                                                                  Cleveland (4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             United States
                            New York (2)




                                                                                                                                         St. Louis (8)
                                                                                                                         Chicago (7)




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dallas (11)
                                                                                                        Atlanta (6)
              Boston (1)




1921-1922
Average        91            90               92                   95                92                209                88             (a)               203                 (b)                   112                82                   92
Maximum        99            98              207                  205               200                120                93                               111                                       122                86                   97
Month.Year   7.20          5.20             5.20                 7.20              7.20               7.20            1-3.20            1.20              7.20                                      7.20            5-8.20
Minimum        85            79               82                   77                78                 83                73              76                86                                        85                75                    80
Month.Year   9.21          9.21             9.21                 9.21              3.22               8.21              3.22            9.21              3.22                                     10.22              1.22                  9.21
1923-1924
Average       200            98              201                  201                98                200               99               99                99                                         98              99                     99
Maximum       207           203              207                  208               204                206              206              206               203                                        201             208                    203
Month.Year   8.23          7.24             2.24                 2.24              9.24               6.23             8.23             2.23              8.23                                    9-10.23            9.23                   4.24
Minimum        95            93               92                   91                88                 93               93               93                93                  87                     90              95                     93
Month.Year   3.24          3.24            10.22                20.24              3.24               3.24             3.24             8.24              3.24                3.24                   3.24            3.24                   3.24
                                            4.26
1926-1927
Average       206           111               99                  205               206               207               120              203                97                  95                    206             112                    206
Maximum       114           121              208                  112               113               113               120              118              117                  111                    118             119                    113
Month.Year   8.27          8.27            10.25                 8.27             10.25              10.25            10.25            10.25             10.25               10.25                   8.26            4.27                   8.27
                                                                                                                       7.26
Minimum        98           204               85                   94                98                 97              204               95                75                  90                     95             208                    201
Month.Year   4.29          5.27             4.29                 4.28              3.27               4.28             5.27             4.28              4.28                3.27                   3.27            5.27                   3.27
1929-33
Average        90           202               79                   81                97                 82                91              81                72                  82                    85               97                     91
Maximum       112           124              200                  111               116                115               125             209               201                 205                   116              122                    113
Month.Year   3.31          5.30            20.29                 9.29              4.30               1.29            8-9.29            8.29             10.29               11.29                 11.29            11.29                   8.29
Minimum        58            72               52                   48                65                 49                55              51                52                  55                    55               61                     59
Month.Year   1.33          1.33             3.33                 3.33              3.33               3.33              3.33            3.33              3.33                3.33                  3.33             3.33                   3.33
1937-38
Average        81            94               73                   88               209                204               98               82                74                  84                   120               97                     91
Maximum        88           202               85                   99               122                120              209               90                79                  90                   117              114                    201
Month.Year   3.37          7.37             3.37                 3.37              3.37               3.37             6.37             3.37              3.37                3.37                 10.36             3.37                   3.37
Minimum        73            84               58                   72                96                 99               83               75                68                  75                   202               85                     80
Month.Year   9.38          5.38             5.38                 5.38              5.38               5.38             5.38             5.38              5.38                5.38                 20.38             9.38                   5.38


Notes: (a) Not available for 1920 and 1921.
       (b) Not available for 1920 through 1924.
Source: Authors‟ calculations.



                                                                                                        69
Table 18: Population Growth by District

                                                                                        Federal Reserve District




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   San Francisco (12)
                                                                                                                                                                                Kansas City (20)
                                                                                                                                                            Minneapolis (9)
                                                    Philadelphia (3)




                                                                                         Richmond (5)
                                                                        Cleveland (4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         United States
                                    New York (2)




                                                                                                                                           St. Louis (8)
                                                                                                                            Chicago (7)




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dallas (11)
                                                                                                         Atlanta (6)
                      Boston (1)




     Average
 1   All            0.66           1.32            0.72                0.91             1.18            1.22           1.22               0.55             0.49                0.55                1.52           2.61                  1.12
 2   1920s          0.89           2.16            1.13                1.30             1.13            1.18           1.65               0.48             0.46                1.15                1.96           3.35                  1.46
 3   1930s          0.33           0.63            0.28                0.42             1.14            1.14           0.53               0.58             0.32               -0.08                1.01           1.64                  0.69
 4   1930 to 1933   0.30           1.05            0.46                0.49             0.78            0.89           0.50               0.71             0.59                0.21                0.98           1.12                  0.70
 5   1933 to 1939   0.35           0.42            0.20                0.39             1.31            1.26           0.55               0.51             0.19               -0.22                1.02           1.90                  0.69

   Standard Deviation
 6 All           0.54 1.17 0.87 0.70 0.40 0.47 0.80 0.29 0.54 0.70 0.58 1.15 0.47
 7 1920s         0.45 1.15 1.01 0.75 0.34 0.52 0.52 0.34 0.42 0.25 0.43 0.84 0.32
 8 1930s         0.21 0.44 0.54 0.19 0.40 0.39 0.18 0.20 0.27 0.30 0.14 0.54 0.10

 9 Maximum           2.02 3.94 2.56 2.39 1.91 2.03 3.17 1.17 2.33 1.67 2.54 4.48 1.95
10 Year             1920 1929 1924 1924 1939 1920 1920 1924 1920 1921 1921 1923 1921

11 Minimum           0.09 0.07 -0.61 0.19 0.69 0.18 0.31 0.13 -0.54 -0.56 0.76 0.91 0.59
12 Year             1939 1938 1929 1929 1929 1929 1934 1930 1929 1937 1934 1932 1933



Source: Authors‟ calculations.




                                                                                                                       70
Table 19: Population Growth by Region

                                    Growth in Population                                                                Growth in Population relative to the U.S.




                                                                                                                                                                                Great Plains (8, 9, 10)
                                                            Great Plains (8, 9, 10)
             North East (1, 2, 3)




                                                                                                                           North East (1, 2, 3)
                                       Great Lakes (4, 7)




                                                                                                                                                         Great Lakes (4, 7)
                                                                                      South (5, 6, 11)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            South (5, 6, 11)
                                                                                                         Pacific (12)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pacific (12)
 Average
 All        1.01 1.10 0.54 1.27 2.61                                                                                    -0.11                          -0.02                  -0.58                        0.15                1.47
 1920s      1.58 1.52 0.70 1.34 3.35                                                                                     0.15                           0.00                  -0.69                       -0.12                1.70
 1930s      0.43 0.53 0.28 1.16 1.68                                                                                    -0.32                          -0.17                  -0.44                        0.50                1.00

 Standard Deviation
 All         0.67 0.73 0.37 0.37 1.15                                                                                    0.46                          0.29                   0.24                        0.38                 0.71
 1920s       0.40 0.59 0.28 0.41 0.84                                                                                    0.48                          0.29                   0.13                        0.24                 0.52
 1930s       0.30 0.20 0.22 0.31 0.52                                                                                    0.31                          0.12                   0.21                        0.27                 0.52

 Maximum 1.97 2.30 1.14 1.91 4.48                                                                                         0.83                         0.71                   -0.12                        0.86                2.72
 Year    1924 1921 1921 1921 1923                                                                                        1929                          1920                   1933                        1939                 1923

 Minimum    0.06 0.29 -0.08 0.65 0.91                                                                                   -0.84                          -0.44                  -0.86                       -0.40                0.26
 Year      1940 1930 1925 1929 1932                                                                                     1940                           1930                   1925                        1929                 1932



Source: Authors‟ calculations.




                                                                                                                                                  71
Table 20: Characteristics of the Seasonal Cycle

                                                                                         Federal Reserve Districts




                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Francisco (12)
                                                                                                                                                                         Kansas City (10)
                                                      Philadelphia (3)




                                                                                                                                                       Minneapolis (9)
                                       New York (2)




                                                                                            Richmond (5)
                                                                         Cleveland (4)




                                                                                                                                       St. Louis (8)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               United States
                                                                                                                         Chicago (7)




                                                                                                                                                                                            Dallas (11)
                                                                                                           Atlanta (6)
                          Boston (1)




Standard deviation (SD)   23           28             24                 20                 30             25            22            21              18                20                 24            22                   23
SD 1920s                  24           28             25                 22                 29             25            22            24              19                23                 25            22                   24
SD 1930s                  22           28             22                 19                 31             25            22            18              16                18                 24            22                   23

Maximum                    76           94             78                 72               103              90            79            71              59                68                 84            82 80
Minimum                   -32          -39            -33                -26               -39             -38           -35           -32             -28               -29                -38           -28 -32

Average Xmas          65   83   62   58   85   65 63     54   39   57   68   76 70
Minimum Xmas          50   66   41   33   60   36 38     33   20   34   40   55 49
Minimum Xmas Year 1932-3 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932 1932
Maximum Xmas          77   98   78   70 102    87 79     72   58   71   87   89 83
Maximum Xmas Year   1926 1929 1926 1926 1939 1939 1928 1927 1925 1926 1939 1929 1928
                    1927           1927                          1927
                                                                 1928


Source: Authors‟ calculations.
Table 21: Final Series Minus Initial Series

                                                                                       Federal Reserve District




                                                                                                                                                                                                           San Francisco (12)
                                                                                                                                                                        Kansas City (10)
                                                    Philadelphia (3)




                                                                                                                                                      Minneapolis (9)
                                     New York (2)




                                                                                         Richmond (5)
                                                                       Cleveland (4)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  United States
                                                                                                                                     St. Louis (8)
                                                                                                                       Chicago (7)




                                                                                                                                                                                            Dallas (11)
                                                                                                         Atlanta (6)
                       Boston (1)




Average              -0.26 0.45 0.00 3.20 -1.69 0.03 -2.56 0.50 1.67 0.30 1.16 0.55                                                                                                                                             -1.15
Avg. 1919-1922       -0.44 0.85 0.21        -3.05 -0.14 -5.59     4.01       3.47 1.11                                                                                                                                          -2.01
Avg. 1923-1927       -0.15 -0.01 -0.17 3.47 -0.87 0.00 0.05       0.88      -0.21 0.12                                                                                                                                          -0.57
Avg. 1928-1929       -0.16 0.54 -0.07 2.88 -0.88 0.35 -1.92 0.50 -0.65 0.30 -0.25 0.36                                                                                                                                          -0.73

Standard deviation   1.80           3.87 9.10 3.10                                     2.96             3.22 9.25 2.24                               6.42 1.78                             6.35           2.78                  5.64
Sd 1919-1922         1.56           5.94 13.37                                         2.01             4.84 13.57                                   8.50                                  9.60           4.07                  7.58
Sd 1923-1927         2.08           1.93 5.62 2.49                                     3.75             1.85 4.37                                    3.51                                  1.79           1.59                  3.86
Sd 1928-1929         1.70           1.25 4.48 3.73                                     1.96             1.27 4.18 2.24                               5.04 1.78                             2.71           1.36                  4.34


Source: See Section 2.
Notes: Missing values indicate data missing for that period.




                                                                                         73
Table 22: Measurement Error in Initial Reports by Month


                         Average                   Standard Deviation
                 (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)
             1919 to      1919 to   1923 to   1919 to     1919 to     1923 to
               1930         1922      1930      1930        1922        1930

 January       -4.18       -10.41     -0.62        7.76     10.47       2.23
 February       1.85        -3.28      4.78        6.90     10.01       1.26
 March         -8.27       -15.00     -4.43        8.96     12.90       1.79
 April         -1.52        -0.79     -1.94        4.61      1.64       5.78
 May           -0.36        -1.09      0.05        1.97      2.99       1.19
 June           0.37         1.41     -0.22        1.96      0.56       2.26
 July           0.54         2.00     -0.30        2.10      2.52       1.38
 August        -1.58         1.34     -3.25        2.74      1.28       1.65
 September      2.53         2.72      2.41        2.47      2.37       2.76
 October       -4.91        -3.63     -5.77        3.11      4.30       2.03
 November       3.99         4.31      3.77        1.91      1.19       2.36
 December      -1.87        -1.73     -1.97        4.82      3.99       5.18



Source: See Section 2.




                                              74
Figure 1: Growth Rate of Retail Sales, Various Measures, Unadjusted for Seasonal Fluctuations


                     0.5



                     0.4                         Month to Month Growth Rate
                                                 Annual Average Month to Month Growth Rate
                                                 Annual Median Month to Month Growth Rate
                     0.3                         January to January Growth Rate
                                                 April to April Growth Rate
                                                 June to June Growth Rate
                     0.2
                                                 December to December Growth Rate
                                                 Growth Rate of Annual Average of Index Values
  Percent Per Year




                     0.1



                       0



                     -0.1



                     -0.2



                     -0.3




                                                                Month and Year
Figure 2: Retail Trade by Month, 1919 to 1939



                                       200
                                                           North East (1, 2, 3)
                                                           Great Lakes (4, 7)
                                       180                 Great Plains (8, 9, 10)
                                                           Pacific (12)
  Index (Base= average 1923 to 1925)




                                                           South (5,6,11)
                                       160


                                       140


                                       120


                                       100


                                       80


                                       60


                                       40



                                                Month and Year




                                                   76
Figure 3: Regions Relative to the South, 1929 to 1939

       (a) Unadjusted Data

         1.1


        1.05


          1


        0.95


         0.9


        0.85            North East (1, 2, 3)
                        North East (1, 2, 3)
                        Great Lakes (4, 7)
         0.8            Great Lakes (4, 7)
                        Great Plains (8, 9, 10)
                        Great Plains (8, 9, 10)
        0.75            Pacific (12)
                        Pacific (12)
         0.7




       (b) Seasonally Adjusted Data

         1.1


        1.05


          1


        0.95


         0.9


        0.85

                        North East (1, 2, 3)
         0.8
                        Great Lakes (4, 7)
                        Great Plains (8, 9, 10)
        0.75            Pacific (12)

         0.7
Figure 4: Growth Rates of Retail Trade by District, Percent Per Year

                    (1) BOSTON                             (2) NEW YORK                        (3) PHILADELPHIA                     (4) CLEVELAND
            30                                   30                                      30                                 30
            20                                   20                                      20                                 20
            10                                   10                                      10                                 10
  Percent




                                       Percent




                                                                               Percent




                                                                                                                  Percent
             0                                    0                                       0                                  0
            -10                                  -10                                     -10                                -10
            -20                                  -20                                     -20                                -20
            -30                                  -30                                     -30                                -30




                   (5) RICHMOND                             (6) ATLANTA                          (7) CHICAGO                          (8) ST. LOUIS
            30                                   30                                      30                                  30

            20                                   20                                      20                                  20

            10                                   10                                      10                                  10




                                                                                                                  Percent
  Percent




                                                                               Percent
                                       Percent




             0                                    0                                       0                                   0
            -10                                  -10                                     -10                                 -10
            -20                                  -20                                     -20                                 -20
            -30                                  -30                                     -30                                 -30




                  (9) MINNEAPOLIS                          (10) KANSAS CITY                      (11) DALLAS                       (12) SAN FRANCISCO
            30                                     30                                    30                                 30
            20                                     20                                    20                                 20
            10                                     10                                    10                                 10
                                       Percent
  Percent




                                                                                                                  Percent
                                                                               Percent



             0                                         0                                  0                                  0
                                                  -10
            -10                                                                          -10                                -10
                                                  -20
            -20                                                                          -20                                -20
                                                  -30
            -30                                                                          -30                                -30




                                                                              78
Figure 5: Changes in the Regional Shares of the Total Population


                    3.0
                                                                   North East (1, 2, 3)
                                                                   Great Lakes (4, 7)
                    2.5
                                                                   Great Plains (8, 9, 10)
                                                                   South (5,6,11)
                    2.0                                            Pacific (12)


                    1.5
 Percent per Year




                    1.0



                    0.5



                    0.0



                    -0.5



                    -1.0




                                                      Month and Year




                                                                       79
Figure 6: Seasonal Cycle

 100
                   North East (1, 2, 3)
                   Great Lakes (4, 7)
                   Great Plains (8, 9, 10, 11)
                   South (5, 6)
  80               Pacific (12)
                   USA



  60




  40




  20




   0




 -20




 -40



                                                 Month and Year




                                                             80
Figure 7: Monthly Averages for the Seasonal Component

   80


                                                                                            65.5

   60




   40




   20
                                                                                     13.1
          Jan    Feb     Mar      Apr     May     Jun    Jul     Aug           8.2

                                          0.2                            1.4
    0
                          -1.8                    -2.3
                                                                         Sep   Oct   Nov    Dec
                                   -0.6

   -20   -16.5   -16.3

                                                                 -23.7
                                                         -26.3


   -40




                                                           81
Figure 8: Monthly Averages for Seasonal Component by Region

  80

                       North East (1, 2, 3)

                       Great Lakes (4, 7)
  60
                       Great Plains (8, 9, 10, 11)

                       South (5, 6)

  40                   Pacific (12)




  20
          Jan    Feb        Mar       Apr        May   Jun    Jul   Aug   Sep




   0



                                                                                Oct   Nov   Dec
  -20




  -40




                                                               82
Figure 9: Difference between the Initial and Final Series by Distict

     40


     30


     20


     10


      0


    -10


    -20


    -30


    -40


    -50




                                                              Month and Year



                                                                   83
Figure 10: Final Index and Measurement Error by Month, 1919 to 1929

     200                                                                 15




                                                                         10

     150

                                                                         5




     100                                                                 0




                                                                         -5

      50

                                                                         -10




       0                                                                 -15




                                                        Month and Year




                                                             84
Figure 11: Three Revisions to the Chicago Series

 20

 15

 10

  5

  0

  -5

 -10

 -15

                   Initial Revision
 -20
                   1928 Revision
 -25
                   1929 Revision
 -30

 -35
   Jan-23          Jan-24             Jan-25        Jan-26        Jan-27
                                        Month and Year




                                                             85
Bibliography

Alston, Lee J. "Farm Foreclosures in the United States During the Interwar Period." The Journal
       of Economic History 43, no. 4 (1983): 885-904.

Alston, Lee J., Wayne A. Grove, and David C. Wheelock. "Why Do Banks Fail? Evidence from
       the 1920s." Explorations in Economic History 31 (1994): 409-431.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bullitin, various issues.

        , “Department Store Sales,” Preliminary Reports, 1924-1939.

         , “Description of Federal Reserve Districts,” Annual Report of the Federal Reserve
Board, various issues.
<http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/publications/arfr/page/28663/download/76175/28663_arfr.pdf>

Barsky, Robert B. and Miron, Jeffrey A., “The seasonal cycle and the business cycle.” Journal of
       Political Economy, vol. 97, no. 3 (June, 1989) pp. 503-35.

Beaulieu, J. Joseph, Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason, and Jeffrey A. Miron, “Why Do Countries and
       Industries with Large Seasonal Cycles Also Have Large Business Cycles?” The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 2 (May, 1992), pp. 621-656.

Beaulieu, J. Joseph, and Jeffrey A. Miron, “A Cross Country Comparison of Seasonal Cycles
       and Business Cycles.” The Economic Journal, Vol. 102, No. 413 (Jul., 1992), pp. 772-
       788.

Beaulieu, J. Joseph, and Jeffrey A. Miron, “What Have Macroeconomists Learned about
       Business Cycles from the Study of Seasonal Cycles?” The Review of Economics and
       Statistics
       Vol. 78, No. 1 (Feb., 1996) pp. 54-66.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960,
        Princeton University Press, 1963.

Haines, Michael R. “Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States,
       1790-2000.” Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
       <http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/ICPSR/>.

Johnson, H. Thomas. "Postwar Optimism and the Rural Financial Crisis." Explorations in
      Economic History 11, no. 2 (1973-1974): 173-192.

McMillin, W. Douglas and Randall E. Parker. "An Empirical Analysis of Oil Price Shocks in the
        Interwar Period." Economic Inquiry 32, 486-497, July 1994.
Melvin, Bruce Lee, John Nye Webb, and Carle Clark Zimmerman. Rural Poor in the Great
         Depression; Three Studies. New York: Arno, 1971. Print.

Miron, Jeffrey A., and Christina D. Romer, “A New Monthly Index of Industrial Production,
       1884-1940.” The Journal of Economic History,Vol. 50, No. 2 (Jun., 1990), pp. 321-337.

Orphanides, Athanasios, Richard Porter, David Reifschneider, Robert Tetlow and Frederico
        Finan, "Errors in the Measurement of the Output Gap and the Design of Monetary
        Policy", Journal of Economics and Business, 52(1/2), 117-141, January/April 2000.

Orphanides, Athanasios, "Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data", American
        Economic Review, 91(4), 964-985, September 2001.

Richardson, Gary and William Troost, “Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics during
         the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from a Federal Reserve District
         Border, 1929-1933.” Journal of Political Economy, 2009, vol. 117, issue 6, pages
         1031-1073

Romer, Christina. "World War I and the Postwar Depression: A Reinterpretation Based on
        Alternative Estimates of GNP." Journal of Monetary Economics 22 (1988): 91-115
       ,“The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105
         (August 1990): 597-624.

Temin, Peter. "Lessons for the Present from the Great Depression," American Economic Review,
       May 1976, pp. 40-45.

United States Census Bureau, Population Division. “Historical Annual Time Series of State
       Population Estimates and Demographic Components of Change 1900 to 1990,”
       Population Estimates.
       <http://www.census.gov/popest/archives/1980s/80s_st_totals.html>.

       , “Intercensal Estimates of the Total Resident Population of States Estimates and
       Projections (P25-139)”, Current Population Reports, June 1956.




                                                87
