                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  NEW CELLULAR NETWORKS IN MALAWI:
        CORRELATES OF SERVICE ROLLOUT AND NETWORK PERFORMANCE

                                          Dimitrios Batzilis
                                          Taryn Dinkelman
                                            Emily Oster
                                          Rebecca Thornton
                                            Deric Zanera

                                        Working Paper 16616
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16616


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




Research for this paper was funded by the NBER Africa Project on African Successes. We are grateful
for research assistance from Eirin Forsund, Cecile Gaubert, Soren Larson, Ajay Shenoy and Ryan
Wang. We also acknowledge the technical insight on cellular phone networks provided by Mung
Chiang and Tian Lin in the Electrical Engineering Department at Princeton University. In addition,
we thank the National Statistics Office in Malawi for assistance with data as well as the helpful staff
at Zain and TNM, Malawi. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Dimitrios Batzilis, Taryn Dinkelman, Emily Oster, Rebecca Thornton, and Deric Zanera.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
New cellular networks in Malawi: Correlates of service rollout and network performance
Dimitrios Batzilis, Taryn Dinkelman, Emily Oster, Rebecca Thornton, and Deric Zanera
NBER Working Paper No. 16616
December 2010
JEL No. O20,O25,R39

                                             ABSTRACT

Cellular technologies have become increasingly important in the developing world; infrastructure for
mobile networks has expanded dramatically over the past two decades giving access to remote areas
without previous phone service. Despite this expansion, relatively little is known about the correlates
of the rollout of cellular phone networks or the performance of these networks. Since the rollout of
cellular networks has been largely spearheaded by an active private sector in telecommunications,
how demand-side and cost-side factors affect the timing of rollout and quality of network service is
of particular interest. In this paper we use new data to estimate the correlates of cellular phone access
and network performance across rural areas of Malawi. We compile a dataset which combines administrative
data of the entire cellular network of Malawi with geographic and Census data to describe the rollout
and the performance of the cellular network measured by the dropped call rate. We find that both
demand-side and cost-side factors are important in determining the timing of network access, while
demand-side factors appear most relevant for the dropped call rate, one metric of network quality.


Dimitrios Batzilis                                  Rebecca Thornton
University of Chicago                               University of Michigan
Chicago, IL 60637                                   611 Tappan St.
batzilis@gmail.com                                  Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                                                    rebeccal@umich.edu
Taryn Dinkelman
Princeton University                                Deric Zanera
357 Wallace Hall                                    Malawi National Statistical Office
Prospect Avenue                                     P.O. Box 333
Princeton NJ, 08540                                 Zomba
tdinkelm@princeton.edu                              Malawi
                                                    dzanera@statistics.gov.mw
Emily Oster
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
eoster@uchicago.edu
I. Introduction



Cellular phone technologies have become increasingly important throughout the developing world and in
Africa in particular. Figure 1 shows growth in the population serviced by at least one cellular phone
network in Africa over the last decade. The number of subscribers has more than tripled during this
period and reached as high as 280 million at the end of 2007 (Buys et al., 2009). In contrast, growth in
fixed line infrastructure has been much slower than growth in cellular phone coverage with approximately
90% of all African telephone subscribers consisting of cellular phone users (Paul Budde Communication
Pty Ltd., 2009). There are challenges to the expansion of fixed line infrastructure, including widespread
material theft and the need to cover large, low population areas. As a result, cellular network technology
may be the best way to bring telecommunication services to most of Africa.

Popular media, as well as a growing body of research within economics, suggest that cellular technologies
may be enormously important for improving productive efficiency, for providing a cheap method of
transferring information and money across space and, ultimately, for promoting growth.2 Despite this
potential importance, we know relatively little about how this technology spreads and who receives
access, especially in poor countries with limited infrastructure and limited ability to provide even very
basic public goods. We also know little about how quality of cellular services varies within a country:
while the presence of cell towers is necessary for cellular technology to have an impact on societies,
reliability of these networks is also important. In most developed country settings we would expect that
the timing of access to a new network provided by the private sector would correlate strongly with
demand and cost factors. Further, we would expect network quality to be correlated with these factors,
through network upgrading and strengthening. However, in a developing country setting it seems
possible that other factors, such as political or ethnic influence, or the existence of complementary
infrastructure could also drive placement and affect the quality of the service provided to an area.3 How
and where infrastructure is provided has potential welfare consequences.

In this paper we take a first step towards addressing these issues using data from Malawi. We focus on
estimating the role of demand-side and cost-side factors in driving cell phone access and the performance



2
  See, for example, Aker (2009), Aker and Mbiti (2010), Arnquist (2009), Balakrishnan (2008), Hausman (2010).
Jack and Suri (2009), Jensen (2007), Klonner and Nolen (2008), Krudy (2009), McGreal (2009) and Ngowi (2005)
3
  There is an established literature on the effects of corruption on public good provision and on economic growth
more generally. See, for example, Alesina, Baqir and Easterly (1999), Tanzi and Davoodi (1998), Mauro (1995),
Banerjee, and Somanathan (2007), Besley et al. (2004), Khwaja (2009), Easterly and Levine (1997), and Kimenyi
(2006).

                                                        2
of these networks across rural areas. Understanding the role of these factors can put an upper bound on
the importance of factors like political influence in driving access.

Our analysis takes advantage of new data on cell phone access and performance which we collected in
Malawi. Our first outcome is cell phone network access. There are two cell phone providers in Malawi.
We obtained detailed data from each of the two them on their exact tower locations and date of
construction; our data cover every tower in the country. Using this information, we use geographic
information system (GIS) software to construct coverage maps for the country over time. We focus on
cellular phone access within a relatively small area, called an Enumeration Area (EA) of which there are
about 9,200 in Malawi. Our data allow us, for each EA, to define coverage by year and to determine the
first year in which the area had significant coverage. In addition, for the last two years of our data (in
2008 and 2009) we have some measures of network performance (dropped calls), which allow us to
observe one aspect of the quality of service access provided to an area. In both cases, we link these data
with Malawian Census data from 1998 (demographic proxies for demand) and to information on the
geography of the country (variables which proxy for cost).

The first cellular towers in Malawi were built in the mid-1990s, and coverage was initially focused
around the major cities (i.e., Lilongwe and Blantyre) and other cities covering tourist areas near Lake
Malawi (i.e., Salima and Mangochi). However, increases in coverage were rapid: by 2004, 57% of the
land area of the country had access and this figure increased to 86% by 2008. Conditional on having cell
coverage, network quality varies. At the cell-tower level, the fraction of dropped calls reached up to 30%
in some months of 2008 and 2009, although median monthly dropped call rates are below 3% in most
months.

We perform three analyses to describe the placement and performance of cellular phone infrastructure in
Malawi. In our simplest analysis, we regress network coverage (either a binary measure indicating
whether more than 50% of the area is covered by a cell tower or a continuous measure of coverage) on the
independent variables of interest for three years (2000, 2004 and 2008). This gives us a sense of which
variables are important in determining access and how their importance changes over time. Second, we
generate Kaplan-Meier survival curves and estimate Cox proportional hazard models to describe each
EA’s hazard out of the uncovered state. This allows us to use all of the information on coverage timing
together. Finally, we estimate OLS regressions on the percent of dropped calls for towers covering each
EA for the month of August 2008 to see whether the performance of the network is related to some of the
same demand-side and cost-side variables used in the rollout analysis.




                                                      3
We begin with the role of demand. Our analysis suggests that area-level proxies for demand measured in
1998 are strongly correlated with the timing of access between 2000 and 2008. A number of proxies for
area income (which we do not observe directly in the Census) are correlated with the timing of access.
Areas with higher population density in 1998 receive coverage earlier. Higher levels of employment in
agriculture correlate with delayed access, and higher levels of education in 1998 correlate with earlier
access in the subsequent 10 years. The results are similar if we use a binary variable measuring coverage
or a continuous measure of the number of towers covering these areas. These correlates correspond with
demand-side factors that engineers and other cellular phone industry representatives report as important
for defining cell phone market potential.

Following this, we move to estimate the correlation between cost-side geographic factors and coverage, in
particular the altitude and slope of the location. Both of these variables affect the size of the potential
market served by a particular tower (since line of sight may be more or less obstructed depending on
terrain) and affect the cost of building and maintaining towers. We find some evidence that these factors
matter. Places with higher slope are consistently less likely to have access; results on altitude are more
mixed. Not surprisingly, isolation matters: areas that are far from a road are significantly less likely to get
access to the network throughout the period. This last correlate may also capture aspects of consumer
demand.

We find similar results when we estimate hazard models: areas with higher population density receive
coverage earlier, as do areas with more education and less agriculture. Areas further from roads and in
higher altitude areas have a tendency to get coverage later. The evidence on geographic correlates is
more mixed in the hazard models.

Turning to the results on network quality, we have two related measures of dropped calls for each cellular
network provider in Malawi. Since we only have network traffic data for the later period, we focus on
describing how the performance of each network (measured by percent of dropped calls per month) varies
in the cross-sectional data. Our measure provides one way of measuring network congestion. A priori,
the relationship between market demand and cell network performance could be negative or positive: cell
networks may be more congested in areas with more users per tower (i.e., higher market demand), but
companies may respond to such congestion by differentially strengthening their infrastructure in these
high demand areas.

In Malawi, the latter relationship appears to be the case for both companies. Using the traffic data for
each firm separately, we find demand-side factors but not cost-side factors are important for predicting
the percent of dropped calls. EAs with higher population density and a higher fraction of educated adults

                                                       4
have fewer dropped calls. We also find that areas with more extensive prior network coverage have a
much lower percent of dropped calls in the month. Not surprisingly, the density of the network matters
for network performance in Malawi.


Taking the two analyses together, we find that within a Traditional Authority (TA), a larger unit of which
there are about 300 in the country, demand and cost factors can explain between 40% and 60% of the
cross-EA variation in cell tower coverage. For the measures of congestion that we use, our control
variables account for 85% of the variation in dropped call rates across EAs within the same Traditional
Authority. Although this obviously does not rule out roles for other factors like political influence or
complementary infrastructure in determining access to this particular service, it does suggest that these
other factors do not play a predominant role in allocation in Malawi.



II. Background



IIA. Country Background

Malawi is a small, landlocked country in Southern Africa. It is extremely poor, with a median daily wage
for a casual worker of around US$0.40, and GDP per capita (PPP adjusted) of around US$800 in 2008
(CIA, 2009). In 1998, almost two-thirds of the population lived below the national poverty line and one-
third of the population lived on less than US$0.25 per day (Benson et al., 2002). The large majority of
Malawians work in agriculture (82% in 1998) and the country has a high population density and a
youthful population (Benson et al., 2002). Education levels are low, as are school enrollment rates
(although these have been rising in recent years); and the infant mortality rate is 83 per 1,000 (CIA,
2009).

Most types of public goods, infrastructure, and service provision are lacking in most areas. Roads are in
poor condition: only 45% of national roads are paved. Although Malawi has an 800 km railway line, this
line does not connect with lines in neighboring Zambia or Tanzania (as the line gauge differs). The only
connection the country has to a port is through Mozambique’s railroad, part of which has been closed
since 1983 due to the civil war in that country.4 Less than 60% of the population obtains water from a
protected source while only 4.5% of households use electricity for lighting.




4
    CIA World Factbook (2009), Railways Africa: http://www.railwaysafrica.com/category/africa-update/sadc/malawi.

                                                         5
Despite high poverty rates and limited infrastructure, Malawi compares favorably with many other
African countries. In the mid-1990s, the country transitioned from a dictatorship to a multiparty
democracy, which has survived since then. Malawi has experienced no major civil conflict over this
period, and elections have been held on schedule with only limited accusations of irregularities. Relative
to other areas in Africa, tribal tensions have been limited, although post-democracy tensions have been
growing.5




IIB. Cellular Telephones in Malawi

Overview of Providers The first cellular operator, TNM (Telekom Networks Malawi Limited), was
initially majority-owned by the government of Malawi. This operator was licensed by the government
agency MACRA (Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority) a government-appointed regulatory
board, in 1995.6 In the early years, growth in the network was concentrated in the four main urban areas
and in tourist destinations; network coverage in rural areas was slow and coverage rates were low. The
histogram in Figure 2 illustrates some of this rollout as it occurred in rural parts of the country. It shows
the fraction of Census Enumeration Areas (EAs) that gain new access to a cellular network in each year
from 1995 to 2009 (we define “access” in more detail below). The figure clearly shows the initial slow
coverage of EAs in early years; many more rural EAs are covered by a cellular network from 2003
onwards.

The slow growth and poor coverage prompted reform of this sector in 1998, at which point a second
private operator, Celtel, was awarded a government license. Celtel was purchased in 2008 by Zain, which
is headquartered in Kuwait and has a strong regional presence in over 20 other African and Middle
Eastern countries. By late 1999 both operators were active in establishing their networks across the
country, and by 2007, the number of cellular phone subscribers (pre-paid and post-paid) had risen to over
1 million people, or 25% of the population (ITU, 2008). Many more than these subscribers have access to
this telecommunications service, as most consumers use a cell phone on a pre-paid basis. Currently, over
70% of the country has access to the cellular phone network and Zain claims to serve 70% of the current
Malawian market.




5
 For a detailed analysis and history of tribalism and ethnicity in Malawi see Vail (1989).
6
 The Communications Sector Policy Statement establishes MACRA, the Malawi Communications Regulatory
Authority, as the body responsible for regulating telecommunications, posts, broadcasting and the radio frequency
spectrum.

                                                         6
Licensing Process As in other countries, companies must have a license to operate a cellular network in
Malawi and these licenses are typically awarded after a tendering process. TNM and Zain were both
granted licenses to provide cellular services by MACRA. License fees are required for participation in
this market, both at the initiation of the license agreement and on an annual basis after that (annual fees
vary between 5% and 7% of company revenue). Additional fees apply for new services (e.g., internet
service) that each company chooses to provide. Since 1998, there have been two subsequent tenders
announced for the awarding of a third license; however, no third operator has entered the market yet and
so we confine our discussion to the combined activities of TNM and Zain in the rest of this paper.7

One important aspect of the license agreements is that each company was required to build cellular phone
towers in certain target areas before specific deadlines. Malawi’s 1998 Communications Sector Policy
Statement commits MACRA to “ensure extension of modern telecommunication services to rural areas”
and do this “according to a defined program covering rural areas” . In discussions with engineers and
managers of both companies in Malawi, many of the target areas in rural parts of the country would not
have been viewed as commercially viable sites, at least initially. During the period in which we analyze
the rollout, these two companies were therefore expanding the network partly into areas that appeared
profitable and partly into areas which were important to connect to meet license obligations. We observe
both types of areas in our sample.

Cellular Phone Costs and Access Although cellular phone infrastructure has expanded rapidly to cover
almost the entire country, ability to access the network in Malawi is still somewhat limited to wealthier
individuals. Malawi’s Integrated Household Survey of 2004 indicates that 17% of urban households and
only 1% of rural households owned a cellular phone (although the rates of access to a cell phone are
likely to have increased substantially since then).8 The initial cost of buying a handset still represents an
important barrier to using the network: in 2009, the cost of the cheapest handset offered by Zain was MK
2,500 = US$18, or about 50 days of day-laborer work.

In addition to the cost of a handset, tariffs are high relative to other developing countries, although there is
some indication that they have fallen over time. Service prices for the two providers are a difficult to
keep track of and standardize over time, because price setting responsibility is opaque, tariff changes
sometimes occur through temporary promotions and changes are not required to be reported to MACRA
(the regulatory authority has no power to set prices). At various points during the period we study, there

7
  How and to whom licenses are awarded may in itself be of interest related to public good and infrastructure
provision in Africa. We do not address this specifically in this paper.
8
  In other surveys that have recently been conducted in Malawi in subsequent years, 72.5% of urban men had their
own cell phone with 75.5% of those without a cell phone having access to one; 23.2% of rural men had their own
cell phone (Godlonton and Thornton, 2010).

                                                        7
have been changes in both pre- and post-paid rates, as well as changes in how calls are billed (per minute
versus per second) and changes in prices for within and outside network calling. Given this difficulty in
standardizing the appropriate “unit of telecommunications” to use to compare prices over time (a
difficulty present in all research related to cell phone services, not just in the context of Malawi), no
single statistic will capture the true cost of using the cellular phone network.

However, to get an overview of how prices have changed on each network over time, we created an
average consumption basket (making assumptions about average call durations, call destinations (in or out
of network) and average call timing (peak/off-peak) using information from cellular phone traffic data
from the later 2008-2010 period) and calculated the price per second of this basket at the relevant tariffs
between 1999 and 2010. On average, the price per second of talk time across both companies was about
1.2 US cents in the late 1990s; by 2009, this average price had fallen by 50%, to 0.6 US cents per second.
Despite this substantial reduction in the price of airtime, cell phone rates in Malawi are still about 5 times
higher than the per-second cost of using a cellular phone in the US (OECD, 2009). As a result of these
generally high tariffs in Malawi, individuals often communicate using cheaper options such as text
messaging (10 US cents per message), or “flashing”/”pinging” (ringing and hanging up to signal a
wealthier party to call back and pay for the call). It is also worthwhile to note that while it costs money to
place a call or to send a text message, receiving a call or a text message is free. Thus, even though prices
may be high enough to prohibitive many people from initiating communication, having access to network
coverage may be beneficial, if only to receive calls.

Access to a cell tower is clearly necessary to use the new technology, but the network also needs to
provide a reliable service in order to be useful for individuals. We know remarkably little about how well
cell networks function in Africa. Given the dismal quality of many other types of infrastructure across the
continent (roads and railways in particular), it is important to know whether cell infrastructure performs
any better and to understand more about the correlates of better performance. In Malawi, network
performance varies substantially across the country. Using the monthly data we have access to, we find
individual towers report a dropped call rate of up to 30% in some months. Undoubtedly, poor network
performance based on this particular measure limits some of the potential effects of cell phones on society
and the economy.9

Lastly, individuals must have access to some means of charging their cellular phone handset. Given the
low prevalence of electricity in Malawian homes (according to the NSO (2004), only 6% of households

9
 It is difficult to find accurate statistics on dropped call rates in the US for comparison. A recent article in the
popular press (Manjoo, 2010) reports statistics collected directly from several cell providers that indicate monthly
call drop rates of below 2%.

                                                          8
(32% urban and 2% rural) had access to electricity), individuals in more remote areas must resort to
charging cellular phones using car batteries, or must pay for additional charging services in order to use
their phones.

Our analysis in this paper primarily focuses on the availability of the cellular phone network from cellular
towers, rather than use. For the analysis, we assume that an area has coverage if it is reached by cellular
phone towers, ignoring the fact that some people may have differing ability to take advantage of the
network. We augment the coverage analysis with an examination of how well each company provides a
reliable service to an area, where we define one particular measure of service reliability below.



III. Data


This paper uses a number of new datasets, which we discuss in turn below. We have collated four types
of data for the description of infrastructure rollout and network performance: (i) administrative data on
the placement and timing of new cellular phone towers from both companies, (ii) engineering data on cell
phone traffic at the tower level for several months in 2008 and 2009; (iii) geographic data describing
Malawi’s physical terrain and (iv) demographic data from the Census. We link these datasets at the
Enumeration Area (EA) level and at times will also refer to the larger Traditional Authority (TA) in
which EAs are nested.

IIIA. Data on Cellular Phone Network Coverage

We begin with our data on cellular phone network coverage. As mentioned above, there are currently two
cellular networks in Malawi: TNM and Zain. To generate information on overall coverage over time, we
collected data from both providers. These data include the precise GIS location and construction date for
each cellular tower for the period from 1995 to 2009.

Using these data on latitude and longitude of the cellular towers, as well as data on elevation, we
determined what areas of the country became part of the cellular phone network and when. We used the
Viewshed tool of the ArcGIS software, which identifies the points in a map that can be seen from a set of
observation points. For a full description of the tool, the reader can consult the help website of ESRI.10

With the Viewshed analysis, we assigned to each point in the map a value that is equal to the number of
cellular phone towers (of either network) that are (a) visible from that location and (b) within a distance of


10
     http://webhelp.esri.com/arcgisdesktop/9.2/index.cfm?TopicName=How%20Viewshed%20works

                                                      9
30 km of the tower. The idea is straightforward: there can be no coverage if the tower signal is blocked
by physical obstructions, and hence the tower is not “visible”, or if the source of the signal is too far
away. Discussions with engineers in Malawi suggested that 30km is an appropriate range for the towers,
although this distance may not be exact in all cases.

Each EA consists of many points on the map of Malawi. The cellular coverage value assigned to an EA
is the expected (average) number of towers that cover a randomly chosen point that lies within the area of
the EA. In mathematical terms, if x and y are respectively the longitude and latitude of a point in the

map, f j (x, y) equals the number of cellular sites that cover the point (x,y) in year j, and A i is the area of

the EA, then the coverage value for the EA can be expressed as:


                                   Coverage i, j           f j (x, y)dxdy
                                                         Ai


It is important to note that having a coverage value of, for example, 0.50 does not necessarily imply that
50% of the area is covered. For example, if 25% of an EA’s area is covered by two towers
simultaneously, then the value of the coverage variable is 0.5 as well. In 2008, the average coverage
measure ranges from 0 to 47. Perhaps the best way to think of this measure is as an indicator of cellular
network intensity in the EA, where EAs with the highest coverage value of 47 have access to the densest
network.

We use this coverage measure in several ways. First, we run OLS regressions on a binary indicator of
coverage in early (2000), middle (2004) and late (2008) periods of our data. For these regressions, we
define an entire EA as “covered” in the years when the above coverage value was larger than 0.5.
Second, we run OLS regressions on the continuous coverage variable in each period. Finally, when we
analyze hazard models, we experiment with various definitions of “covered”: whether the area is covered
at all (coverage>0), whether the coverage is over 0.5 and whether the coverage is over 1.0.

Panel A of Table 1 provides basic information about the fraction of all, urban and rural, EAs that are
covered by at least one network in each year, using the binary definition of covered as coverage greater
than 0.5.11 As early as 1999, most of the urban EAs were covered by the networks, but only 20% of rural
areas had access. Coverage in rural areas started to ramp up from 2003 onwards. Because of this quick
initial saturation of network coverage in the main urban areas and the greater variation in coverage in
rural areas, the analysis in this paper excludes the urban areas and focuses on rural Malawi, where the

11
  Although there are about 9,200 EAs in all of Malawi, we have data for only 8,924 so our analysis focuses on those
areas.

                                                        10
majority of the population resides. In Figure 2, as described above, we show the fraction of rural EAs
with new cellular network coverage for each year. Maps in Figures 3 to 5 provide a visual representation
of the cellular coverage data by year in 1997 (when only TNM was active), 2004 and 2008.

IIIB. Cell phone traffic data and network performance measures

We collected traffic data from each cell company for several months in 2008 and 2009. We limit our
analysis here to the month of August 2008, taking this as a representative month during the period. For
each cell tower, we calculate a measure of average percent of calls dropped during the month. The
measures differ slightly across the two network providers since the level of aggregation differs. One
provider’s data was available at the daily level, while the other’s was available at the monthly level.
Because of this difference, we do not aggregate the data across providers, and rather present statistics
separately; because of the potential sensitivity of this information, we anonymize each provider. In this
case, Company 1’s drop call rate is computed using monthly data on the number of dropped calls and the
number of total attempted calls, while for Company 2, we use the reported fraction of dropped calls by
day and average these up to the monthly level.

Each tower t is placed in a unique EA. However, because there is a 30 km radius around each cell tower
that receives signal from this tower, a typical tower will provide service to more than one EA. We
address this by assigning the dropped call information from tower t to each EA which falls in its radius.
For EAs that are covered by multiple towers, we take the average of the dropped call rate across all
towers from which it receives coverage. EAs that do not receive any network coverage from one or the
other company do not have any traffic data assigned to them. In Table 1, Panel B, we see the mean
dropped call rate (fraction) for each cell company for the set of rural EAs with cell coverage. Company
1’s dropped call rate is higher at 2.0% per month, with Company 2 being 0.9% per month in August 2008.

Note that the fraction of dropped calls is not a perfect measure of network congestion. Dropped calls may
occur for reasons unrelated to the quality of the network infrastructure or excess demand for services on
the existing network. For example, weather and geographic conditions can also affect the fraction of calls
dropped. We use the dropped call rate as one indicator of network performance although we recognize
that other factors can also contribute to variation in this outcome.

IIIC. Geographic Data

Since profit maximizing cell phone providers take the cost of building and maintaining cell towers into
account when deciding how to optimally expand the cellular network, we collated important geographic
data to be used in our rollout analysis. The source of the elevation data we use is the national map

                                                      11
seamless server that contains high-analysis international geographic data.12 As mentioned in section IIIA,
the elevation data were used in the Viewshed analysis, in order to determine which EAs were covered by
towers. Moreover, altitude data were used to calculate the slope of each point in the map. This was done
using the slope calculating tool in ArcGIS.13 The average altitude (measured in meters at the EA level)
and slope (measured in degrees at the EA level) are used as controls in our regression analysis. The slope
is essentially a measurement of the steepness of the terrain. EAs with precipitous cliffs or mountains have
steeper slope than EAs that are located in plains or plateaus.

We created a measure of distance to the nearest road for each EA (using the centroid of the EA as the
starting point) where the national roads data from 1998 was provided from the National Statistics Office.

Panel C of Table 1 shows some simple summary statistics on geographic data at the EA level – the
average altitude and slope observed in the data.. The average height of an EA is almost one kilometer
above sea level although there is a great deal of variation across the country. Malawi’s terrain varies from
the high plateaus in the northern and central parts of the country (west of Lake Malawi) to the relatively
flatter area around the Shire River in the south. We also see in Table 1 that rural areas range from being
immediately next to a road to more than 50 km distant.

IIID. Demographic Data at Baseline

Baseline demographic data comes from the 1998 National Census, provided by the National Statistics
Office in Malawi. We obtained a 100% sample containing detailed information on each household’s
membership, levels of education of adults, occupation, religion and other variables. One important aspect
of the data which is worth mentioning is the limited information on income and labor force participation.
These questions were not asked in 1998, possibly due to the fact that the majority of Malawians are
subsistence agricultural workers and collecting accurate income and labor data would lengthen the
questionnaire. To link the National Census to the geographic data, we use spatial files also from the
National Statistics Office which were collected in 1998 during the Census. These files contain
geographic information on the boundaries of the administrative divisions and the Census enumeration
areas.

The Census data follow the administrative structure of the country – Regions, Districts, and either
Traditional Authorities (TAs) or administrative wards. Malawi consists of three regions – Northern,
Central and Southern. Each region is divided into Districts, with a total of 27 in the country. Districts

12
  http://seamless.usgs.gov/index.php
13
  Following the process described at
http://webhelp.esri.com/arcgisdesktop/9.2/index.cfm?TopicName=Calculating_slope

                                                     12
usually contain at least one larger peri-urban center with a district hospital, police unit and
commissioner’s office. Each District contains a number of Traditional Authorities in the rural areas; in
1998 there were a total of 250 Traditional Authorities. Traditional Authorities are governed by a
“Traditional Authority”, which is a non-elected office and determined by the tribal politics of the area.
The four urban centers of Malawi consist of Blantyre, Lilongwe, Mzuzu, and Zomba; we exclude these
urban areas from our empirical analyses.

Enumeration areas (EA) are defined by the National Statistics Office mainly for data collection, while
Districts, Traditional Authorities, and administrative wards are common political divisions used by the
government and other institutions. There are approximately 9,200 EAs across the country, and we
observe a total of 8,924 of them. We restrict to the 8,118 rural EAs for the analysis. The lowest level of
disaggregation consists of villages, governed by a village chief. EAs do not uniquely contain villages.

Panel D of Table 1 shows summary statistics for the Census demographic measures at the EA level. As
noted above, Malawi has a relatively youthful population with an average age of 22 in rural areas.
Education levels are low with an average of under 3 years of completed schooling for females (males)
ages 15 to 49 (54). Almost 90% of adults in rural areas work in agriculture, and the average population
density is high, at 314 persons per square kilometer, although this average masks considerable spatial
variation in density.

An important aspect of the 100% Census data is that they provide the most complete, albeit crude, set of
proxies for market demand that cellular phone network engineers would have had available to them at the
beginning of the period. The data also represent the most complete picture of population density and
socioeconomic characteristics for most years between 1998 and 2010. A more recent Census was
conducted in 2008, but the data are still unavailable to the public. As a result, apart from smaller surveys
(an income and expenditure survey from 2004 and Demographic Health Surveys) , companies would have
had to collect their own market-level data to supplement the national coverage of the 1998 Census or use
published population projections in order to construct up-to-date measures of potential market demand.
What we will see is that the 1998 Census data variables are strong predictors of cell coverage expansion,
particularly in the earlier and middle periods of this expansion; and that these demographic variables from
1998 are also important predictors of network congestion ten years later.



IV. Results: Patterns of Rollout and Correlates of Coverage




                                                      13
Graphical Evidence We begin by illustrating our basic results in graphical form, using maps and
estimating survival functions.

The maps in Figures 3, 4 and 5 show our basic descriptive evidence on rollout of cellular phone coverage
over time. Figure 3 illustrates the areas that had cellular coverage in 1997, when only TNM was active.
Coverage is concentrated around the large cities (Lilongwe the capital, and Blantyre the industrial and
market center), and a several of the main tourist destinations around Lake Malawi (i.e., Salima and
Mangochi). By 2004 (Figure 4) coverage has expanded significantly, moving further out from the cities
and specifically, along the main road network. Figure 5 shows coverage in 2008. At this point, coverage
has expanded significantly beyond the main road network and the majority of the country has some
cellular phone access. We should note that, even in this later period when coverage extends more widely,
it still appears to be concentrated around major population centers and tourist centers.

In Figures 6.1 to 6.3, we present estimated Kaplan-Meier survival functions for the time to first cellular
coverage within our sample of EAs. These graphs serve as the first illustration of our evidence on
correlates of rollout. In these figures, “time of coverage” (on the x-axis) denotes when an EA first
received cellular network coverage and ranges from 1995 (year 1) to 2009 (year 15). Each line shows the
fraction of EAs that have not yet received cellular phone coverage; as coverage spreads across the
country, these “uncovered” lines step downwards. We plot survival functions separated by one measure
of demand and two measures of cost.

We treat population density (measured in 1998) as a proxy for potential market demand, while slope and
altitude within the EA affect the cost and feasibility of building cellular towers. Although the three
factors are clearly related (e.g., population density is higher in flatter EAs), we examine the relationship
between each one individually and the time to first coverage for each EA. We show survivor functions
for each of the groups ordered from low to high values of slope, altitude or population density as well as
the 95% confidence intervals for each group.

Population density is clearly correlated with time-to-coverage, as Figure 6.1 shows. Places with the
lowest population density get coverage much later in the period while about 25% of EAs in the two
highest density groups get coverage by 1999. Although all density groups see more EAs getting coverage
after 2003 (year 9), the gap between the survivor functions increases after 2004. This suggests that
market demand factors are still important in prioritizing network expansion, even after the backbone
structure of this network is in place.




                                                      14
Figure 6.2 provides evidence that in the early part of the period (1995 to 2003), areas of different slope
appeared equally likely to make the transition from no coverage to coverage (the lines and confidence
intervals of the survivor functions overlap). After 2003 (year 9), areas with lower values of the slope
variable (i.e., flatter areas) are significantly more likely to make this transition, compared to places in the
steepest gradient group. Combining this with the prior graph that indicates the important role for
population density in early years, the figures suggest that cost considerations appear more important in
discriminating among areas in the second half of the period, once the basic network structure was already
established.

The message from the survival functions for EAs of different altitude in Figure 6.3 is more mixed: in
some periods, EAs in different altitude groups have very similar chances of receiving cellular coverage by
a certain year. For many of the later years, places with lower altitudes actually have a higher likelihood
of transitioning to a covered state. While we might think that locations with the highest altitude would be
those places most likely to receive network towers since they offer uninterrupted line of sight, these
locations may not be the lowest cost options (e.g., maintenance costs may rise as towers are built on taller
and taller mountains) nor are they likely to represent areas with large market potential (EAs at lower
altitudes have higher population density). Hence, the advantage of building towers in lower altitude EAs
seems to emerge only later on in the sample period.

Demographic Correlates While the figures discussed above are illustrative of some of the important
factors related to increased network access, many of these factors are correlated (i.e., altitude and
population density).14 We next turn to examining the determinants of access in a multivariate regression
framework. We begin by using an OLS framework to estimate the correlates of cell phone access in three
different years (2000, 2004 and 2008). We estimate a regression of the following form:

                                                                                                           (1)

In this regression, Phonekc is an indicator for phone coverage (binary or continuous) or for quality of
network (dropped calls) in TA k and EA c. The regressions are estimated at the EA level (denoted by c)
with a full set of TA fixed effects (γk). This means that we identify off of the EA-level variation.
Demographic variables (population density, percent of workforce in agriculture, average education and
average age) are computed by aggregating 1998 Census data to the EA-level. These variables are proxies
for potential market demand in two ways. First, they represent the potential customer base for originating
calls, especially in areas with more educated adults earning higher incomes. Second, they capture

14
  In our sample of rural EAs, the correlation between population density and altitude is -0.10, the correlation
between density and slope is -0.17 and the correlation between population density and distance to a road is -0.30.

                                                         15
potential customer base for receiving calls from other parts of the country – therefore, even poor areas
with high population density could be more attractive markets than areas with lower population densities.

Table 2 turns to estimating our first correlates of coverage: demographic variables that proxy for potential
market size. Panel A estimates the impact of these demographic variables on a binary for coverage in
2000, 2004 and 2008. Panel B estimates similar regressions using the continuous measure of coverage.

We find that most of the demographic variables seem to be important in driving coverage timing. Areas
with higher education levels and a lower share of individuals working in agriculture, both typically
correlated with higher income, tend to get coverage earlier and are still more likely to have coverage in
2008. The relationship between education and cellular network expansion seems to grow stronger over
time. Note that our estimation sample excludes the four main urban areas: so even outside of urban areas,
it is the relatively richer rural areas that are more likely to receive early and any cellular network
coverage. Higher population density is also associated with greater coverage, and this remains true even
through 2008.15

Adding Geographic Factors In Table 3 we explore the effect of geographic factors on coverage,
controlling for demographics, again at the EA level. The structure of Table 3 mimics Table 2: in Panel A
the dependent variable is a binary for coverage, in Panel B it is the continuous coverage measure. We are
interested in the coefficients on these cost-side variables as well as how the coefficients for the demand-
side variables change between Tables 2 and 3.

A number of interesting points emerge from this table. First, even when controlling for demographic
variables, EAs with smaller values of slope (that is to say, areas with flatter terrain) have a significantly
higher probability of receiving cellular coverage in early years while areas of higher altitude are
significantly less likely to receive cellular coverage in the later years. Looking at the interaction term,
EAs with steeper slope and at higher altitudes also have a higher probability of getting coverage in the
early years. This result has a fairly natural interpretation that it may only make sense to locate cellular
towers in EAs with steep slopes when there is a high point to locate the tower. If population density is
very low in areas with high values of slope, then having a tower at a higher point with completely
uninterrupted line of sight may be required to reach more individuals, conditional on this low density.

Second, conditional on geographic factors, the relationship between most of the demographic factors
(percent of the workforce in agriculture, average education and average age) and cellular coverage


15
  When we estimate these regressions including total population as well as population density, the coefficient on log
population density does not move much at all; the coefficient on total population is negative and significant.

                                                         16
remains about the same, or becomes even stronger in the early and middle periods. However, once we
control for slope, altitude, the interaction of the two and mean distance to the nearest road, the
relationship between population density and cellular coverage is weakened and in the last year, with the
binary measure of coverage, is no longer statistically different from zero. This possibly reflects the fact
that a large part of the relationship between geographic factors and cellular coverage indirectly captures
the relationship between population density and cellular coverage.

We noted at the start of the paper that one of the motivations for estimating the relationship between
demand and cost side factors and cell network expansion was to see how large a role these factors play in
accounting for the pattern of expansion. Our regressions suggest that, with an EA, these demand and cost
factors account for about 50% of the variation in coverage. This suggests that although there is some
possible role for other variables (e.g., political factors or the availability or lack of complementary
infrastructure), likely they do not account for the majority of the variation.

Hazard Models In Table 4 we move to estimating Cox proportional hazard models where the outcome is
coverage. The model we estimate is:

                                    |   ,           exp                

where, c(t|Gc,) is the EA specific hazard rate, 0(t) is the baseline hazard rate, t is the year in which the
EA obtains cellular coverage and Gc is the set of EA-specific demographic and geographic variables. The
Cox proportional hazards model allows us to estimate the relationships between geographic and
demographic variables semi-parametrically. This model does not make assumptions about the form of
0(t) (which is unidentified here) but does assume that time-invariant repressors Gc shift the hazard rate
around multiplicatively (Cameron and Trivedi, 2005). The advantage of these models over the OLS
models is they provide a more complete picture of which areas get coverage faster, without relying on
inference from multiple regressions as in Tables 2 and 3. The hazard models use all of the time variation
in rollout between 1998 and 2008, not just the three years which we analyze in the OLS analysis.

The evidence in Table 4 largely echoes what we have found already. In this case, the three columns
represent three different cutoff values for coverage. In Column 1, the area is defined as covered in the
first year of any cell phone coverage. In Column 2, it is defined as covered in the first year that our
coverage measure exceeds 0.5 (recall this does not necessarily mean that 50% of the area is covered; it
could be that 25% of the area is covered by 2 towers. In Column 3, it is defined as covered in the first
year our coverage measure exceeds 1.0.



                                                      17
Regardless of which coverage definition we use, we find that the demand-side factors matter as expected
(Panel A). More dense areas have faster coverage, as do areas with a higher fraction of educated people;
more agricultural areas have slower coverage. When we add in geographic factors (Panel B), we find
some evidence they matter, but it is fairly weak. Higher altitude areas seem to have slower coverage, and
the interaction between altitude and slope matters in some specifications. Distance to a road is more
consistently important. In these models, the demographic factors continue to be strongly influential even
when we include geographic variables.

Together, the demographic and geographic results suggest that both demand-side and cost-side factors
drive cellular phone coverage. Even though Malawi is one of the poorest countries in the world, we see
coverage expanding into areas where it seems likely there is higher potential market demand – i.e., those
areas with more income and more potential users. This is in line with what each company’s marketing
unit highlighted as one of the key factors guiding rollout: market potential. In addition, controlling for
these demand-side factors we see evidence of more coverage in areas that appear to be easier to reach and
build on – i.e., those with a less severe slope and areas that are less remote. We see similar patterns in
rollout of other types of infrastructure (for example, television and electricity) in both the developing and
developed world (Dinkelman, 2010; Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2008; Jensen and Oster, 2009).



V. Results: Correlates of Network Performance: Dropped Call Rates



In our final piece of analysis, we describe variation in traffic congestion rates across EAs, within a TA,
for each of the two network providers. Table 5 presents estimates from OLS regressions of the form in
equation (1) above where the outcome variable is the percent of dropped calls for each company (defined
above) in the month of August 2008. In addition to the prior set of controls, we also control cell phone
network coverage within the EA in 2007. For the samples of interest, mean network coverage for
Company 1 in 2007 is 0.72 while mean network coverage for Company 2 in 2007 is 0.70.

From this analysis, we learn that population density in 1998 is an important predictor of the percent
dropped calls for both companies, and these relationships are of about the same magnitude. This negative
relationship is not obvious a priori: with more people using a given network, higher demand pressure
could result in a higher dropped call rate. What we are seeing in Malawi appears to be the reverse: that in
places with higher actual demand (as proxied by higher population density in 1998), the performance of
the network is better. This suggests that the cell phone providers are responding to high demand areas by
increasing their coverage quality. In fact, they are more than responding to the increased demand such

                                                     18
that coverage is actually better, not just the same, in high demand areas. This is similar to what we see in
the developed world: cell phone coverage is typically at its best in large urban areas, and worse in more
isolated rural areas, despite the lower demands on the network.

It is interesting to note that, in contrast to the analysis of rollout, network congestion as measured by the
dropped call rate is not sensitive to most of the geographic variables that we use to proxy for cost of
actually building the network.

Finally, prior network coverage in 2007 in the EA is also a strong predictor of the dropped call rate.
Better, more dense coverage by Company 1’s network reduces the dropped call rate for Company 1 users,
and more dense coverage by Company 2’s network reduces the dropped call rate for Company 2 users.

VI. Conclusion

This paper makes use of new, very detailed, data on the history and location of each cellular phone tower
constructed in Malawi matched with Census data, geographic data and information on network traffic.
The goals of this paper are two-fold. First, we provide detailed evidence on cellular phone rollout in a
very low-income context. We show that despite the fact that Malawi is extremely poor, cellular rollout
occurs rapidly and within 10 years, over half of the country has access to at least one network. This
stands in stark contrast to the backlog in access to roads and electricity in this largely rural country. Part
of the success of the cell phone rollout may be due to licensing requirement that cell companies provide
access to specific areas by predetermined target dates. However, our evidence shows that both cost-side
factors and demand-side market potential variables are important for the timing of initial coverage; cell
companies are not simply providing coverage in response to MACRA-mandated target areas. This
suggests that even in a setting in which the government may struggle to fairly provide public goods, the
timing of infrastructure provision and the quality of the services provided for cell phone networks seem to
be driven by market-oriented factors.




                                                      19
References

Aker, Jenny C. 2009. “Does Digital Divide or Provide? The Impact of Cell Phones on Grain Markets in
Niger.” BREAD Working Paper.

Aker, Jenny C. and Isaac M. Mbiti. 2010. “Africa calling: Can mobiles make a miracle?” Boston
Review, March/April.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly. 1999. “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 1243-1284.

Arnquist, Sarah. 2009. “In rural Africa, a fertile market for cellphones”, The New York Times, October 5
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/06/science/06uganda.html

Balakrishnan, Angela. 2008. “Mobile phone technology vital to growth in the developing world.” The
Guardian (London), February 7, No. 32.

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Rohini Somanathan. 2007. “The Political Economy of Public Goods: Some
Evidence from India.” Journal of Development Economics, 82(2), 287-314.

Benson, T., J. Kaphuka, S. Kayanda and R. Chinula. 2002. Malawi: An atlas of social statistics.
National Statistics Office Malawi.

Besley, Timothy, Rohini Pande, Lupin Rahman, and Vijayendra Rao. 2004. “The Politics of Public
Good Provision: Evidence from Indian Local Governments.” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 2, 416-426.

Buys, Piet, Susmita Dasgupta, Timothy S. Thomas, and David Wheeler. 2009. “Determinants of a
Digital Divide in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Spatial Econometric Analysis of Cellular Phone Coverage.”
World Development, 37(9), 1494-1505.

Cameron, A. Colin, and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2005. Microeconometrics: Methods and applications,
Cambridge University Press.

CIA, 2009. The World Factbook. CIA Publication. Accessed at:
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html.

Dinkelman, Taryn. 2010. “The effects of rural electrification on employment: New evidence from South
Africa.” RPDS Working Paper.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1203-1250.

Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse Shapiro. 2008. “Preschool Television Viewing and Adolescent Test
Scores: Historical Evidence from the Coleman Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 123(1), 279-
323.

Godlonton, Susan and Rebecca Thornton. 2010. “Peer Effects in Learning HIV Results.” Working Paper,
University of Michigan


                                                   20
Hausman, Jerry. 2010. “Mobile phones in developing countries.” Department of Economics, MIT,
Mimeo.

International Telecommunications Union. 2009. “World Telecommunications Indicators/ICT database”
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/publications/world/world.html

Jack, William, and Tavneet Suri. 2009. “Mobile money: The economics of M-Pesa.” MIT Sloan,
Mimeo.

Jensen, Robert. 2007. “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance and
Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 879-924.

Jensen, Robert, and Emily Oster. 2009. “The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women's Status in
India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124(3), 1057-1094.

Khwaja, Asim Ijaz. 2009. “Can Good Projects Succeed in Bad Communities?” Journal of Public
Economics 93.7-8 (August): 899-916.

Kimenyi, Mwangi S. 2006. “Ethnicity, Governance and the Provision of Public Goods.” Journal of
African Economies, 15, 62-99.

Klonner, Stefan, and Patrick Nolen. 2008. “Does ICT benefit the poor? Evidence from South Africa.”
Department of Essex, UK, Working Paper.

Krudy, John P. 2009. “Africa Rings Up Trade Benefits.” The Washington Times, June 22, B5.

Manjoo, Farhad. 2010. “How often does your phone drop calls?” Slate, July 22.

Mauro, Paolo. 1995. “Corruption and Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3), 681-712.

McGreal, Chris. 2009. “Front: From Congo to Kathmandu, how mobiles have transformed the world.”
The Guardian (London), March 3.

National Statistics Office. 2004. “Malawi Integrated Household Survey 2004”

Ngowi, Rodrique. 2005. “Africa’s cellphone explosion changes economics, society.” USA Today,
October 16.

OECD. 2009. “OECD Communications Outlook 2009.” OECD Publication, August 11.

Paul Budde Communication Pty Ltd. 2009. “Global Mobile Communications - Statistics, Trends &
Forecasts”, http://www.budde.com.au/Research/2009-Global-Mobile-Communications-Statistics-Trends-
Forecasts.html

Tanzi, Vito, and Hamid Davoodi. 1998. “Roads to Nowhere: How Corruption in Public Investment Hurts
Growth.”Economic Issues 12. International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

Vail, Leroy, editor. 1989. The Creation of Tribalism in Southern Africa. London Berkeley: Currey
University of California Press. http://ark.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/ft158004rs.



                                                  21
                                            Figure 1: Cellular Phone Coverage in Africa

            100.00%
                                                                         Malawi: 93.10%
             90.00%

             80.00%

% pop.       70.00%
with         60.00%
access
             50.00%
to a
             40.00%
network
             30.00%                                                                             1999
                                                                                                2006
             20.00%

             10.00%

              0.00%
                                          Ghana




                                        Rwanda
                                        Burundi




                                         Eritrea
                                           DRC




                                         Nigeria
                                           Chad




                                         Liberia
                                         Malawi




                                   South Africa
                                         Angola

                                      Botswana




                                       Ethiopia




                                            Mali




                                         Zambia
                                           Benin

                                  Burkina Faso




                                      Swaziland
                                          Kenya




                                  Mozambique




                                       Tanzania
                                         Gabon

                                         Guinea
                                 Guinea-Bissau




                                       Namibia




                                        Uganda
                                       Djibouti
                                          Congo




                                        Lesotho
                            Equatorial Guinea




                                   Sierra Leone




                                   The Gambia
                                        Somalia

                                          Sudan
                                  Cote d'Ivoire




                                     Zimbabwe
                                     Cameroon




                                           Togo
                      Central African Republic




                                           Niger


                                        Senegal
          Source: Buys et al. (2009)




          Figure 2: Distribution of First Year of Cellular Coverage at Local (EA) Level
                                      .15
                                      .1
                           Fraction
                                      .05
                                      0




                                            0              5                          10   15
                                                               Time of Coverage

          Range of years is from 1995 (year 1) to 2009 (year 15).




                                                                    22
Figure 3: Map of Cellular Phone Coverage in 1997 (TNM Only)




                            23
Figure 4: Map of Cellular Phone Coverage in 2004 (Both Networks Active)




                                    24
Figure 5: Map of Cellular Phone Coverage in 2008 (Both Networks Active)




                                    25
Figure 6: Arrival of Cellular Coverage at the Local Level

Figure 6.1 By 1998 Population Density (1=sparse, 4=dense)
       Kaplan-Meier survival estimates: Year to coverage by pop density
1
.75
.5
.25
0




       0                           5                           10                          15
                                           analysis time

             95% CI                    95% CI              95% CI           95% CI
             Pop density 1 (low)       Pop density 2       Pop density 3   Pop density 4 (high)




            Figure 6.2 By Slope Group (1=flat, 4=steep)

           Kaplan-Meier survival estimates: Year to coverage by slope
 1
 .75
 .5
 .25
 0




       0                           5                           10                         15
                                           analysis time

               95% CI                   95% CI              95% CI           95% CI
               Slope 1 (flat)           Slope 2             Slope 3          Slope 4 (steep)




                                               26
                             Figure 6.3 By Altitude Group (1=low, 4=high)
                            Kaplan-Meier survival estimates: Year to coverage by altitude


                  1
                  .75
                  .5
                  .25
                  0




                        0                           5                        10                        15
                                                          analysis time

                                 95% CI                 95% CI            95% CI          95% CI
                                 Altitude 1 (low)       Altitude 2        Altitude 3      Altitude 4 (high)



Unit of observation is the Enumeration Area (EA). Graphs show Kaplan-Meier survival functions for EAs with
different values of slope, altitude and population density, where exit is into the “covered” state. Range of years is
from 1995 (year 1) to 2009 (year 15). Observations without coverage by 2009 are assigned a year value of 15.
Sample is restricted to rural areas with positive population in 1998 Census.




                                                              27
                      Table 1: Summary Statistics for Enumeration Areas (EA)
                                Panel A: Cellular Phone Coverage Over Time
                                                       Fraction of EA covered
                                                All EAs    Rural EAs Urban EAs
1999                                              0.27        0.20         0.97
2000                                              0.27        0.20         0.97
2001                                              0.30        0.23         0.97
2002                                              0.31        0.24         0.97
2003                                              0.45        0.39         0.99
2004                                              0.57        0.53         0.99
2005                                              0.66        0.63         1.00
2006                                              0.74        0.72         1.00
2007                                              0.80        0.78         1.00
2008                                              0.86        0.85         1.00
N                                                8,924        8,118        806
 Panel B: Summary statistics for traffic congestion data: Rural EAs with cell coverage, by network
                                                Mean         S. d.    Num. obs. Min                              Max
Fraction dropped calls: Company 1, Aug 2008     0.020       0.010        5,971   0.002                           0.050
Fraction dropped calls: Company 2, Aug 2008     0.009       0.003        8,046   0.003                           0.023
                 Panel C: Summary statistics for geographic data: Rural EAs only
                                              Mean          S. d.    Num. obs. Min       Max
Altitude (meters above sea level)             848.52       342.23      8,118      34    1,988
Slope (% rise)                                 3.23         3.14       8,118       0      24
Distance to road (km)                          1.45         2.17       8,118       0      62
     Panel D: Summary statistics of demographic variables from 1998 Census: Rural EAs only
                                                          Mean            S. d.        Num. obs.       Min       Max
Age                                                        22.16          1.59          8,118           16        40
Education (yrs)                                            2.97           1.22          8,118           0          8
Percent adults married                                      0.55          0.07          8,118            0         1
Percent adults in agriculture                               0.89          0.17          8,118            0         1
Population                                               1,054.01        372.46         8,118           3        3,661
Population density (pop/km2)                              313.84         770.43         8,118          0.03     21,142
Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the primary variables used in the rollout analysis. In all panels, the
unit of observation is the enumeration area (EA). Summary measures are calculated over EAs with positive
population density. Panel B, C and D summary statistics are restricted to rural area EAs. Cellular coverage is a
combined TNM and Zain coverage measure, constructed as described in the text.




                                                         28
   Table 2: Cellular Phone Coverage and Demographic Proxies for Market
                                 Demand
                               Panel A: Binary Coverage
                                          OLS 2000      OLS 2004                     OLS 2008
                                               (1)           (2)                         (3)
Log EA population density                  0.020***      0.048***                    0.027***
                                             (0.00)        (0.01)                      (0.00)
Percent adults in agriculture               -0.033       -0.136**                     -0.020
                                             (0.03)        (0.04)                      (0.03)
Education (yrs)                            0.018***      0.029***                    0.036***
                                             (0.00)        (0.01)                      (0.00)
Age                                         -0.001       0.016***                    0.012***
                                             (0.00)        (0.00)                      (0.00)
R-squared                                    0.558         0.475                       0.367
N                                            8,118         8,118                       8,118
Mean of dependent variable                    0.20          0.53                        0.85
                       Panel B: Continuous Measure of Coverage
                                          OLS 2000      OLS 2004                     OLS 2008
                                               (1)           (2)                          (3)
Log EA population density                  0.037***      0.104***                     0.259***
                                             (0.01)        (0.01)                       (0.03)
Percent adults in agriculture             -0.303***     -0.688***                    -1.575***
                                             (0.08)        (0.13)                       (0.36)
Education (yrs)                            0.038***      0.087***                     0.165***
                                             (0.01)        (0.02)                       (0.04)
Age                                          0.001        0.016**                      0.034*
                                             (0.00)        (0.01)                       (0.02)
R-squared                                         0.527              0.556              0.518
N                                                 8118               8118               8118
Mean of dependent variable                        0.20               0.53               0.85
Notes: This table shows the relationship between cellular phone coverage in different years and
market demand variables measured in the 1998 Census. The unit of observation is the EA, sample
is restricted to rural EAs with positive population according to 1998 Census data. All regressions
contain TA fixed effects and a constant. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the TA
level. Binary coverage is defined as an indicator of whether more than 50% of the area is covered.
Continuous measure of coverage indicates the number of towers covering each area. *p<0.1,
**p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                       29
      Table 3: Cellular Phone Coverage, Demographic Proxies for Market Demand, and
                                   Geographic Variables
                                          Panel A: Binary Coverage
                                                     OLS 2000         OLS 2004                        OLS 2008
                                                          (1)              (2)                             (3)
Log EA population density                              0.010*          0.027***                          0.000
                                                        (0.00)           (0.01)                          (0.00)
Percent adults in agriculture                          -0.044         -0.161***                         -0.040
                                                        (0.03)           (0.04)                          (0.03)
Education (yrs)                                       0.013**          0.025***                        0.031***
                                                        (0.00)           (0.01)                          (0.00)
Age                                                    -0.002          0.012***                         0.006*
                                                        (0.00)           (0.00)                          (0.00)
Log Altitude                                            0.020           -0.004                        -0.101***
                                                        (0.02)           (0.03)                          (0.03)
Log Slope                                            -0.138***         -0.216**                         -0.086
                                                        (0.04)           (0.07)                          (0.06)
Log Altitude * Log Slope                              0.018**           0.021*                           0.004
                                                        (0.01)           (0.01)                          (0.01)
Distance to road (km)                                -0.014***        -0.018***                       -0.025***
                                                        (0.00)           (0.00)                          (0.00)
R-squared                                               0.560            0.484                           0.390
N                                                       8,115            8,115                           8,115
Mean of dependent variable                               0.20             0.53                            0.85
                                  Panel B: Continuous Measure of Coverage
                                                     OLS 2000         OLS 2004                        OLS 2008
                                                          (1)              (2)                             (3)
Log EA population density                             0.024***         0.064***                        0.158***
                                                        (0.01)           (0.01)                          (0.04)
Percent adults in agriculture                        -0.329***        -0.749***                       -1.717***
                                                        (0.08)           (0.13)                          (0.36)
Education (yrs)                                       0.029***         0.073***                        0.126***
                                                        (0.01)           (0.02)                          (0.04)
Age                                                      0.00            0.008                           0.016
                                                        (0.00)           (0.01)                          (0.02)
Log Altitude                                         0.123***            0.059                        0.183***
                                                        (0.03)           (0.06)                          (0.12)
Log Slope                                            -0.355***        -1.151***                       -2.197***
                                                        (0.07)           (0.16)                          (0.32)
Log Altitude * Log Slope                             0.047***         0.152***                        0.284***
                                                        (0.01)           (0.02)                          (0.05)
Distance to road (km)                                -0.019***        -0.037***                         -0.108*
                                                        (0.00)           (0.01)                          (0.02)
R-squared                                               0.514            0.549                           0.507
N                                                       8,115            8,115                           8,115
Mean of dependent variable                               0.20             0.53                            0.85
Notes: This table shows the relationship between cellular phone coverage in different years, market demand variables
and geographic features. The unit of observation is the EA, sample is restricted to rural EAs with positive population
according to 1998 Census data. All regressions and contain TA fixed effects and a constant term. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered at the TA level. Binary coverage is defined as an indicator of whether more than 50% of the
area is covered. Continuous measure of coverage indicates the number of towers covering each area. *p<0.1,
**p<0.05, ***p<0.01

                                                         30
         Table 4: Cox Regressions: Hazard Out of No Cellular Coverage
                            Panel A: Demand Covariates Only
                                                   (1)          (2)                        (3)
Coverage cutoffs                                    0            0.5                         1
Log EA population density                      0.132***      0.280***                   0.355***
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)                     (0.01)
Percent adults in agriculture                 -0.541***     -0.491***                   -0.358***
                                                 (0.09)        (0.10)                     (0.10)
Education (yrs)                                   0.002      0.066***                   0.070***
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)                     (0.01)
Age                                            0.079***      0.099***                   0.107***
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)                     (0.01)
N                                                 8,118        8,118                      8,118
                      Panel B: Demand and Geographic Covariates
                                                   (1)           (2)                         (3)
Coverage cutoffs                                    0            0.5                          1
Log EA population density                      0.114***      0.210***                    0.272***
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)                      (0.02)
Percent adults in agriculture                 -0.574***     -0.578***                   -0.457***
                                                 (0.09)        (0.10)                      (0.10)
Education (yrs)                                   0.001      0.086***                   0.094***
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)                      (0.01)
Age                                            0.077***      0.093***                   0.106***
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)                      (0.01)
Log Altitude                                     -0.015     -0.054***                     -0.031
                                                 (0.02)        (0.02)                      (0.02)
Log Slope                                        0.267*       -0.051                       0.058
                                                 (0.14)        (0.17)                      (0.19)
Log Altitude * Log Slope                        -0.039*       -0.032                     -0.057**
                                                 (0.02)        (0.03)                      (0.03)
Distance to road (km)                         -0.027***     -0.058***                   -0.088***
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)                      (0.01)
N                                                 8,115        8,115                       8,115
Notes: This table shows the relationship between cellular phone coverage and market demand
variables measured in 1998 Census and geographic features. The unit of observation is the EA,
sample is restricted to rural EAs with positive population according to 1998 Census data. In
Column 1, the area is defined as covered in the first year of any cell phone coverage. In Column 2,
it is defined as covered in the first year that our coverage measure exceeds 0.5. In Column 3, it is
defined as covered in the first year our coverage measure exceeds 1.0. *p<0.1, **p<0.05,
***p<0.01




                                                31
               Table 5: Network Performance Measured as Percent Dropped Calls in August 2008
                                               OLS regressions: Company 1                      OLS regressions: Company 2
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)                (4)            (5)            (6)
Log EA population density                 -0.0120*      -0.0132*     -0.0119*           -0.0128***     -0.0131***    -0.0125***
                                           (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.007)             (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)
Percent adults in agriculture            -0.192***     -0.200***    -0.216***               0.021          0.017         0.011
                                           (0.055)       (0.054)      (0.055)             (0.014)        (0.014)       (0.014)
Education (yrs)                         -0.0265*** -0.0231*** -0.0218***                   -0.003         -0.003        -0.002
                                           (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)             (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)
Age                                         0.006         0.005         0.005          -0.00467*** -0.00476*** -0.00472***
                                           (0.004)       (0.005)      (0.005)             (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)
Log Altitude                                              0.000        0.000                            0.0207**      0.0206**
                                                         (0.053)      (0.053)                            (0.008)       (0.008)
Log Slope                                                -0.0534       -0.103                             -0.012       -0.0172
                                                         (0.143)      (0.143)                            (0.022)       (0.022)
Log Altitude * Log Slope                                  0.003        0.010                              0.000         0.001
                                                         (0.022)      (0.022)                            (0.003)       (0.003)
Mean Distance to road (km)                                0.009        0.008                              0.002         0.002
                                                         (0.006)      (0.006)                            (0.002)       (0.002)
Company 1 coverage in 2007                                         -0.0211***                                           -0.003
                                                                      (0.006)                                          (0.002)
Company 2 coverage in 2007                                              0.006                                         -0.00692*
                                                                      (0.012)                                          (0.004)
N                                           5,971         5,968        5,968               8,046          8,043         8,043
Mean of outcome                              2.03          2.03          2.03               0.93           0.93           0.93
R-squared                                   0.850         0.850         0.851               0.827          0.827         0.828
F stat for demand side variables             5.25          4.43          4.52               16.61          14.23         12.03
F stat for geographic variables                            3.04          3.60                              3.48           3.69
F stat for prior coverage variables                                     22.85                                            19.32
Notes: This table shows the relationship between network performance for both of the network providers in August 2008, and a set of
variables proxying for market demand (from 1998 Census data), cost factors and prior network coverage. The unit of observation is the
EA, sample is restricted to rural EAs with positive population according to Census data. All regressions contain TA fixed effects and a
constant term. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the TA level, *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01




                                                                  32
