NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AGOA RULES: THE INTENDED AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF SPECIAL
FABRIC PROVISIONS
Lawrence Edwards
Robert Z. Lawrence
Working Paper 16623
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16623

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

We are grateful to Mark Bennett for his invaluable assistance on our visit to Lesotho; to the various
people we interviewed including Nkopane Monyane, Jennifer Chen, Grace Lin, Mpho Madia, Fiona
Lee and those from the Lesotho National Development Corporation; to Mike Morris for helpful conversations,
to Pandey Bibek and Jenny O Connell for research assistance; and for funding to the NBER Africa
project. We also thank the South African National Research Foundation, Economic Research Southern
Africa and the Center for International Development at Harvard for hosting our visits to work together
on this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Lawrence Edwards and Robert Z. Lawrence. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

AGOA Rules: The Intended and Unintended Consequences of Special Fabric Provisions
Lawrence Edwards and Robert Z. Lawrence
NBER Working Paper No. 16623
December 2010
JEL No. F0,F14,O0,O24
ABSTRACT
Lesotho and other least developed African countries responded impressively to the preferences they
were granted under the African Growth and Opportunities Act with a rapid increase in their clothing
exports to the US. But this performance has not been accompanied by some of the more dynamic growth
benefits that might have been hoped for. In this study we develop the theory and present empirical
evidence to demonstrate that these outcomes are the predictable consequences of the manner in which
the specific preferences might be expected to work.
The MFA (Multi-fiber Arrangement) quotas on US imports of textiles created a favorable environment
for low value-added, fabric-intensive clothing production in countries with unused quotas by inducing
constrained countries to move into higher quality products. By allowing the least developed African
countries to use third country fabrics in their clothing exports to the US, AGOA provided additional
implicit effective subsidies to clothing that were multiples of the US tariffs on clothing imports. Taken
together, these policies help account for the program’s success and demonstrate the importance of
other rules of origin in preventing poor countries from taking advantage of other preference programs.

But the disappointments can also be attributed to the preferences because they discouraged additional
value-addition in assembly and stimulated the use of expensive fabrics that were unlikely to be produced
locally. When the MFA was removed, constrained countries such as China moved strongly into precisely
the markets in which AGOA countries had specialized. Although AGOA helped the least developed
countries withstand this shock, they were nonetheless adversely affected. Preference erosion due to
MFN reductions in US clothing tariffs could similarly have particularly severe adverse effects on these
countries.

Lawrence Edwards
School of Economics
University of Cape Town
Cape Town
Republic of South Africa
Lawrence.Edwards@uct.ac.za
Robert Z. Lawrence
JFK School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robert_lawrence@harvard.edu

3

AGOA Rules: The intended and unintended consequences of Special
Fabric Provisions.

Introduction
The export performance of the small, land-locked nation of Lesotho is an
African success story that demonstrates both the power and limitations of trade
preferences. In 2004, just three years after Lesotho became eligible for preferences
under the Africa Growth and Opportunities Act (AGOA) the clothing exports to the
US from one of Africa’s poorest land-locked nations had trebled to reach $460
million and provide employment for over 50,000 workers (Bennett, 2006). The
performance of Lesotho and several other preference recipients was particularly
striking because it seemed to contradict the pessimistic verdict many had reached
about Africa’s capacity to become a globally competitive exporter of manufactured
products even when granted preferential market access.2
On May 12 2010, a ceremony was held on Capitol Hill in Washington DC, to
celebrate the tenth Anniversary of AGOA. In his remarks at the gathering, United
States Trade Representative Ron Kirk credited AGOA with “a substantial increase in
two-way U.S.-Africa trade since 2000, with African countries now exporting to the
United States a more diverse range of value-added products,” Kirk also asserted that
the trade program “powerfully demonstrates the link between trade and economic
development.”

3

In this paper we will provide some evidence that supports Kirk’s

2

Several studies have been devoted to explaining this poor performance, and most conclude that the
problems lie with the African countries themselves, rather than on the access given their products in
foreign markets. A host of inhibiting factors have been identified (Ng et al., 1996; Wang and Winters,
1998).
3
http://www.america.gov/st/business-english/2010/May/20100513122443SztiwomoD0.8958856.html

3

4
positive verdict: AGOA has stimulated exports of manufactured products, especially
clothing, but we will also suggest that the ultimate impact on economic development
has been quite disappointing. We will argue that both the success and limitations are
the predictable consequences of the manner in which the preferences have been
constructed. We will show that although these preferences encourage exports, they
simultaneously create disincentives for local value-addition that may limit the
program’s development benefits.

Background
As indicated by Mr. Kirk’s remarks, trade preferences are of interest not only
because they might provide one time benefits in the form of higher incomes and
increased employment but also because trade is associated with more dynamic
benefits that lead to faster growth. Economic growth is an ever- expanding process in
which actors not only replicate what they were doing on greater scale but
continuously develop new capabilities that allow them to produce increasingly
sophisticated goods and services (Hausmann, Hwang and Rodrik, 20007). More
developed countries typically produce higher unit value products and wider ranges of
products than their less-developed counterparts (Schott, 2004). These products often
face less elastic demands and provide higher profit margins than more standardized,
commodity-like products. If they can “learn by doing” by using trade preferences, it is
hoped that firms that start by exporting a few simple products can upgrade their
product sophistication, and diversify into other products and markets and ultimately
become competitors that no longer need preferential treatment.4 In addition, it is

4

According to Hwang (2007) there is unconditional convergence at the 6-digit level. If countries start
to produce low unit-value goods within a product category, they will eventually experience significant
increases in their unit values. The claim is that this will happen more or less automatically, without
any special supportive policies in place.

4

5
hoped that there are benefits to the rest of the economy. Other domestic firms could
gain too through backward and forward linkages as exporters demand inputs and
services and become increasingly embedded in the local economy.
During the industrial revolution this form of development was evident in the
textile industry which was an important driver of industrialization. Japan, and later
Korea, Hong Kong and other dynamic Asians also all cut their teeth as exporters of
clothing continuously upgrading, and diversifying (Gereffi, 1999). Motivated in part
by such considerations, the EU and the US both implemented multilateral Generalized
Special Preferences (GSP) programs in the 1970s. In addition, they both have
regionally focused preferential programs. 5
Yet, the notion that developed country markets are open to manufactured
exports from least developed economies as a result of these concessions can be
challenged. It is difficult for underdeveloped countries to produce complete complex
products but they are often quite capable of providing simple assembly operations.
Some of the preferences given through programs are thus a sham because they include
rules of origin that require more local production than these poor countries can
provide.

These rules are generally justified as necessary to prevent the trade-

deflection that could occur if products are imported from third countries and then,
with little additional value added, claimed as originating from preference-recipients –
a practice sometimes known as “screwdriver plants.” This is a legitimate concern, but
the rules are more constraining than strictly necessary and they inhibit poor countries

5

The EU granted African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Countries special preferences, first under the
Lomé Conventions (starting in 1976) and later through the Contonou Agreement (2000). More recently
the EU has concluded Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) with groups of ACP countries. The
US has granted special preferences under the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI), the Andean Promotion
Act and AGOA. Preferences for least developed countries (LDCs) have received special attention. In
2001, the European Union introduced an “Everything But Arms” (EBA) program which provides LDC
exports duty free, quota-free access. In the Doha Round negotiations the United States agreed to give
duty-free access to LDCs in 97 percent of its tariff lines.

5

6
from specializing in the narrow slices of global production chains in which their
comparative advantage is likely to lie.
In the case of preference programs in apparel, these rules are particularly
stringent, generally requiring that at least two (in the case of the EU) or even (in the
case of the US) three transformation processes (e.g. yarn, fabric, assembly) in the
preference-receiving or granting countries to qualify for duty-free entry. (For an
excellent account see Ahmad, 2007). These rules are especially problematic because
fabric production is a highly capital and technology activity that is beyond the
capabilities of most very poor countries.
The rules of the US AGOA program are however an important exception,
indeed perhaps the exception that proves the rule. AGOA not only gave all SubSaharan countries extensive duty -free quota-free access to the US (Table 1).

6

Its

rules of origin also contained an unusual a waiver for wearing apparel that was
granted to “Lesser Developed Beneficiary Countries” (LDBCs). Subject to a fairly
generous market-share caps that have not been binding, the waiver allowed these
LDBC countries to use third-country fabrics or yarn and still export clothing under the
AGOA preferences.7 Instead of requiring individual items to meet specific
transformation rules, such as minimum value-added requirements, or the use of
domestic fabric, the US set up a simple inspection program that verified that genuine

6

In May 2000, the US congress passed AGOA. The Act granted duty free access for 4600 GSP tariffline items plus another 1800 tariff line –items not on the original GSP. This meant that, aside from
some apparel and agricultural products, AGOA beneficiaries could export almost any product to the US
duty free. The AGOA preferences for garments required that that they are made of 85% US made yarn
and fabric or from fabrics and yarns made in other AGOA beneficiary countries.
7
Most of the countries that were eligible for the wainver are classified as Least Developed by the
United Nations. Botswana and Namibia did not meet the requirements for the Special Rule as their
GDP per capita exceed the minimum of US$ 1 500 in 1998. However, they were designated as LDC
countries under amendments to the AGOA act in 2002 (AGOA II) and 2004 (AGOA IV). Mauritius
was temporarily granted the third-country fabric derogation from October 2004-September 2005 under
the Miscellaneous Tariff Bill of 2004 (known as AGOA III). More recently Mauritius qualified for the
third-country fabric derogation in November 2008 for a period of 4 years.

6

7
production activities were taking place.8 Although the special LDBC rule was
originally scheduled to expire after three years, it was extended in 2004 for another
three years and in 2007 for a further five.

[TABLE 1 HERE]

Countries not defined as “lesser-developed” such as South Africa and
Mauritius did receive AGOA preferences, but they were required to meet GSP rules
of origin that for clothing required the use of US or regional yarns or fabric. Because
the different treatment for higher income countries provides a useful control group,
AGOA provides an ideal opportunity to explore the role of different types of rules of
origin in preferential arrangements. And the experience demonstrates how important
they can be: US imports of clothing from AGOA countries (SITC 84- Apparel and
Clothing Accessories) increased from $730 million in 2000 to $1755 million in 2004.
This growth was dominated by US imports of clothing from the least developed
African countries which increased by four hundred percent, almost all of which took
advantage of the lesser developed country provision (See Figure 1). The largest
growth in exports between 2000 and 2004 came from Lesotho (up from $140 million
to $456 million) and over the same period very significant increases also occurred in
Kenya (up from $43 million to $270 million), Madagascar ($110 million to $323
million), Swaziland ($32 million to $179 million) and Namibia (0 to $79 million)
(Figure 2). By contrast in 2004, US imports of clothing from South Africa and

8

AGOA privileges also require protecting US intellectual property rights, observing labor rights,
proving access to US trade and investment and implementing rule of law. Apparel exports require
adopting an effective visa system to prevent transshipment

7

8
Mauritius, the two largest African clothing exporters when AGOA was passed, were
actually 18 million dollars lower than they had been in 2000 (Figure 2).

[FIGURE 1 & 2 HERE]

AGOA also stimulated entry into new clothing markets. Table 2 reports the
number of HTS ten-digit apparel products produced by AGOA countries. Overall
AGOA countries export limited ranges of apparel products. South Africa, Mauritius
and Madagascar had the widest range of products (over 130 each) prior to the
implementation of AGOA in 2000. AGOA preferences increased product penetration.
Many countries experienced exceptional increases in the total number of lines from
2000 to 2004 (see Kenya from 45 to 155, Swaziland from 47 to 139, Lesotho from 60
to 118).

9

In most countries however these trends reversed after 2005, but still

remained above 2000 levels.

[TABLE 2]

AGOA countries have experienced setbacks, however, first when the
constraints on their (mainly Asian) competitors were lifted with the expiration of the
Multi-Fiber Arrangement in 2005 and second with the slump in the US because of the
global financial crisis.

10

As a result, U.S. imports declined, although for the least

developed AGOA countries still remained three times as large as in 2000. By contrast,
9

The largest contractions in Lesotho occurred in firms producing knitted garments; those producing
woven garments (e.g. denim) did better. See Bennet op. cit.
10
In July 2007 Lesotho Clothing and Applied Workers Union estimated employment at 44,000
compared to 55,000 in 2004.

8

9
despite AGOA, imports from South Africa and Mauritius combined were decimated
and in 2008 were only a third of their 2000 levels.
Several research papers have confirmed what is obvious to the naked eye -that the lesser developed country provisions have played a key role in the outcomes.
Using a variety of methodologies, empirical estimates confirm that preferences under
AGOA are a significant determinant of Apparel exports: Mattoo, Devesh, and
Subramanian (2003) stressed the role of rules of origin in limiting the overall benefits
from AGOA to all recipients. Collier & Venables (2007) find that the AGOA apparel
provision had a positive and significant effect. Frazer and Van Biesebroeck (2010)
find that the AGOA had a “large and robust effect that grew over time” and estimate
that overall AGOA apparel exports increased by 53 percent with stronger impacts on
products with high initial levels of protection. Portugal-Perez (2008) report an impact
of 96 percent for 22 countries eligible for the third-country fabric provision, and 303
percent for the top 7 beneficiaries 11 In addition to higher export volumes there is also
evidence that AGOA exporters enjoyed higher prices and captured some of the tariff
rents created by the preferences (Olarreaga and Özden, 2005). Apparently, whatever
Africa’s handicaps, they have not prevented substantial responses: indeed, there is no
evidence of differential effects in taking advantage of AGOA based on measures of
corruption or institutional quality (Frazer and Van Biesebroeck, 2010).
Despite the impressive growth in volumes, there is also some disquieting
evidence in AGOA’s performance that relates to the issue of dynamic benefits.
Decompositions of output growth reported in Table 3 reveal that the export of new
product lines (the extensive margin) contributed only 30 percent of total AGOA
import growth from LDC special rule countries between 2000 and 2004, and 42
11
Other studies include Brenton and Ikezuki (2005), Gibbon (2003), Seyoum (2007), Nouve (2005),
Rolfe and Woodward (2005), FIAS (2006).

9

10
percent of the decline from 2004-08. Strikingly only 8 percent of the growth in
Lesotho’s apparel exports took the form of new products. The share of product lines
accounted for by the top four and top ten HS 10-digit products is around sixty and
eighty percent and has remained fairly constant throughout the period. In addition,
production is predominantly CMT (Cut-Make-Trim) with little value addition and
there is little evidence of dynamic spillovers to other sectors of the economies (Lall
2005). These trends are exemplified by the development of Lesotho’s clothing
industry in response to the AGOA preferences. Therefore, before presenting and
testing a theory that can explain these outcomes, we describe briefly the history of
Lesotho’s clothing industry.

[TABLE 3]

Lesotho
As the largest apparel exporter to the US, Lesotho is of particular interest.
Whereas some countries such as Namibia, Malawi and Botswana, became clothing
exporters for the first time after AGOA, the response of Lesotho actually built on a
longer historical experience in which trade preferences and policies also played an
important part. The industry was launched in the 1980s when Taiwanese
manufacturers, originally based in South Africa, moved to Lesotho in order to avoid
trade sanctions imposed by the US and Europe on what was then the Apartheid
regime. More investors were attracted in the late 1980s, after the European Union
signed the Lomé convention, which granted special preferences to the ACP countries
that had formerly been colonies. While the clothing preferences in Lomé had a double
transformation rule, Lesotho was granted a temporary derogation from the

10

11
requirement allowing it to use third country fabrics that the investors took advantage
of.
When the derogation expired in the mid 90s, exports to Europe plunged and
they have never recovered (Figure 3). This experience provided the first
demonstration of the importance of the role of these special preferences in the
viability of Lesotho’s exports of clothing. Clothing exports to the United States were
subject to tariffs but were also constrained by quota restrictions under the MFA. As
these became increasingly binding on others, Lesotho’s foreign owned firms shifted
to exporting to the United States to take advantage of its unfilled quotas. Lesotho’s
concentration of exports in products where quota constraints on Chinese exports were
binding is clearly revealed in Figure 4. Thus even prior to the passage of AGOA,
firms based in Lesotho, most of which were subsidiaries of Asian multinationals were
exporting to the US. Indeed, after 1999, 99 percent of all Lesotho’s apparel exports
went to the US with only 0.8% going to South Africa and just 0.2% to the EU.

[FIGURE 3]

The small share of Lesotho’s exports going to South Africa also indicates the
important role played by fabric rules of origin. The US MFN tariff on clothing is
around 17 percent, while the SACU tariff is about 40 percent. Thus garments exported
to South Africa from Lesotho (which is within the customs union) have a much larger
margin of preference. Yet Lesotho is far more competitive in the US than in SACU.12

12
Indeed according to Sandrey et al. (2005) Lesotho cannot even compete in Lesotho! “Examination of
the local clothing retail outlets reveals a predominance of both Chinese and South African garments.”

11

12
The reason is that to sell in South Africa, Lesotho has to pay SACU tariffs or SACU
prices for fabric. By contrast, under AGOA it obtains these duty free.13

[FIGURE 4]

AGOA has been in effect for a decade but there is little evidence that much of
Lesotho’s industry could survive without preferences or that it has diversified
horizontally into new products and markets or vertically into greater domestic value
addition. Factories in Lesotho continue to concentrate on just a narrow range of
garments: the most basic low unit value categories knitted tee-shorts, slacks, blouses
and blue-jeans. The slice of the production chain they participate in is narrow and
does not seem to be expanding. Most apparel manufacturing in Lesotho is CMT (CutMake-Trim). The firms, almost entirely foreign owned, typically provide assembly,
packaging and shipping services and depend on their Asian headquarters to generate
orders, design the clothes and send them the fabric they need. This can be seen by
comparing the industry wage bill for 50,000 workers (approximately $1000 per
worker) i.e. $50 million in 2004 with total US exports valued at $456 million. Most of
the value is thus added to other parts of the chain. Almost none of the managers are
locals and the buyers of fabric and the marketers of the garments and the key strategic
corporate decisions are all made thousands of miles away in Asia.

13

To be sure, factors besides favourable rules of origin have contributed to Lesotho’s performance.
(Maloney, 2006) These include fluctuations in the Rand to which its currency is tied (favourable
between 2000 and 2002) and other policies to assist exporters by the Lesotho Government. In addition
Lesotho has benefited from a favourable international image as a non-sweatshop producer (Seidman
2009). It has also been promoted by Bono in his campaign against Aids. The Lesotho National
Development Corporation (LNDC) has played an active role, offering favourable rents for factory
shells. The government also provided generous tax treatment from the Government --reduced from 15
to 0 in 2006 – and sought to maintain industrial peace with a Directorate of Dispute Prevention and
Resolution. The Government has used the Duty-Credit-Certificate Scheme of the South African
Customs Union that gives apparel firms between 10 and 25 percent of the FOB value of their exports in
certificates which allow them to import textiles or apparel duty-free.

12

13
The local production process is characterized by highly routine steps used to
produce very large volumes. Just one buyer -- the US retailer the GAP -- accounts for
almost 40 percent of overall output. The combination of the large scale on which they
operate and the large orders by concentrated buyers, makes it difficult for small firms
to enter the market. In addition, to move up the value chain and to produce
differentiated products in smaller batches requires more skilled workers. This is part
of the explanation for Lesotho’s inability to do well in the relatively small South
African market in which demand is more varied.
One firm in Lesotho has built a denim plant.14 But with this exception, all
fabrics are imported. Lesotho and other AGOA countries, even South Africa,
therefore, lack the domestic textile industry that would allow them to meet the regular
clothing rules of origin in US preference programs.
Lesotho’s workers have relatively low productivity levels and their skills do
not appear to have increased over time.15 Lall ascribes the lack of improvement in part
to the Labor Code Rule that prohibits the use of piece rate. He noted “Despite a
decade and a half or experience in CMT operations, productivity in Lesotho is below
that of major competitors. Since wages are comparable, its competitiveness cannot
outlast trade privileges” (Lall 2005).
The relatively low quality of Lesotho’s (and other AGOA) apparel exports is
also revealed in the comparative price of its exports. Table 4 presents the average unit
values of the top 15 apparel products at HS 10-digit level exported by Lesotho to the
US in 2004. These unit values are compared against the average unit value of other
14

In 2004 the industry faced a major challenge which the potential expiration of the special rule. Partly
anticipating the expiration of the Special Rule in 2004, the Nien Hsing Group of Taiwan invested over
$100 million to build the Formosa Mill, a state of the art denim fabric mill.
15
Lall (2005) estimated that while Lesotho’s wages were similar to Asian levels, its productivity was
typically only fifty percent of East Asian levels. According to Morris and Sedowski (2006), worker
productivity has not increased over a ten year period. See also Morris (2006).

13

14
lesser-developed AGOA countries and the 10th, 25th, median, 75th and 90th percentile
unit values of the 226 countries in the sample. In all but one case when it is just below
the 25th percentile, the unit values of Lesotho’s apparel exports fall between the 25th
and 50th percentile range.

[TABLE 4]

What is also striking is the range of unit values even within these highly
disaggregated product lines (see Schott 2004). For example, the 90th percentile unit
value of a dozen women’s or girls’ cotton pullovers (Lesotho’s top apparel export) in
2004 was 280 dollars versus 31 dollars for Lesotho exports.
The combination of a productivity disadvantage and almost no domestic
textile industry makes the industry’s survival totally dependent on its preferences.
Each time the expiration of the special rule has drawn near, therefore studies have
issued credible and dire warnings about the industry’s ability to survive without them
(Salm, 2002 and Bennett, 2006).
This experience makes it clear that trade need not automatically lead to growth
and the manner in which trade is stimulated could well prove consequential for the
amount and nature of the growth it stimulates. In particular it suggests that trade that
is stimulated by preferences might well have different effects than trade that occurs
for other reasons.
Why this disappointment? Both Lall (2005) and Collier and Venables (2007)
suggest it may be that these AGOA countries are simply too underdeveloped for the
exports to ignite the process. Collier and Venables argue it reflects a lack of
complementary inputs that are required to exploit scale economies. They suggest that

14

15
preferences are only likely to work if countries already have “the skills and
infrastructure to be near the threshold of global manufacturing competitiveness”
(P1328). Lall also suggests that part of the explanation could lie with having foreign
factory owners – most of whom are Taiwanese, -- that are not closely integrated into
the local community. Ironically, this might suggest that these kinds of preferences
should be given to the more advanced developing countries like South Africa rather
than the least developed countries that have received them.
In this paper, however, we will explore a different explanation that has been
overlooked in the literature. We will argue that both the positive and negative
responses to AGOA are no accident. Indeed, they are the consequences that economic
theory would lead us to expect, given the form in which the preferences have been
granted.
As we will show using the theory of effective protection, preferences
combined with the third country fabric rule can have powerful financial effects. They
could easily be the equivalent of a subsidy to production that is two or three times
higher than the 17 percent preference margin granted by AGOA through MFN tariff
relief on clothing. This allows AGOA producers to offset cost disadvantages due to
the lower productivity of their workers and greater distance from suppliers and
markets and helps explain why the initial responses to AGOA (and the availability of
unused MFA quotas) were so powerful.
On the other hand, in theory the preferences also have two deleterious effects.
First, they steer firms mainly toward the simplest products in which clothing
producers add little value. Thus the preferences tax skills acquisition and discourage
firms from moving up the value-chain. Second, the preferences (and the MFA)
discourage backward linkages because they induce exporters to use relatively

15

16
expensive fabrics rather than the cheaper fabrics that are more likely to be produced in
poor countries.
In sum, trade preferences “work.” They can stimulate trade, raise incomes in
developing countries and boost employment. But whether they actually lead to
development conceived of as a cumulative growth process is much less certain.
In addition changes in other trade policies at first helped and then hindered
AGOA’s performance. On the one hand, the MFA initially provided an especially
favorable environment for AGOA countries to produce low unit value products
because it not only constrained their Asian competitors but also induced these
exporters to shift towards higher quality products. On the other hand, when the MFA
was removed, constrained countries such as China moved strongly into precisely the
markets in which AGOA countries had specialized. Although AGOA helped the least
developed African countries withstand this shock, they were nonetheless adversely
affected.
This paper proceeds now in three sections. In the first we discuss the economic
theory of the effects these regimes are likely to have. In the second, we conduct
several empirical tests of the theory and in the final section we present our
conclusions.

Theory
The overview of Lesotho’s export performance identified the influence of two trade
policies: (i) the effect of MFA quotas and their removal and (ii) the effect of AGOA
tariff preferences and rules of origin. In this section we draw on economic theory to
investigate the impact of these policies. The focus is on incentives they create for the
production and export of particular types of clothing products. We are particularly

16

17
interested in the impact on product characteristics such as quality, fabric-use and
value addition in recipient countries.
We will show that the regime governing clothing trade can be expected to
have a profound impact on clothing production choices in countries like Lesotho. In
particular, we will demonstrate that the MFA not only provided a subsidy to
Lesotho’s clothing exports but also created incentives for it to specialize in low
quality and low valued-added products. The AGOA program provided an even more
powerful incentive to expand exports of low value added clothing products, but it had
an additional effect. The third-country fabric provision encouraged further
specialization in clothing products with high fabric cost shares.
Some of the arguments we will use are not new. The body of literature on how
trade policies influence product characteristics is well established in the case of quotas
(Falvey, 1979; Krishna, 1987, Feenstra, 1988) and transport costs (Alchian and Allen,
1964; Hummels and Skiba, 2004). The central result in this literature is that quotas
and unit transport costs lead to quality upgrading, while tariffs do not. However, the
literature generally assumes integrated production, and less studied are the effects of
quotas and tariffs on the quality and value-addition when products contain imported
intermediate inputs. This analysis therefore explores how tariff preferences and their
associated rules of origin lead to changes in the quality of goods produced and
exported. We focus on clothing and fabric inputs although some of the results would
be applicable to other products that are manufacturing with imported intermediate
inputs.
Most apparel firms located in Lesotho sell products to the U.S. through ‘full
package’ intermediaries located in East Asia. These ‘full package’ suppliers compete
with others for orders in the US and Europe (Lall, 2005). They then contract these out

17

18
to their associated apparel producers, either through competitive bidding or through
some allocation rule. Lesotho, for example, will export all products for which its
production costs are lower than its competitor suppliers.
We are therefore going to develop a simple model which captures this intrafirm allocation and thus the relative shares of two countries, think Lesotho and China,
in the US apparel imports. We model clothing as an array of products containing
varying quantities of labor and fabric inputs. We determine patterns of value-addition
and specialization in a Ricardian framework that captures the effects of differences in
fabric intensity. We then explore the effects of changes in market access policies on
production choices in both countries. In particular we highlight how these policy
changes affect both the volumes (intensive margin) and the types of products (the
extensive margin) each of the countries will export.
Model
We assume apparel products are differentiated by type of product and the content of
fabric.16 Each apparel product z is associated with a point on an interval [0,1] and is
assembled using labor and fabric according to a constant returns to scale Leontief
production function:17

y ( z )  minL( z ) a( z ) , F ( z )  ( z )

16
Mattoo et al. (2003) develop an alternative model with decreasing returns and infinite demand to
show how both tariff preferences and waivers of rules of origin increase exports of existing products.
They do not deal with the impact on product quality, nor export of new varieties.
17
Portugal-Perez (2008) assumes a similar production function. A clear limitation of this model is that
it does not take into account capital (sewing machines, fabric cutters, irons, washing and drying
machines) used in the production of apparel. However, in a world where this type of capital is
internationally mobile, it is the non-traded factors that become the primary determinant of a country’s
comparative advantage (Wood and Mayer, 2001).

18

19
a(z) is the labor used per unit output, L(z) is the quantity of labor, F(z) is the quantity
of fabric and (z) is the unit fabric requirement in square meters (the input-output
coefficient).
Using the cost function dual to the production function, the unit cost c(z) of
clothing (assuming no transport costs) is given as:
c ( z )  a ( z ) w   ( z ) PF ( z )

(1)

where w is the wage and PF(z) is the price per square meter fabric associated with
product z. We also assume firms are competitive, so equilibrium profits are zero and
the free on board price equals costs, i.e.
p ( z )  c ( z )  a ( z ) w   ( z ) PF ( z ) .

(2)

Products are therefore differentiated according to their unit labor requirements,
as well as unit fabric costs which are affected by the quantity and price of fabric used.
For example, we would expect more complex apparel products (e.g. suits) to require
more labor than simple products (e.g. T-shirts). Although we do not model quality
specifically, we would also expect higher quality apparel to require more labor
services and higher priced fabric than lower quality products.
The allocation decision
The allocation process depends on the relative cost of production across different
locations. Lesotho will export all products for which its costs are less than or equal to
those from China. This allocation condition can be specified as:
a( z )w   ( z ) PF ( z )  a  ( z ) w   ( z ) PF  ( z )

(3)

where transport costs are assumed to be zero and * denotes foreign competitor
(China). Under free trade where fabric is internationally traded and there are no

19

20
differences in unit fabric costs (PF(z) = PF*(z)), we can re-specify the relationship in
terms of Lesotho’s Relative Unit Labor Cost (RULC):
RULC ( z ) 

wa( z )
1
wa  ( z )

(4)

Here, home (Lesotho) exports all apparel products for which its unit labor costs are
lower than its foreign competitors. Alternatively, China exports all apparel products
for which its relative wages are less than or equal to its relative productivity.
This result implies that comparative advantage when intermediate inputs can
be obtained at world prices is entirely dependent on the relative effective price of the
non-traded factor. This outcome is equivalent to that of the Dornbusch, Fischer and
Samuelson (DFS) (1977) Ricardian model with a continuum of goods. The fabric

content of apparel therefore has no influence on what is produced by the home
country. We will see later that this no longer holds once we introduce quotas and
preferential trade barriers.
Consumption and Equilibrium
To close the model, we assume that there is no US apparel production, that countries
only export apparel to the U.S. and that U.S. consumers have identical and homothetic
preferences. Utility is Cobb-Douglas for a numeraire good (non-clothing products),
but is a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) function in the quantities of the
differentiated clothing products. The utility function is specified as:18
1
u    C  ( z )dz 
0



 

C01

0   1

(5)

where C(z) denotes total U.S. consumption of apparel products z and C0 is
consumption of all other goods. U.S consumers spend a constant fraction  of their

18

See Dixit and Norman (1980: 282).

20

21
income on apparel products with the remainder spent on the numeraire good. In
addition, the differentiated apparel products are substitutes with a constant elasticity
of substitution given by   1 /(1   )  1 .19
Since u is a separable utility function, the optimal choice of apparel products
can be obtained by maximizing the CES component of the utility function subject to
expenditure being less than or equal to I where I is U.S. income. Optimal demand by
U.S. consumers for each product z is given by
 p( z ) 
C ( z)  

 P 



I
P

(6)
1 (1 )

1
where the price index of the CES quantity index is given by P    p( z )1 dz 
 0


.

A rise in the relative price of a particular product will therefore result in a
disproportionate reduction (as  > 1) in the relative consumption of that product.20
Assuming a sufficiently large number of products, the elasticity of demand for each
product will be given by .
The model so far differs importantly from the Dixit/Stiglitz (1977) and
Krugman (1979, 1980) monopolistic competition models in that we assume perfect
competition and constant returns to scale. The full range of apparel products will
therefore be produced and prices will equal marginal cost in equilibrium.21 In

19
Note that this is ensures that the differentiated goods are closer substitutes among themselves than
are the differentiated goods and the numeraire good. We do not modify the CES function to allow for
quality as in Hummels and Klenow (2005). A quality index acts as a demand shifter, leading to higher
consumption at every given price.
20

To see this take the ratio of (6) for product 1 to product 2 to obtain: C ( z1 ) C ( z 2 )   p ( z1 ) p ( z 2 )  .

21

While we could follow DFS (1977) and use a Cobb-Douglas utility function for U.S. consumers, this
has the disadvantageous outcome that the value of U.S. imports of each variety does not change.
Growth in foreign exports to the US can only be achieved through growth along the extensive margin.
This outcome is inconsistent with the empirical evidence.

21

22
addition, the value of exports of any product decline in response to a rise in relative
prices, with a greater change the more substitutable are the differentiated products:
 p( z ) 
p ( z )C ( z )  

 P 

1

I

The final condition for equilibrium is that labor demand equals labor supply
(L), or alternatively that labor income equals the wage bill in the clothing sector.
Assume that apparel products are indexed according to diminishing Chinese relative
unit labor requirements, (a*(z)/a(z)). With z denoting a hypothetical dividing line
between Chinese exports (0, z ) and Lesotho exports ( z ,1), the home and foreign
labor market clearing condition are respectively represented as:
z

wL   wa( z )C ( z )dz
0

(7)

and
1

w L   w a  ( z )C ( z )dz .
z

(8)

Taking the ratio of these two conditions gives:
 z

w  0 wa ( z )C ( z )dz  L 
 

w  1 w a  ( z )C ( z )dz  L 
 z


(9)

This schedule is upward sloping on z. A rise in the range of products exported by
Lesotho at constant relative wages increases the demand for labor in Lesotho and
reduces the demand for labor in the competitor country. This raises the relative wage
in Lesotho required to equate demand and supply of labor. Equilibrium is achieved
through reductions in relative U.S. consumption of Lesotho exports in response to
higher prices.

22

23
If relative wages are fixed, as may be expected in Lesotho where
unemployment is very high, then the adjustment to equilibrium will be through
changes in the relative employment of labor in the apparel sector (L*/L falls). In what
follows, we impose the fixed wage assumption to avoid unnecessary complexity
associated with the marginal effect of relative wage changes on the range of products
exported. Together, equations (2), (3), (6), (7) (8) and the price index solve for
Chinese and Lesotho wages, the geographic specialization of apparel exports, the
price index P and U.S. consumption and prices across the full spectrum of products.
Quotas and product choice for exporting firms
The MFA was important in the markets in which Lesotho and other clothing
producers operated and its application and elimination had major effects (Harrigan
and Barrows, 2009). Quotas on clothing imports into developed economies were
widely applied under the MFA with imports from China particularly constrained
(Brambilla, Khandelwa and Schott, 2010). The MFA, therefore, led to a geographical
dispersion of clothing production as producers re-located to countries where there
were unused quotas. Lesotho (and other AGOA countries) was a beneficiary of this
relocation of production as its US quotas were not filled.22 But the effects on clothing
products were not all the same. As we will argue, quotas under the MFA induced the
export of low value added, fabric-intensive and low priced (low quality) clothing
products in developing countries such as Lesotho.
It is well established in the literature that under competitive conditions a quota
is equivalent to a specific tariff (Falvey, 1979). The result also holds in cases of

22

For data on quota fill rates see the US Office for Textiles and Apparel (OTEXA)
(http://otexa.ita.doc.gov/). Brambilla et al. (2010) provide a review of the fill rates for various countries
since the 1980s.

23

24
imperfect competition (Feenstra 1988, 2004).23 While the quota restricts the total
volume of sales, its effect differs across products produced by the firm. Firms adjust
exports of different products to ensure that they earn the same quota premium from
each good exported (Feenstra, 2004). The effect is that exports of low priced (low
quality) products are the most adversely affected.
We find similar effects in our model. Assume apparel quotas are imposed on
imports from China. The specific tariff effect of the quota (denoted as s) alters the
allocation condition (equation 3) that determines the range of apparel products
exported by Lesotho. The condition becomes:

a( z ) w   ( z ) PF ( z )  a  ( z )w   ( z ) PF  ( z )  s .

(10)

Assuming, for exposition purposes, that both Lesotho and China have access to fabric
at world prices ( PF  ( z )  PF ( z ) ), this equation can be re-specified in terms of
Lesotho’s Relative Unit Labor Cost (RULC):24
wa ( z )
s
 1 
 
w a ( z)
a ( z ) w

(11)

Further, if we let *(z) denote the share of fabric in foreign costs
(  ( z )   ( z ) PF  ( z ) / c ( z ) ) and therefore 1-*(z) as unit labor costs as a share of
total costs (  w a  ( z ) c  ( z ) ), we can simplify the allocation condition even more to:
wa ( z )
s
.
 1
 

w a ( z)
(1   ( z ))c  ( z )

(12)

23

See Krishna (1987) for an imperfect competition model where firms jointly select the quantity and
the quality of the products they export in response to a quota. Feenstra (1988, 2004) also show how
quotas lead to an upgrading of the characteristics within each variety produced.
24
In Lesotho, for example, import duties were rebated on imported fabric used in the production of
apparel exports. We ignore the effects that transport cost differentials have on the relationship. Specific
transport costs on output can be modelled in an equivalent way to the effect of specific tariffs and
quotas. For example, relatively high specific transport costs on output for the competitor country have
the equivalent effect on quality as our example for quotas. See Falvey (1979) and Hummels and Skiba
(2004).

24

25
The effect of the quota is a modified allocation condition in which the right hand side
of the DFS equation (4) is raised by the term s (1   )c  . This term is positive and
rises if, ceterus paribus, s increases, costs fall or the share of fabric in production
rises.
We can consider four implications of quotas under the MFA for apparel
exports from Lesotho using this relationship.25 Firstly, the effect of a quota is
equivalent to a specific subsidy on exports from non-quota constrained countries such
as Lesotho. This enables Lesotho’s producers to export apparel products even if they
do not have a comparative advantage in the production of that product, i.e. where their
RULC exceeds 1 by up to s (1   ( z ))c  ( z ) . The implicit subsidy conferred by the
tariff compensates the relatively inefficient apparel producers for their high relative
unit labor costs and helps explain why countries such as Lesotho exported apparel
under the MFA despite productivity levels that were lower and wage levels that were
comparable to those of Asian levels (Lall 2005).
The second consideration is that the implicit subsidy of the quota for Lesotho
(and other non-quota constrained countries) is a greater percent of the overall value
the lower is the price ( c (z ) ) of the product exported by China. This is the standard
result for quotas obtained by Falvey (1979). Quota constrained countries upgrade
quality of exports by shifting to higher priced varieties. What we show here is that the

25

There are two additional considerations. Missing from this story is the fact that within-quota tariffs
were also imposed under the MFA. As shown by Hummels and Skiba (2004), ad valorem tariffs lower
the relative demand for high-quality goods in the presence of per unit transport costs (or equivalently
quotas). As tariffs rise, the shadow price of the quota constraint falls and dampens the effect (but not
direction) of the quota on relative demand for high-quality products. The final consideration is that
import quotas administered by the Office of Textiles and Apparels (OTEXA) are specified in terms of
yardage of fabric equivalents and not quantity of goods. In this case, the quota is equivalent to a
specific tariff on the price per square meter of fabric equivalence, i.e. the allocation condition is:

c( z ) /   c  ( z ) /   s . The implication for Lesotho is that relative demand and relative prices shift
in favor of exporting low priced clothing varieties that are intensive in the use of cheap fabric.

25

26
gap in the market is filled by non-quota constrained countries that may not have been
able to compete prior to the quotas, i.e. where their RULC exceeded 1.
The third consideration is novel to our model. Holding costs constant, the
effective subsidy, i.e. the subsidy as a proportion of value added, rises exponentially
with the share of costs (of the efficient producer) attributed to fabric. Alternatively,
the effective subsidy is greater the smaller the value added of the product.
Take for example, two apparel products each priced at US$ 10, but differing in terms
of fabric-intensity: Fabric costs make up 90 percent of the cost of product A and 1
percent of the cost of product B. Assume further that the specific tariff equivalent of a
quota on imports from China is 1 dollar. The resulting effective export subsidy for
Lesotho is just over 1 percent for product B, but is 100 percent for product A. In fact,
the effective subsidy is 100 percent for any product in which China’s labor costs are
equal to 1 dollar. The implication is that firms in Lesotho will be able to compete in
exporting product B, even if their unit labor costs are 100 percent higher than those of
the competitive quota constrained supplier (China). These considerations explain how
the quotas enable an expansion in the range of products exported by Lesotho and
other non-quota constrained countries, i.e. growth along the extensive margin.
The impact of the quota is to shift the Chinese out of low prices products. This
implies that relative price increase of Chinese exports will be strongest in low priced
products. This leads to the fourth effect: Lesotho will also experience growth in the
volume and value of existing exports (intensive margin) as the relative price of their
existing exports falls relative to the exports from quota constrained countries (their
export price falls relative to the average price index, see equation 6).. Therefore in
Lesotho we expect the strongest intensive margin growth in exports in existing low

26

27
priced products. In contrast, quota constrained countries experience a decline in the
range, value and volume of their exports, particularly in low priced products.
In conclusion, we expect four effects of the MFA on Lesotho and other AGOA
countries (and other non-quota constrained countries): a rise in the export of both (i)
existing and (ii) new apparel products combined with specialization in (iii) cheap low
quality products with (iv) very little value addition. The removal the MFA would have
had the opposite effects. Previously quota constrained countries would shift
production towards cheaper products with lower labor value added. Unconstrained
countries would thus be especially adversely affected in these shifts, both in terms of
the range and value of their apparel exports.
Tariff preferences and product choice
We now turn to an analysis of the effect of the tariff preferences granted under
AGOA. Generally, theory suggests that in a competitive market ad valorem tariffs
have no impact on value-addition as they preserve relative prices faced by the firm
and the consumer (Falvey, 1979; Feenstra 1988).26 This changes once we introduce
tariffs and tariff preferences in a model where products contain internationally traded
intermediate inputs such as fabric.
Once tariffs are introduced, what determines whether Lesotho exports product
y(z) is whether the tariff inclusive price of its good in the US market is less than or
equal to its foreign competitor, China: 27
c( z )1  t   c  ( z )1  t  

(13)

26

Krishna (1987) presents an imperfect competition model where the firm’s choice of output and
quality is influenced by ad valorem tariff rates.
27
To simplify the model we have assumed that the ad valorem tariff does not vary by variety. Apparel
tariffs actually vary enormously according to the type of fabric used and in some cases according to the
quantity and amount of fabric used in production. Extending the model to allow for variation in tariffs
across z does not alter the main insights of the theory.

27

28
Letting (z) denote the Lesotho fabric price relative to the Chinese fabric price,
PF ( z) PF  ( z) , we can express the allocation condition (13) in terms of relative unit
labor costs (RULC) and fabric cost shares () as follows:






wa ( z )
1 t
 ( z )  (1  t  )


  ( z )

 
w a ( z ) 1  t  1   ( z )  (1  t )


(14)

The cut off point defining what products will be exported by Lesotho is now a
function of relative tariff rates faced, fabric-intensity and relative fabric prices. To
explore the implications for product choice under AGOA, three different scenarios are
compared:
(a) Case 1: Pre-AGOA with MFN tariffs and competitive input supplies,
(c) Case 2: AGOA tariff preferences for LDC Special Rule beneficiaries,
(d) Case 3: AGOA tariff preferences for non-LDC Special Rule beneficiaries
Case 1: No preferences, MFN tariff rates (t = t*) and access to competitively priced
inputs
In the first scenario the US imposes common MFN tariffs on apparel imports from
Lesotho and China. For MFN trade there are no rules of origin requirements or
restrictions on access to internationally priced fabric, so barring domestic restrictions
on use of inputs, all countries have access to internationally priced fabric, i.e.
((z)=1).
In this scenario, the product allocation condition 14 reduces to the standard
RULC condition of the DFS model (equation 4). Tariffs affect both countries
equivalently and the unit fabric cost components cancel each other out. The
geographic location of production is determined entirely by relative unit labor costs,
with specialization according to comparative advantage. Fabric intensity has no

28

29
bearing on what a country exports. Tariff protection in this scenario introduces no
fabric-use bias.
Case 2: Preferential access granted to home (t=0, t*>0) and no rules of origin
The second scenario is set up to reflect the AGOA preferences granted to Lesotho and
other LDBCs. These countries are granted a tariff preference into the U.S. (t = 0,
t*>0), but under the LDC Special Rule are also able to use internationally competitive
third-country fabric in the production of apparel exports. Given our assumption of notransport costs, fabric prices are therefore equal in Lesotho and China (((z)=1).
The allocation condition in this case simplifies to:

wa( z )
 ( z ) 


1

t

t .
w a  ( z )
1   ( z )





 

(15)

What can be observed from the relationship is that the effective preference is a
function of both the tariff preference as well as the ratio of fabric cost shares to value
added costs shares (*/(1-*)). We explore the implications of this in more detail.
Take a scenario where apparel products contain no fabric, i.e. * = 0, and the
term on the far right of equation 15 falls away. The tariff preference has a uniform
impact on all apparel products and allows Lesotho to export products in which it is up
to 1+t* times less efficient at producing than China. For example, a tariff preference
of 20 percent enables the home country to export new apparel products where its unit
labor costs are up to 20 percent greater than their foreign competitors.
In addition to the export of new products (i.e. growth along extensive margin),
the tariff reductions under AGOA also raise U.S. consumption of existing products
exported by Lesotho (i.e. the intensive margin) through reductions in the relative U.S.
consumer price of these goods. The effect on the volume and value of exports could

29

30
be very large if products are highly substitutable. We would therefore expect to see
growth in exports along both the intensive and extensive margin.
Once fabric is introduced, the AGOA preferences alter relative incentives to
export products of different unit fabric contents. In particular, the tariff preference is
greater for products with higher fabric cost shares. This is revealed by the second term
on the right hand side which is positive and increasing (exponentially) in *. As the
fabric cost share approaches 1, the effective preference granted to Lesotho converges
on positive infinity.
Diagrammatically, this relationship is represented in Figure 5. Assume for
simplicity sake, that Lesotho’s relative unit labor costs are fixed at aw a  w 1 on the
vertical axes for all apparel products. We have also assumed that Lesotho’s RULC
exceeds 1. On the horizontal access, apparel products are ordered according to rising
fabric cost shares (or diminishing labor cost shares). In a competitive environment
where Lesotho and China face the same U.S. tariffs (see Case 1 in Figure 5), Lesotho
would not export any products as its RULC exceeds 1. With tariff preferences plus
waivers from the rules of origin granted to Lesotho, the relevant comparison is
between RULC and the solid line (equals the right hand side of equation 15) identified
as Case 2 in the Figure. Lesotho is still unable to export products with low fabric cost
shares. However, because the effective tariff preference rises with fabric cost share,
Lesotho is able to export all products in which the fabric cost share exceeds 1,
despite having no comparative advantage in these products.
In sum, the tariff preference affects Lesotho’s exports in three ways. Firstly, it
raises the relative unit labor cost threshold by (1  t  ) , which is equivalent to what we
would expect in a tariff adjusted DFS model. Secondly, the threshold defining the cutoff-point is higher for fabric intensive products. This arises because tariffs not only
30

31
tax foreign unit labor costs, but also tax the fabric content of the product. The total
tariff equivalent preference per unit labor cost is therefore an increasing function of
the unit fabric cost share.28 Finally, by reducing the relative price of exports, the
preferences increase the volume and value of existing imports from beneficiary
countries.
The implication for LDC AGOA beneficiaries is that they enter and specialize
in the export of the most-fabric intensive apparel products. The AGOA preferences to
LDC beneficiaries therefore compound the existing incentives to produce low value
added or fabric-intensive products brought about by the MFA. There is one important
difference. The AGOA incentives are unrelated to the price of the product, only fabric
intensity whereas the implicit subsidy for non-quota constrained countries under the
MFA is greatest for low priced fabric-intensive products.

[FIGURE 5]

Case 3: Preferential access granted to home (t=0, t*>0), but rules of origin
constraints on fabric inputs
This scenario reflects the situation for non-LDC Special Rule AGOA countries such
as South Africa (and Mauritius for most of the post 2001 period). Apparel exports
from these countries have preferential access into the US market, but production is
subject to a two-stage transformation requirement. Apparel producers from these
countries are therefore required to use domestic (or U.S.) produced fabric in the
28

In a small-country price taking model, the tariff effects are greatest for fabric intensive products even
amongst those goods where it has a comparative advantage (the intensive margin). The tariff
preferences therefore create incentives for firms to expand production most in the low value-added
fabric-intensive varieties of products they are already exporting. In addition, the preferences would
encourage entry of the least efficient firms into the most fabric-intensive apparel products.

31

32
production of exports to the U.S. under AGOA preferences. If these countries produce
fabric at internationally competitive prices, (z)=1, then the outcome will be
equivalent to Case 2. However, if local fabric is more expensive than foreign fabric,

(z)>1, the allocation condition is given by:
wa ( z )
 ( z )


1

t

1  t    ( z)
wa ( z )
1   ( z )









(16)

The relationship differs from equation 15 in that while the home country is granted a
tariff preference, it has to utilize more expensive domestic fabric.
The impact on clothing production relative to the pre-AGOA period is
ambiguous and depends on the fabric price disadvantage relative to the tariff
preference. Take for instance a scenario (Case 3a) where the home relative fabric
price disadvantage is less than the tariff preference such that 1  t    ( z )  0 . In this
scenario, the effective preference rises with fabric-intensity, but less so than in Case 2.
In Figure 5 this is depicted by the dashed line identified as Case 3a. The home country
will export all products in which the fabric cost share exceeds 2.
An alternative scenario (3b) is one where the fabric price disadvantage is
greater than the tariff preference such that 1  t    ( z )   0 . Here the effective
preference declines as the fabric-intensity of the product rises. At some level of
fabric-intensity, the fabric price disadvantage will dominate the tariff preference
effect and reduce the right hand side of equation (15) to below 1. At this point, there
is a disadvantage associated with exporting under the preferential access scheme as
opposed to exporting under MFN rates (Case 1). Firms that are competitive in these
products, i.e. RULC < 1, will then export under MFN rates. In Figure 5, Case 3b
depicts the declining effective preference (Case 3b), although in this example, the

32

33
non-LDC AGOA beneficiaries will not export at all as the allocation condition 15 is
not met for any product.
Bar the case of competitive domestic fabric producers, our model predicts that
LDC AGOA beneficiaries such as Lesotho will experience higher growth in export
volumes (along both the extensive and intensive margin) to the U.S. than other
AGOA beneficiaries. The effect will be particularly pronounced in fabric-intensive
apparel products.
Other effects
Other considerations relate to the development of a comparative advantage in the
nascent industry. Our model raises a number concerns in relation to this. Firstly, the
incentives steer firms to producing products with the lowest value addition
conditional on price, rather than up the value-chain. If these products are
characterized by low positive growth externalities, then the preference may trap firms
into a lower growth path than alternative preferences that incentive greater value
addition.
Secondly, our model does not deal with the opportunity cost of resources used
in the production of apparel. If labor supply is not infinite, then the growth in the
apparel industry will raise wages, which may actually drive out export firms in other
sectors where the home country has a comparative advantage. This also holds for
other scarce resources such as infrastructure, land and water.
Thirdly, the specialization by firms in fabric-intensive products makes these
exporters highly vulnerable to international price volatility (either through exchange
rates or international prices), preference erosion through lower MFN tariff rates and
the ending of the waiver of the rules of origin. Changes in these variables result in an
amplified impact on the effective subsidy provided by the AGOA preferences and the
33

34
MFA quotas. Preference erosion could therefore provide an additional blow that
would be seriously underestimated if models fail to capture the contribution of the
rule of origin preference.
Finally, the preferences restrict backward linkages by discouraging the
addition of value added services from other sectors and inducing exporters to use
expensive fabric that is less likely to be produced in poor countries.

Empirical application: Testing Methods and Data
Our background review identified three distinct trade regimes facing AGOA
recipients from the mid-1990s: (a) Quotas under the MFA, (b) AGOA preferences
including the third country fabric provision, and (c) the expiration of the MFA.
Theory suggests that each of these trade regimes had different impacts on the
incentives facing AGOA and non-AGOA countries
In what follows we describe the testing approach we use and then apply this to
highly disaggregated U.S. import data. Our specific focus is on changes in the
characteristics (value-addition, and fabric intensity) of AGOA apparel exports
associated with the MFA and AGOA preferences. We ignore the effects on the value
and range of imports as this is already covered by existing empirical research.29 The
empirical method we use is difference-in-difference estimation applied to price
equations. In essence, we identify changes in the fabric-intensity of U.S. apparel

29

We have estimated triple difference-in-difference equations similar to those of Frazer and van
Biesebroeck (2010) and do find a surge in apparel imports from lesser-developed beneficiaries relative
to other AGOA recipients (and the rest of the world) in response to the third-country fabric provision.
The average growth in imports from 2001 through 2004 associated with the fabric-provision is
estimated to be up to 282 percent, with stronger effects in products facing high preference margins. We
also find that that the expiration of the MFA adversely affected exports from AGOA recipients, but the
effect was mitigated for the least developed AGOA countries by the third-party fabric preferences
provided under AGOA.

34

35
imports from AGOA recipients by analyzing changes in the relationship between
apparel import prices and fabric input prices.
We find support for our theoretical predictions. Under the MFA, AGOA
recipients are found to be specialized in fabric-intensive clothing products with low
value addition relative to quota-constrained (and other) countries. Our estimates
suggest, however, that the implementation of AGOA led to no further increases in the
overall

fabric

intensity

of

these

exports.

Lesser-developed

beneficiaries

predominantly expanded the output of the products they were already exporting as a
result of their MFA preferences, i.e. growth was primarily along the intensive margin.
However, support for our hypothesis of rising fabric-content in response to the
AGOA preferences is found after the expiration of the MFA. China and other
previously quota-constrained countries raised the fabric content of their exports after
2005 relative to other emerging economies, as predicted by our theory. More
importantly for this study is that we also find a rise in the fabric-content of lesserdeveloped AGOA apparel exports relative to the emerging country control group.
AGOA preferences therefore helped insulate recipients in those fabric intensive
products that China and other quota constrained countries increasingly entered into
after 2005.
Empirical specification of the price equation
An important limitation of existing empirical studies on the effect of AGOA on
import values (Collier & Venables 2007; Portugal-Perez 2008; Frazer and Van
Biesebroeck 2010) is that import value data, even at the HS 10-digit level, is too
aggregated to fully capture changes in product characteristics. By only looking at the
value or range of HS10-digit products exported by each country, existing studies may
miss important changes occurring within each product line.

35

36
Take for example, Figure 6 that plots U.S. import unit values on exporter per
capita GDP (both in logarithmic form) for Women’s and girls’ cotton pullovers
(Lesotho’s top apparel export) in 2004. The price of imports of this highly
disaggregated HS10-digit product ranges from under 10 dollars to over 1000 dollars
per square meter equivalent with higher income economies producing the more
expensive (higher quality) varieties (as in Hummels and Klenow (2002) and Schott
(2004)). The lesser-developed AGOA recipients predominantly situate at the lowprice, low-income per capita end of the spectrum.30

[FIGURE 6]

Our particular focus is on product prices. More specifically, we use differencein-difference estimation to exploit the distinct breaks arising from the implementation
of AGOA and the ending of the MFA and identify whether prices changes and
changes in the fabric-intensity of apparel products are consistent with those predicted
by our theory.
Following Feenstra (2004), the U.S domestic price of an imported good i from
country c is specified as a function of marginal costs (c*), the exchange rate (e),
import tariffs (tar), aggregate domestic expenditure (I) and the price of substitute
goods (q) as follows:

ln pict    1 ln cict
  2 ln ect   3 ln qict

  4 ln(1  tarict )   5 I t   t

.

(17)

30

There are exceptions. Apparel unit values of China, India and Indonesia, who were amongst the top 4
quota restricted countries under the MFA (Brambilla et al. (2010), are higher than predicted. This is
consistent theoretical predictions of quality upgrading in response to quota restrictions.

36

37
This is an unrestricted version of a price equation that imposes symmetric passthrough of the exchange rate and foreign costs (where 1 =2), symmetric passthrough of the tariff and exchange rate (where 2 = 4) and homogeneity of degree 1
in its arguments (1 (=2=4) +3+5 =1).
We are particularly interested in isolating changes in the fabric content of U.S.
apparel imports using this equation. This requires a more precise specification of the
influence of fabric costs on unit costs c*. To simplify the analysis, we impose a unit
cost function derived from a constant return to scale Cobb-Douglas production
function:

1
cict
 At pf it pvaict

(18)

pf is the price of the fabric used in the production of good i, pva is the value added
price (made up labor and capital costs) and At measures total factor productivity. This
specification imposes the restriction that the proportion of expenditure spent by the
firm on fabric is constant and is given by . Substituting (18) into (17) gives the
following equation:
ln pit    1 ln pf it   2 ln pvait   2 ln et   3 ln qit

(19)

  4 ln(1  tarit )   5 I t   t

where  1  1 and  2  1 (1   ) . Given the assumptions imposed, the fabric
content

of

the

clothing

product

can

be

calculated

as

 1 /( 1   2 )  1 /( 1  1 (1   ))   . Fabric-intensive products would therefore
be characterized by large coefficients on the fabric price ( 1 ) relative to the
coefficient on the value added price (  2 ).

37

38
There are two changes in response to the MFA and AGOA that we wish to
identify: (i) changes in the price level and (ii) changes in the fabric-intensity of U.S.
apparel imports.
To identify changes in the level of import prices from a region in response to a
shock, say AGOA recipients after 2001, the above equation is modified to include an
interaction between an AGOA dummy variable (DAg) and a dummy variable for the
post-AGOA period (D01). The basic price equation in this example is then specified
as:

ln pict  1 D01 DAg c
  1 ln pf it   2 ln pvaict
  2 ln ect   3 ln qict   4 ln(1  tarict )

.

(20)

 cntry / prod ct  t   ict
where 1 measures the marginal effect of the AGOA preferences (D01) on unit values
of U.S. imports from AGOA countries (DAgc) relative to all other countries in the
sample (the control group). Country by product (cntry/prod) fixed effects are
included, so the regression uses the within-country by product variation of prices and
the other variables over time to estimate the coefficients.31 Year fixed effects t are
also included to account for common shocks across all product varieties.
To identify changes in the fabric-intensity associated with the various trade
regimes, we focus on changes in the coefficients on the fabric and value added prices.
For example, we would expect a shift by AGOA recipients to more fabric intensive
varieties within each 10-digit product line to be revealed by a rise in the coefficient on
fabric prices and a decline in the coefficient on value added prices.

31

The standard most restrictive difference specification includes a dummy variable for AGOA
countries (DAgc), but in equation 22 these have been replaced with country by product fixed effects
(cntry/prod) to allow for country and product level heterogeneity in the base-level of import prices.

38

39
We use difference-in-difference estimation to identify changes in the relative
fabric-content of apparel imports from AGOA beneficiaries. The specification in the
case of AGOA preferences is as follows:
r1 : ln pict  1 D01 DAgc
r2 :

 (1   2 D01)  DAgc  ln pf it

r3 :

 ( 2   3 D01)  DAgc  ln pvaict

r4 :

 (1   4 D01)  ln pf it

r5 :

 ( 2   5 D01)  ln pvaict

r6 :

  2 ln ect   3 ln qict   4 ln(1  tarict )

r7 :

 cntry / prodic  t   ict

.

(21)

The first row tells us the effect of AGOA on U.S. import unit values of apparel
products imported from AGOA recipients. Rows 2 and 3, however, are of most
interest to us. The coefficients on the triple interaction terms (2 and 3) measure the
marginal impact of AGOA preferences on the fabric-intensity of U.S. imports from
AGOA recipients (first difference) relative to changes in the fabric-intensity of U.S.
imports from the control group (second difference). The latter effect is captured by
the coefficients 4 and 5 in rows 4 and 5.
For example, support for our hypothesis that AGOA preferences raise the
fabric-intensity of imports from recipient countries, would be revealed by a positive
coefficient on the AGOA country by post-2001 interaction with the fabric price (2) in
row 2 and a negative coefficient on the AGOA country by post-2001 interaction with
the value added price (2) in row 3. Note that these coefficients reflect the post 2001
impact on fabric-intensity in AGOA countries relative to the post-2001 impact on

39

40
fabric-intensity in the control group which is captured by the coefficients 4 in row 4
and 5 in row 5. 32
Equations 20 and 21 summarize the main approaches used in the following
analysis. Further refinements to isolate the marginal effects of the MFA and AGOA
preferences on lesser-developed AGOA beneficiary countries will be explained in the
relevant empirical sections.
Data
The empirical analysis draws on a panel of time-consistent 10-digit HTS
import data for the U.S. from 1996-2008.33 The raw data contains approximately 1202
product lines for Clothing (HS61, 62 and various sub-codes of HS 64 & 65) covering
224 countries.
Unlike the price equations specified above, the dependent variable is the log
import price of clothing exclusive of tariffs, insurance and freight costs. This does not
affect the estimates, except that the pass-through of tariffs to US domestic prices of
imports is calculated as 1-7. Looking at the independent variables, we use the foreign
industry value added deflator (in foreign currency) for pva, the US dollar to foreign
currency exchange rate for e and US Producer Prices (at 6-digit NAICS level) (usppi)
and competitor clothing unit values (at 10-digit level) (Pcompete) for substitute
products q. Applied tariff rates are defined at the 4-digit HS level.34 In addition to

32
We could also include product by year fixed effects and country by year fixed effects. In this case,
only variables defined over product, country and time will be retained.
33
The HTS classification changed frequently throughout the period as new product lines were
introduced and old product lines were aggregated. We use the Pierce and Schott (2009) concordance
programme to construct a time-consistent classification for the full period.
34
We use the average tariff at the HS 4-digit level to avoid erroneous correlations arising from the
construction of the variables (tariff rate = duty/import value and price = import value/import quantity).
Using the average may also reduce biases associated with the potential endogeneity of product level
tariff rates. The trade data are obtained from Peter Schott who constructed the database using US
Customs Service data. US producer prices are obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, fabric
prices are constructed using UNcomtrade data and the exchange rates are obtained from the World

40

41
these variables, real GDP per capita measured in PPP prices is included to capture the
impact on prices of general productivity improvements in the economy and relative
technological advantage in producing higher-quality goods (Hummels and Klenow
2005). 35
For fabric prices, we calculate Tornqvist price indices for silk (HS50), wool
and fine animal hair (HS51), cotton (HS 52) and man-made fiber and staple (HS 54 &
HS55) using unit values derived from world trade data obtained from UNComtrade.36
The calculated fabric indices are presented in Figure 7.37 Of interest, is the relatively
close association between the average U.S. import unit value of wearing apparel (HS
61 and HS 62) and fabric prices, particularly man-made fabrics.

[FIGURE 7]

The relevant fabric price (silk, cotton, man-made, wool, or weighted average
of these) is allocated to each 10-digit HTS clothing product based on the dominant
fabric used in producing the good.38 Unfortunately, we are unable to construct

Bank World Development Indicator database. Country specific tariff rates at the 4-digit HS level are
constructed as the sum of duties collected over value of imports. Competitor clothing prices are
calculated as the geometric average price of all other countries (using import values as weights).
35
Although the industry value added price is the net effect of productivity and nominal factor prices,
the real GDP per capita also embodies productivity improvements in the services sector.
36
The following HS codes for synthetic fibres are also included in man-made products: 550110,
550120, 550130, 550190, 550200, 550310, 550320, 550330, 550340, 550390, 550410, 550490,
550610, 550620, 550630, 550690. The average of the fabric prices calculated using world exports and
world imports are used.
37
The fabric prices correspond closely with the dominant agricultural commodity used to produce the
fabric. For example, there is a close fit between cotton-based fabric and raw cotton prices, and woolbased fabric and wool prices.
38
The allocation was done manually on the basis of the product description.

41

42
weighted average fabric price indices for apparel products produced using different
combinations of fabric types.39
We now separately apply the various equations to the AGOA and MFA trade
regimes.
African Growth and Opportunity Act

Our expectation is that AGOA preferences stimulated US imports from beneficiary
countries, with relatively high growth in imports of fabric-intensive and low valueadded products. The effects are predicted to be particularly pronounced in LDC
recipients eligible to use third country fabric.
Table 5 presents regression results for various specifications of the price
equation. The first column presents benchmark estimates of the price relationship over
the period 1996-2004 and is used to evaluate the consistency of the price equation
with our theoretical priors. Overall, the price model produces results that are
consistent with theory and other empirical evidence (See Feenstra 1989.
The dollar price of US clothing imports rise with increases in foreign and US
competitor’s prices. Import unit values rise with foreign GDP per capita reflecting a
positive association between income and quality of exports as explained by Hummels
and Klenow (2005). Applied tariffs reduce the fob price of apparel products with a
coefficient of -0.60, which is very close to the effect of an equivalent depreciation of
the dollar.40 Foreigners therefore absorb 60 percent of tariff increases or depreciation
either through lower mark-ups (in case of imperfect competition) and/or reduced
marginal costs (from upward sloping supply curve). Further, rising foreign production
39

See Goldberg and Knetter (1997) on how aggregate production cost indices can bias the exchangerate pass-through downwards. The value added deflator is also more aggregated than is desired.
40
The estimated exchange rate pass-through coefficient of 0.6 falls between Feenstra’s (1989)
estimates for Trucks (0.63) and Cars (0.71) and more general estimates based on aggregate import data
(Marazzi et al. 2005, Gopinath and Rigobon 2008).

42

43
costs result in higher U.S. import prices. US import prices are equally affected by
increases in foreign fabric costs and value added costs, implying a fabric share
coefficient of approximately 50 percent.41

[TABLE 5]

Various diagnostic tests reveal that the aggregate model fails the homogeneity
test and the hypothesis of symmetric pass-through of the tariff and exchange rate.
However, far fewer instances of rejection are found in the disaggregated HS4–digit
level estimates. The disaggregated results and hypotheses tests are presented in Table
A1 in the appendix. We are therefore reasonably satisfied with our basic price
equation and proceed with our objective of identifying differences in the fabriccontent of AGOA apparel exports.
The second column of results extends the base regression by including
interactions between an AGOA dummy (DAg) and fabric costs and value added prices
(see rows 9 & 10). The objective of this estimate is to identify the average fabricintensity of U.S. imports from AGOA beneficiaries throughout the 1996 to 2004
period.
The results indicate that AGOA countries produce relatively fabric-intensive
clothing products with low value addition. The coefficient on the fabric price (DAg x
ln(pf)) is positive and significant (0.323), while the coefficient on value added prices
(DAg x ln(pva)) is significant and negative (-0.389). Therefore, U.S unit values of
apparel imports from AGOA beneficiaries are far more sensitive to fluctuations in
fabric prices than apparel imports from the rest of the world. We infer from this result

41

The coefficients on value added and fabric prices are insignificantly different from each other.

43

44
that AGOA beneficiary exports are relatively fabric-intensive. This outcome is
consistent with both the effect of the AGOA preferences and the MFA.
To identify the effect of AGOA preferences on beneficiary exports, we use the
specification in equation 21 where the time period dummy variable in the interactions
refers to the 2001 to 2004 period.42 The relevant results are presented in rows 3 & 4 in
column 3 of Table 5. These are the coefficients on the difference-in-difference terms
that measure the change in fabric-intensity of U.S. imports from AGOA beneficiaries
after 2001 relative to the change in fabric-intensity of imports from the rest of the
world. Our expectations are that AGOA preferences raised the fabric-intensity of
imports from beneficiary countries.
However, contrary to our theoretical predictions, we find no increase in the
fabric-intensity of apparel exports from 2001 to 2004 in response to the AGOA
preferences. The coefficients on the interaction terms (D01 x DAg x ln(pf)) in row 3
and (D01 x DAg x ln(pva)) in row 4 are insignificantly different from zero.
One reason may be that the above estimates are an average for both LDC
AGOA and other AGOA countries. Our theory suggests that the effect of AGOA
preferences on fabric-intensity is particularly pronounced amongst LDC AGOA
countries who are eligible for the third country fabric provision. To isolate the
marginal impact of the third country fabric provision on fabric-content, we include
additional interactions of ln(pva) and ln(pf) on dummy variables for LDC AGOA
countries (Dldc) over the full period and over the 2001-04 period. Estimates of this
relationship are presented in column 4. The coefficients on the LDC interaction terms

42

Not all countries became eligible to export apparel in 2001. D2001 therefore varies by country and
time and equals 1 for all years from the time the country becomes eligible to export apparel products.
The dummy variable is set equal to 1 for the initial year if eligibility occurred within the first 6 months
of the year.

44

45
in rows 2 & 3 are interpreted as the marginal impact of AGOA on fabric intensity in
LDC special rule countries relative to the rest of AGOA beneficiaries.
We still find no increases in the fabric content of apparel exports by lesserdeveloped AGOA countries relative to other AGOA countries or the rest of the world
from 2001 to 2004. None of the marginal effects for LDC Special Rule countries are
significantly different from zero.
Overall, the results suggest that the preferences under AGOA had very little
impact on the within-product fabric content of apparel exports to the US by recipient
countries. AGOA beneficiaries, including lesser-developed Special Rule countries,
were already specialized in fabric intensive products prior to receiving AGOA
preferences. The impact of AGOA was to make production of these products more
attractive and they responded by increasing exports of these products, rather then of
new fabric-intensive products. This is consistent with the decomposition of growth
analysis in Table 3 which showed that the expansion of exports was overwhelmingly
along the intensive margin.

Expiration of MFA

The ending of the MFA presents an additional policy ‘experiment’ to test our theory
as applied to AGOA beneficiaries. As noted, quotas under the MFA were removed on
the 1st January 2005, although some quotas were re-imposed in industrialized
countries in response to the rapid growth in imports from China.43 In this section, we

43

We do not take into account the re-imposition of quotas on selected Chinese apparel products from
late 2005. As shown by Harrigan and Barrow (2010) these contained, but did not reverse the import
response to the end of the MFA.

45

46
exploit this break to indentify whether import values, import unit values and the
fabric-intensity of U.S. apparel imports moved in accordance with our predictions.
Theory predicts that firms in previously quota restricted countries respond to
the ending of quotas by downgrading the quality of their apparel exports. In our
model, this would be revealed by relatively strong growth in imports of low priced
varieties from previously quota restricted countries that include AGOA beneficiaries.
Evidence in support of quality downgrading is found by Brambilla et al. (2010) and
Harrigan and Barrows (2009).
A second hypothesis derived from our theory, is that, conditional on price,
quota restricted countries responded to the ending of the MFA by increasing exports
of fabric-intensive apparel products. In this section, we test these two hypotheses
focusing on the response by quota restricted countries relative to AGOA beneficiaries.
Preliminary support for the effect of the MFA on product quality is provided
in Figure 8 that presents a measure of within-product price differences for selected
countries relative to Lesotho. These are calculated by aggregating up the log ratio of
export prices relative to Lesotho using Lesotho export values as weights. Higher
values reflect the export of more expensive apparel varieties than Lesotho within each
product line.
During the MFA period, quota-constrained countries such as China,
Bangladesh and India exported varieties within each HS 10 digit line that were up to
twice as expensive as those from Lesotho. The expiration of the MFA, however, saw
a dramatic decline in the relative price as these countries downgraded the quality of
their apparel exports: see the relative price of Chinese apparel that fell from 1.95
times to 90 percent of those from Lesotho in one year. There was a slight rebound

46

47
from 2006 as new quotas on Chinese apparel exports were imposed, but by 2008
relative prices had still fallen by over 55 percentage points from 2004.

[FIGURE 8]

The composition of imports from quota constrained countries also shifted
towards the low priced products exported by Lesotho. Figure 9 presents import
weighted prices (per square meter equivalent) of apparel imports from each country
calculated using the product-level median prices for the entire sample and period and
time varying import values by country as weights. Reductions in the average price,
reflects across-product shifts in the composition of apparel exports to the U.S.
towards lower priced products.
The shift in composition is most noticeable for China, whose apparel exports
were initially concentrated in relatively expensive 10-digit apparel products, but then
fell in 2002 as quotas imposed under Phase I, II and III of the MFA were eliminated
in response to China’s entry into the WTO. A further shift towards low priced
products occurred in 2005 after the ending of Phase IV of MFA and by 2008 the
import weighted median price of Chinese apparel exports was very similar to those of
Lesotho.

[FIGURE 9]

The trends in these diagrams provide some support for our hypotheses
regarding the effect of quotas on product prices. We now apply the difference-indifference estimation to test for significant changes in the price and fabric-content of
apparel exports by AGOA recipients

47

48
Quotas and price levels
The first objective of this section is to estimate if the expiration of the MFA reduced
average U.S. import unit values from quota-constrained countries who are predicted
to have shifted apparel production towards lower priced products. The equation used
to identify these price effects is the difference-in-difference specification of equation
20, except that we replace DAg with a dummy variable Dquotacntry for quota
constrained countries and D01 with a post-2005 dummy variable (D05). Table 6
presents the results.
In line with theoretical predictions (and the price trends in Figure 8 and Figure
9), quota constrained countries responded to the end of the MFA by reducing the
quality of their apparel exports by shifting towards lower priced varieties and
products. The average unit value of U.S. apparel imports from the top 4 most quota
constrained countries declined by 31.9 log points relative to other countries after 2005
(see row 1 of column 1 of Table 6) (see also Brambilla et al. (2010) and Harrigan and
Barrows (2009)).44 This arises from a combination of across-product shifts of imports
towards lower price products and within-product shifts towards lower priced varieties.
The expiration of the MFA therefore adversely affected the competitiveness of nonquota constrained countries such as Lesotho that produced low priced products in
response to the MFA.

[TABLE 6]

Quotas and fabric-intensity.

44

The decline for the top 30 quota constrained countries is lower at 13.9 percent.

48

49
We now test for changes in the fabric-intensity of apparel imports in response to the
expiration of the MFA. Our theory predicts a rise in the fabric-content of exports by
previously quota constrained countries relative to AGOA beneficiaries and other nonquota constrained exporters.
We commence with the simplest difference-in-difference specification to
identify changes in the fabric-intensity of quota-constrained countries in response to
the end of the MFA. The specification is similar to that of equation 21, except, as
above, a post-2005 dummy variable is used and we also include of various
interactions between Dquotacntry and value added and fabric prices covering the pre
and post MFA period.
We are interested in two effects: (i) the change in fabric-intensity of exports of
the control group (non-quota constrained emerging economies) after January 2005,
and (ii) the change in fabric-intensity of exports of the quota-constrained group
relative to the control group. The first effect is given by the interactions between the
post-MFA dummy (D05) and fabric and value added prices in rows 4 & 5 of Table 6.
The second effect is given by the triple interaction between D05, Dquotacntry and
fabric and value added prices in rows 6 & 7.
The results in rows 4 & 5 in column 2 indicate a decline in the fabric-intensity
of apparel exports to the U.S from emerging economies after 2005. The coefficient on
log fabric prices declines by 10.9 log points, while the coefficient on log value added
prices rises by 9.3 log points. This change is consistent with our theory that predicts
shifts out of fabric-intensive products by non-quota constrained countries in response
to the removal of quotas.

49

50
Our estimates also reveal significant increases in the fabric-intensity of U.S.
apparel imports from the most quota-restricted countries.45 This is revealed by the
significant positive coefficient of 0.217 on the interaction term (D05 x Dquotacntry x
ln(pf)) in rows 6 & 7 of column 3. Apparel exports from Bangladesh, India, China and
Indonesia therefore became more responsive to fabric price fluctuations after 2005
relative to all other emerging economies. We infer from this result that the fabricintensity of apparel exports to the U.S. from these previously quota constrained
countries has risen.
The next two estimates focus on identifying the MFA effect on prices and
fabric-intensity for AGOA beneficiaries relative to other non-quota constrained
emerging economies. We do this by separately including additional triple interactions
for the AGOA group (see rows 8 & 9 column 3) and the LDC AGOA group (see rows
10 & 11 column 4).
The estimates produce interesting results. The data suggest that the expiration
of the MFA led to a rise in the fabric-intensity of AGOA exports relative to other
emerging economies. This is revealed by the rising responsiveness of U.S. import
prices from AGOA recipients to changes in fabric prices relative to the control group.
If we focus on Lesser-developed beneficiary countries (column 4), we get a similar
result.
Clearly AGOA countries have responded differently to other non-quota
constrained emerging economies. This is precisely what our theory predicts would
happen under AGOA preferences. We found earlier that AGOA resulted in no
changes in fabric-intensity of exports by beneficiary countries. Our explanation was

45
There is no significant difference from the control group for the top 30 most quota-restricted
countries.

50

51
that these countries were already specialized in fabric-intensive low value-added
apparel products as a result of the incentives introduced by the MFA quotas.
With the end of the MFA, China and other quota-constrained countries moved
into the fabric-intensive products they were previously discouraged from exporting
under the quotas. This led to increased competition in fabric-intensive products that
non-quota constrained countries specialized in under the MFA. The response by these
countries was to reduce the fabric-intensity of their apparel exports. AGOA recipients,
however, are an exception.
Why? An explanation based on our theory is that AGOA preferences insulated
the recipients in the most fabric-intensive products as the effective preferences in
these products are the greatest. The effect of AGOA on fabric-intensity is only
revealed in our estimates once MFA is removed as prior to this we had an
identification problem as both AGOA and MFA encouraged specialization in fabricintensive products.
In sum, the MFA induced AGOA countries to specialize in low value added,
high fabric-content apparel products. AGOA preferences and particularly the thirdcountry fabric provision were expected, according to our theory, to compound this
specialization in low value-added, fabric-intensive varieties and products. We do not
find evidence of significant changes in the fabric-content of apparel exports in
response to the AGOA preferences. Rather, the apparel producers in AGOA recipient
countries responded by increasing exports of existing products.
The dependence of these exports on the tariff preferences and quota
restrictions in competing countries made AGOA recipients and other non-constrained
emerging economies very vulnerable to the ending of the MFA. The elimination of
quotas (quotas were re-introduced on Chinese exports in later 2005) induced China

51

52
and other previously quota restricted countries to downgrade product quality and
increase exports of those products and varieties that AGOA countries were
specialized in. However, the effect on fabric-content of AGOA recipient exports was
insulated relative to other countries by the AGOA preferences that grant the greatest
effective preferences in fabric-intensive products. The AGOA preferences helped
mitigate the effects of the expiration of the MFA.
Conclusions

Lesotho and other Lesser-developed beneficiary countries enjoyed rapid growth in
their clothing exports to the US as a result of the third-country fabric provision of
AGOA. Although adversely impacted by the expiration of the MFA and the recession
in the US, the clothing industries of these least developed African countries have
clearly benefited from the provisions. But these economies have not enjoyed the more
dynamic upgrading and spill-over benefits that might have been hoped for. Most of
the export growth has come in the products that these countries were already
producing. Success in the US clothing market has also not translated into success in
other clothing markets or in success in exporting other labor-intensive products. The
LDBCs have generally remained specialized in a small number of garment categories
that are particularly favored by the preferences. These typically embody low-value
added in sewing and are relatively intensive in fabric. Although the AGOA program
has operated for a decade, it is unlikely that most of the industry in these poor SubSaharan could survive without the special rule.
This experience provides important lessons. Trade preferences do have major
advantages. First, they can offer powerful inducements to beneficiary exporters that
are financed through foregone tariff revenues by developed countries rather than
taxpayers in developing countries. Second, by providing a form of infant industry
52

53
protection in export rather than domestic markets, they ensure that products have to
meet the requirements of consumers in advanced economies. And third, since they are
externally imposed, they do not give rise to domestic rent-seeking.
The positive response to AGOAs special rule highlights the importance of
providing exporters with access to inputs at world prices. Requiring exporters to use
expensive inputs can seriously impede their competitiveness. This is clearly seen in
the contrast between Lesotho’s prowess in the United States where it is allowed to use
fabrics that are priced at world prices, with its weak performance in the EU and
SACU where it is not. The positive response to AGOA highlights the restrictive
nature of other rules of origin that have been imposed on least developed country
exports. Allowing LDBCs to use imported fabrics provided powerful effective
subsidies for clothing exports. This served to compensate producers in poor countries
for the lower productivity of domestic workers and other institutional and
infrastructural deficiencies.
The fact that the program has operated smoothly without problems relating to
trade deflection demonstrates the scope for improving the restrictive rules that
continue to limit the benefits to poor countries from programs such as the EBA
program of the European Union. Such improvements would create more realistic
possibilities that the least developed countries could participation in global production
chains. It would be particularly welcome given the problems faced by these countries
as a result of the expiration of the MFA.
In the Doha Round, it is recognized that lower MFN tariffs will result in
preference erosion. But typically studies have suggested that the effects would not be

53

54
large.46 However, if the models that are used to estimate the impact of erosion fail to
take the third-country fabric provision into account they could seriously
underestimated the impact on the effective protection provided to the Lesserdeveloped AGOA recipients.
The experience also shows, however, that trade preferences are not a panacea.
The outcomes associated with the special rule conform to those suggested by theory.
The special rule distorts decisions on value-addition and fabric use in opposite
directions, both of which are undesirable. On the one hand, the incentives are most
powerful in lower quality products that require less value-addition. This may limit the
dynamic benefits that are hoped for from these preferences by discouraging skills
development and other forms of quality upgrading. On the other hand it encourages
the use of more expensive fabrics. This makes it less likely that there will be
backward linkages into domestic textile industries that are still at rudimentary stages
of development.
Preferences are thus an opportunity but not a substitute for more
comprehensive industrial strategies that involve complementary domestic policies to
improve private and governmental capabilities. This does not mean that these
preferences are unimportant, but suggests they are unlikely to be sufficient. In
addition problems arise when most of the entrepreneurs taking advantage of the
preferences are foreign, with many other crucial parts of the value chain being
provided thousands of miles away.
The experience analyzed in this paper is a case study of the links between
trade and growth -- a topic that has been the subject of considerable empirical

46
For estimates of the impact of preference erosion see IMF (2003), Olarreaga and Özden (2005),
Hoekman and Prowse ( 2005) and Grynberg and Silva (2004).

54

55
investigation. This example highlights the obvious, but often ignored consideration,
that both trade and growth are quintessentially endogenous variables rather than
policy instruments and suggests that the reasons for trade are likely to be important in
the impact on growth. Even if on average trade and growth are associated, and even if
on average trade may cause growth, the widely used proposition that trade leads to
growth should not be used as an unconditional forecast. The precise reasons for trade
and the other domestic conditions and policies that are associated with it, are likely to
play key roles in the growth impact. In the case of Lesotho and other AGOA countries
utilizing preferences may lead to more trade but are not a substitute for the more
difficult challenges of developing more comprehensive development strategies. In
sum, the slogan of “trade not aid” can be misleading. Trade preferences may be help
create the conditions for growth, but they are not sufficient

55

56
References

Alchian, Armen A., and William R. Allen (1964). University Economics. Belmont,
Calif.: Wadsworth.
Bennet, Mark (2006). “Lesotho’s Export Textiles & Garment Industry.” In Herbert
Jauch and Rudolf Traub-Merz (Eds.) The Future of the Textile and Clothing
Industry in Sub-Saharan Africa, Bonn: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.
Brambilla, Irene, Amit K. Khandelwal, Peter K. Schott (2010). “China's Experience
under the Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA) and the Agreement on Textiles and
Clothing (ATC).” In Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei (editors) China's
Growing Role in World Trade, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Brenton Paul and Takako Ikezuki (2004). “The Initial and Potential Impact of
Preferential Access to the U.S. Market under the African Growth and Opportunity
act,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3262, April 2004.
Collier, Paul and Anthony J. Venables (2007). “Rethinking Trade Preferences: How
Africa Can Diversify its Exports,” The World Economy, Vol. 30, No. 8, pp. 13261345.
Collier, Paul and Jan Willem Gunning (1999). “Explaining African Economic
Performance,” Journal of Economic Literature, March 1999 37, pp 64 – 111.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Victor Norman (1980). Theory of International Trade.
Cambridge Economic Handbooks, Cambridge University Press.
Dixit, Avinash. K., and Joseph. E. Stiglitz (1977). “Monopolistic Competition and
Optimum Product Diversity,” American Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 3, pp.
297-308.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer and Paul A. Samuelson. (1977). “Comparative
advantage, trade and payments in a Ricardian Model with a continuum of goods,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 65, pp 297-308.
Falvey, Rodney E (1979). “The Composition of Trade within Import-restricted
Product Categories,” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 87, No. 5, Part 1
(Oct., 1979), pp. 1105-1114.
Feenstra, Robert C. (1988). “Quality Change under Trade Restraints in Japanese
Autos,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 103, No. 1 (Feb., 1988), pp. 131146.
Feenstra, Robert C. (2004). Advanced international trade: theory and evidence,
Princeton University Press.
FIAS (2006). “The Competitiveness of Regional and Vertical Integration of Lesotho’s
Garment Industry” IFC and World Bank: Washington DC 2006.
Frazer, Garth and Johannes Van Biesbroeck (2010). “Trade Growth Under the
African Growth and Opportunity Act,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
92, No. 1, pp. 128-144.
Gereffi, G. (1999). “International trade and industrial upgrading in the clothing
commodity chain,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 48, pp. 37–70.
Gibbon, Peter (2003). “The African Growth and Opportunity Act and the Global
Commodity Chain for Clothing,” World Development Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 18091827.

56

57
Goldberg, Pinelopi .K. and Michael M. Knetter (1997). “Goods prices and exchange
rates: what have we learned?” Journal of Economic Literature XXXV, pp. 1243–
1272.
Gopinath, Gita, and Roberto Rigobon (2008). “Sticky Borders,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 123, No. 2, Pages 531-575.
Grynberg, Roman, and Sacha Silva (2004). Preference-Dependent Economies and
Multilateral Liberalization: Impacts and Options. London: Commonwealth
Secretariat.
Harrigan, James and Geoffrey Barrows (2009). “Testing the Theory of Trade Policy:
Evidence from the Abrupt End of the Multifiber Arrangement,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, Vol. 91, No. 2, pp. 282-294.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang and Dani Rodrik (2007). “What you export
matters,” Journal of Economic Growth, Springer, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 1-25.
Hoekman, Bernard, and Susan Prowse (2005). “Policy Response to Preference
Erosion: From Trade as Aid to Aid for Trade”. Paper Presented at the international
symposium “Preference Erosion: Impacts and Policy Responses”, Geneva, June
13-14.
Hummels, David and Alexandre Skiba (2004). “Shipping the Good Apples out? An
Empirical Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture,” The Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 112, No. 6 (Dec., 2004), pp. 1384-1402
Hummels, David and Peter J. Klenow (2005). “The Variety and Quality of a Nation's
Exports,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 95, No. 3 (Jun., 2005), pp. 704723.
Hwang, Jason Jaemin (2007) Patterns of Specialization and Economic Growth, Phd
Thesis, Harvard University.
IMF (2003). “Financing Losses from Preference Erosion, Note on Issues raised by
Developing Countries in the Doha Round.” Communication to the WTO from the
International Monetary Fund, WT/TF/COH/14 February. Prepared by Arvind
Subramanian.
Krishna, Kala (1987). “Tariffs versus quotas with endogenous quality,” Journal of
International Economics, Elsevier, Vol. 23(1-2), pp. 97-112.
Krugman, Paul R. (1979). “Increasing returns, monopolistic competition, and
international trade,” Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, Vol. 9, No. 4,
pp. 469-479.
Lall, Sanjaya (2005). “FDI, AGOA, and Manufactured Exports From a Land-Locked
Least Developed African Economy: Lesotho,” Journal of Development Studies,
August 2005, Vol. 41, No. 6, pp. 998-1022.
Maloney, Christopher (2006). “All Dressed Up with No Place to Go? Lesotho’s
Rollercoaster Experience with Apparel,” Harvard Kennedy School MPA/ID
Second Year Policy Analysis
Marazzi, M., N. Sheets, R. Vigfusson, J. Faust, J. Gagnon, J. Marquez, R. Martin, T.
Reeve, and J. Rogers, “Exchange Rate Pass-Through to U.S. Import Prices: Some
New Evidence,” International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 833, 2005.
Mattoo, Aadditya; Devesh Roy, and Arvind Subramanian (2003). “The Africa Growth
and Opportunity Act and its Rules of Origin: Generosity Undermined?” World
Economy, Vol. 26, No. 6, pp. 829-851.

57

58
Morris, Mike (2006). ‘China’s dominance of global clothing and textiles: is
preferential trade access an answer for sub-Saharan Africa?,” IDS Bulletin, Vol.
37, No. 1, pp. 89–97.
Morris, Mike and Leanne Sedowski (2006). “Report on Government Responses to
New post-MFA realities in Lesotho,” Report for Institute of Global Dialogue.
Ng, Francis, and Alexander Yeats. 1996. “Open economies work better: Did Africa’s
protectionist policies cause its marginalisation in world trade?” World Bank
Policy Research Working paper No. 1636. World Bank, Washington DC.
Nouve, Kofi (2005). “Estimating the Effects of AGOA on African Exports Using a
Dynamic Panel Analysis” World Bank Working Paper July 2005.
Olarreaga, Marcelo and Çaglar Özden (2005).“AGOA and Apparel: Who Captures
the Tariff Rent in the Presence of Preferential Market Access?” World Economy,
Vol. 28, No.1, pp. 63-77.
Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott (2009). “Concording U.S. Harmonized System
Categories over Time,” Center for Economic Studies (CES) Working Paper 09-11.
Portugal-Perez, Albert (2008). “The costs of rules of origin in Apparel: African
preferential exports to the United States and the European Union,” UNCTAD
Policy Issues in International Trade and commodities Study Series No. 39,
UNCTAD.
Rolfe, Robert J. and Douglas P. Woodward (2005). “African Apparel Exports, AGOA
and the Trade Preference Illusion,” Global Economy Journal, Berkley Electronic
Press, Vol. 5, Issue 3.
Romalis, John (2007). “Market Access, Openness and Growth” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 13048.
Salm, Andrew, William J. Grant , Thuso J. Green, John R. Haycock and John
Raimondo (2002). “Lesotho Garment Industry Subsector Study” Report for the
Government of Lesotho,” study funded by the Department for International
Development.
Sandrey Ron, David Maleleka Adelaide Matlanyane, and Dirk Ernst van Seventer
(2005). “Lesotho: Potential Export Diversification Study”, (Mimeo)
Schott, Peter K. (2004). “Across-product Versus Within-product Specialization in
International Trade,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 2, pp.
646–677.
Seidman, Gay W. (2009). “Labouring under an Illusion? Lesotho’s ‘sweat-free’
label,” Third World Quarterly, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp. 581 – 598.
Seyoum, Belay (2007). “Export Performance of developing countries under the Africa
Growth and Opportunity Act,” Journal of Economic Studies, Emerald Group
Publishing, Vol. 34, No. 6, pp. 515 – 533.
Wang, Zhen Kun, and Alan Winters (1998). “Africa’s Role in Multilateral Trade
Negotiations: Past and Future,” Journal of African Economies Vol. 7, pp. 1-33.
Wood, Adrian. and Jörg Mayer (2001). “Africa’s Export Structure in a Comparative
Perspective,” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 369-394.

58

59
TABLES
Table 1: Summary of Apparel Rules of Origin under AGOA
Description of the rules of origin requirements
1. Apparel made from U.S. yarns or fabric
2. Apparel assembled from regional fabric from U.S. or
African yarn
3. Apparel assembled in a Lesser Developed Country
using foreign fabric or yarn

Conditions of Access
Unrestricted
Subject to tariff rate quota cap (currently
6.43675 percent to 2015)
Unrestricted for four years, but extended to
2012 (cap of 3.5 percent of US imports)

4. Certain cashmere and merino wool sweaters;
5. Apparel made of yarns and fabrics not produced in
commercial quantities in the US
6. Eligible handloomed, handmade, or folklore articles
and ethnic printed fabrics; and

Unrestricted for selected products
Unrestricted
Unrestricted for selected products from Dec
2006 under AGOA IV

Note: Unrestricted implies duty-free and quota-free treatment .

Table 2: Products traded (out of approx 1,500 possible products), sorted by 2004

non-apparel eligible

Apparel eligible, LDC special rule

Eligibility
Apparel
eligible

Possible
products

Country
Mauritius
South Africa
Benin
Botswana
Burkina
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Chad
Ethiopia
Ghana
Kenya
Lesotho
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Swaziland
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Angola
Burundi
Comoros
Congo (Brazzaville)
Congo (Kinshasa)
Djibouti
Gabon
Gambia
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Sao
Tome
and
Principe
Seychelles
Togo
All AGOA countries

1996
165
136
2
14
8
10
2
0
9
38
55
41
38
2
10
3
0
4
61
0
31
2
21
4
0
1
0
1
1
0
3
0
1
6
5
0
2

2000
139
267
2
24
9
7
4
0
4
52
45
60
175
22
10
0
1
4
47
0
20
28
47
6
0
1
0
1
0
0
4
0
1
11
12
0
3

2004
135
318
4
57
9
14
14
1
41
63
155
118
236
45
12
7
40
7
39
2
10
45
139
24
9
4
0
0
1
3
1
0
3
7
13
0
2

2008
139
177
0
18
4
18
5
0
79
48
117
84
259
25
11
0
2
5
33
5
16
54
86
16
4
4
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
9
12
3
3

1
0
13
323

1
2
4
439

0
3
3
537

0
6
4
465

1,548

1,533

1,525

1,515

Notes: We use the Pierce and Schott (2009) concordance programme to construct a HS 10-digit timeconsistent classification for the full period.

59

60

Table 3: Decomposition of growth in US apparel imports: Extensive and
Intensive growth

non-apparel eligible

Apparel eligible, LDC special rule

Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Chad
Ethiopia
Ghana
Kenya
Lesotho
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Swaziland
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Apparel Mauritius
eligible South Africa
Burundi
Comoros
Congo (DROC)
Congo (ROC)
Gabon
Gambia
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Sao Tome & Principe
Seychelles
Togo
All AGOA
LDC special rule eligible
Other apparel eligible
Other AGOA

Contributi
Contributio on
n Intensive Extensive
growth
growth
2000-04
0.00
1.00
0.24
0.76
-0.02
1.02
0.00
1.00
0.33
0.67
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.02
0.98
0.68
0.32
0.92
0.08
0.78
0.22
0.51
0.49
1.19
-0.19
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
-0.82
1.82
1.90
-0.90
0.00
1.00
0.73
0.27
0.40
0.60
0.57
0.43
0.24
0.76
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.67
0.33
-17.67
18.67
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
-0.32
1.32
-0.02
1.02

Average
annual
Growth
(US$)
0.33
0.27
0.28
0.22
0.36
4.00
1.18
0.59
0.34
0.31
0.38
-0.17
3.69
0.11
-0.07
-0.30
0.59
0.54
1.80
-0.42
-0.02
0.00
-1.00
-0.19
2.56
-0.14
-0.42

0.00
0.00
0.95
0.00

1.00
1.00
0.05
1.00

-0.34
-1.00
-0.64
-0.18

0.68
0.69
1.05
-2.03

0.32
0.31
-0.05
3.03

0.25
0.42
-0.01
0.04

Contributi Average
Contributio on
annual
n Intensive Extensive Growth
growth
growth
(US$)
2004-08
0.00
1.00
-1.00
-1.56
2.56
-0.06
0.00
1.00
-0.49
-0.27
1.27
0.21
0.00
1.00
-0.73
0.00
1.00
-1.00
0.52
0.48
0.30
0.95
0.05
-0.41
0.81
0.19
-0.03
0.87
0.13
-0.07
0.91
0.09
-0.04
0.32
0.68
-0.17
0.90
0.10
0.37
0.00
1.00
-1.00
0.07
0.93
-0.94
0.44
0.56
0.18
-0.10
1.10
-0.08
0.00
1.00
0.92
0.65
0.35
0.16
0.19
0.81
-0.39
0.63
0.37
-0.09
-0.25
1.25
-0.12
-0.04
1.04
-0.44
0.00
1.00
-0.52
0.94
0.06
-0.18
0.80
0.20
-0.40
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.90
1.01
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.10
-0.01
1.00
1.00

-1.00
1.45
-1.00
-1.00
0.32
0.11

0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00

0.97
0.47

0.70
0.58
0.87
-0.18

0.30
0.42
0.13
1.18

-0.10
-0.07
-0.25
-0.21

0.12

Cumulative
imports
2004
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.18
0.44
0.62
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.79
0.79
0.79
0.79
0.92
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

Note: Mauritius is treated as not eligible to export under LDC special rule, despite being granted
temporary LDC status from October 2004-September 2005 under the Miscellaneous Tariff Bill of 2004
(known as AGOA III).

60

61

Table 4: Price (US$ per dozen) of top 15 Lesotho products in terms of export
value, ranked largest to smallest, 2004

HS
6110202075
6110202065
6203424010
6203424035
6204624010
6204624020
6110303055
6204624040
6110303050
6110202040
6104632011
6203424045
6203424060
6203424050
6204624055

Description
WOMEN’S/GIRL’S OTHER
PULLOVERS OF COTTON
MEN'S/BOYS' OTHER PULLOVERS
OF COTTON
MENS TROUSER BREECHES
COTTON BLUE DENIM
BOYS TROUSER/BREECHES,
COTTON, BLUE DENIM.
WOMENS TROUSERS/BREECHES,
COTTON, BLUE DENIM.
WOMENS TROUSERS/BREECHES
OTHER COTTON, NOT KNIT
WOMEN’S/GIRL’S OTHER
SWEATERS, MANMADE FIBERS
GIRLS TROUSER COT BLUE DNM NT
IMP PLYSUIT PT,N KT
MEN'S/BOYS'OTHER SWEATERS,
MANMADE FIBERS, KNIT
MEN'S/BOYS' SWEATSHIRTS, OF
COTTON
WOMEN'S TROUSERS AND
BREECHES, SYNTHETIC FIBERS
BOYS TROUSER ETC OT COTTON
BOYS SHORTS COTTON NOT
PLAYSUIT PARTS, NOT KNIT
MENS SHORTS OF COTTON
WOMENS SHORTS OF COTTON
All products exported by Lesotho

Other
lesserdeveloped
Lesotho AGOA

Percentiles
10th

25th Median

75th

Cumulati
ve trade
share
90th Lesotho

31

27

26

32

46

99

280

14%

36

36

24

34

60

110

222

26%

90

73

48

63

100

191

465

32%

68

66

42

54

68

98

269

37%

87

71

52

76

92

199

449

42%

71

58

39

65

93

232

384

45%

36

46

34

43

57

120

406

49%

70

66

43

59

73

100

470

52%

35

52

30

41

68

163

287

56%

60

56

41

60

77

170

306

58%

50
70

46
49

28
26

43
47

60
67

198
93

409
243

61%
63%

52
69
63

53
53
49

25
27
34

39
48
52

55
74
67

84
148
113

207
288
337

65%
67%
69%

37

59

22

33

60

122

299

Notes: The mean price for Other AGOA is the exponent of the mean log price.

61

62

Table 5: Marginal impact of AGOA preferences on fabric-intensity in
beneficiary countries
Country sample

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

All

All
AGOA fabricBase
intensity
(1)
(2)
Marginal impact of AGOA on fabric-intensity
LDC AGOA countries relative to other AGOA
D01 x Dldc x ln(pf)
D01 x Dldc x ln(pva)
AGOA countries relative to control
D01 x DAg x ln(pf)
D01 x DAg x ln(pva)
Other coefficients
ln(pf)
0.272***
0.268***
ln(pva)
0.237***
0.252***
Dldc x ln(pf)
Dldc x ln(pva)
DAg x ln(pf)
0.323***
DAg x ln(pva)
-0.389***
D01 x ln(pf)
D01 x ln(pva)
D01 x Dldc
D01 x DAg
ln(GDP/capita), PPP
0.126***
0.115***
ln(e)
-0.538***
-0.548***
ln(Pcompete)
0.037***
0.037***
ln(US ppi)
0.135
0.131***
ln(1+t)
-0.600***
-0.637***

All
AGOA
(3)

All
Marginal LDC
AGOA
(4)

0.067
-0.083
-0.114
0.113

-0.175
0.186

0.316***
0.213***

0.315***
0.213***
-0.049
0.144
0.446**
-0.537**
0.099***
-0.104***
0.034
-0.092
0.122***
-0.546***
0.037***
0.11
-0.689***

0.405***
-0.423***
0.099***
-0.104***
-0.063
0.124***
-0.547***
0.037***
0.109
-0.684***

N
F

255231
255231
255231
255231
90.9
81.61
67.2
54.8
country/pro country/produ
Fixed effects
duct
ct
country/product country/product
year
year
year
year
Notes: Estimates are robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

62

63

Table 6: Marginal impact of the ending of the MFA on import unit values and
fabric-intensity in Apparel eligible AGOA beneficiaries
Base price
Emerging
(1)
Impact of ending of MFA on U.S. import prices
Quota constrained relative to control (D05
x Dquotacntry)
-0.319***
AGOA relative to control (D05 x DAg)
LDC AGOA relative to other AGOA (D05
x Dldc)
Marginal impact of ending of MFA on fabric-intensity
Control group
D05 x ln(pf)
D05 x ln(pva)
Quota-constrained group relative to control group
D05 x Dquotacntry x ln(pf)
D05 x Dquotacntry x ln(pva)
AGOA countries relative to control group
D05 x DAg x ln(pf)
D05 x DAg x ln(pva)
LDC AGOA countries relative to other AGOA
D05 x Dldc x ln(pf)
D05 x Dldc x ln(pva)
Other variables
ln(pf)
0.619***
ln(pva)
0.381***
Dquotacntry x ln(pf)
Dquotacntry x ln(pva)
DAg x ln(pf)
DAg x ln(pva)
Dldc x ln(pf)
Dldc x ln(pva)
ln(GDP/capita), PPP
0.152***
ln(e)
-1.141***
ln(Pcompete)
0.028**
ln(US ppi)
0.216*
ln(1+t)
-0.637***
Country sample

1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

N
F
Fixed effects

Base fabric
Emerging
(2)

AGOA
Emerging
(3)

LDC Agoa
Emerging
(4)

-0.580***

-0.567***
0.422***

-0.573***

0.111

-0.107***
0.093***

-0.087***
0.073**

-0.098***
0.084***

0.217***
-0.112

0.219***
-0.112

0.209***
-0.104

0.294***
-0.317***
0.273**
-0.260**
0.443***
0.288***
0.599***
-0.898***

0.578***
-0.886***
0.038***
0.230*
-0.681***

0.468***
0.332***
0.631***
-0.938***
0.432***
-0.324***

0.580***
-0.980***
0.037***
0.234*
-0.661***

0.430***
0.320***
0.628***
-0.917***

0.373***
-0.297***
0.534***
-0.918***
0.038***
0.220*
-0.701***

102208
102208
102208
102208
168
131
108
106
country/prod country/prod country/prod country/prod
uct
uct
uct
uct
year
year
year
year

Notes: Estimates are robust to heteroskedasticity. * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

63

64
FIGURES

Figure 1: US apparel imports from AGOA countries according to import
program
Apparel imports from AGOA countries according to Import Programme (bill SME)
500

Other

450
400

Commercial availability based

billion M2

350
Cashmere and merino wool
sweaters

300
250

Lesser developed country
provision

200
150

From regional fabric from U.S. or
African yarn

100
50
9/2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

Apparel made of U.S. yarns and
fabrics
1997

0

Non-preference imports

Source: USITC

Figure 2: US imports from AGOA countries
U.S. imports of clothing and textiles for selected AGOA recipients
500000

$ thousands

450000
400000

Lesotho

350000

Madagascar

300000

Kenya
Swaziland

250000

Mauritius

200000

South Africa

150000

Botswana

100000

Malawi

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

0

1997

50000

Source: USITC

64

65

Figure 3: Apparel exports to the EU 15, selected AGOA countries
Exports of HS61 & 62 to EU15
12000
Euros (thousands)

10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Kenya

Lesotho

Swaziland

Notes: Own calculations using data from Eurostat (http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/newxtweb )

Figure 4: Lesotho apparel exports to US according to Chinese quota fill rates

AGOA apparel exports to US according to binding and non-binding 2003 Chinese
quota categories
2000
1800
1600
US$ mill

1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Unbound

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Bound, fill rate >=90%

Notes: Quota fill rates are obtained from OTEXA ((http://otexa.ita.doc.gov/). Quotas on product lines
are assumed binding if the 2003 Chinese fill rate is greater than or equal to 90%.

65

66

Figure 5: The effect of tariff preferences on incentive to export fabric-intensive
products

Case 2
LDC AGOA

Case 3a
Non-LDC AGOA

1  t

 aw 
  
 a w 1

1+t*





  0

Case 3b
Non-LDC AGOA
1  t    0



1



Case 1
=0

Fabric cost share ()

1

2

=1

Figure 6: Unit values and level of development: Top Apparel product exported
by Lesotho in 2004 (Women’s or girls’ other pullovers of cotton, knitted).

ln(p per dozen) 2004
4
5

6

7

HS 6110202075: Women's or girls' cotton pullovers, 2004

Hong Kong

China
India
Cambodia
Bangladesh
Lesotho
Kenya

Madagascar
Ethiopia
Malawi

Indonesia
Thailand
Sri Lanka
Mauritius
Namibia
Swaziland
Botswana
South Africa

Macao
Korea, South
UAE

3

Tanzania

2

Nigeria

6

7

8
9
ln(GDP/Capita PPP)

10

11

Notes: Triangles are AGOA countries eligible to export apparel. Square blocks reflect the top quota
restricted countries from 1984-2004 as identified by Brambilla et al. (2010)

66

67

Figure 7: Fabric price indices
Fabric price indices (based on world exports & imports from UNComtrade)
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

Clothing
Silk fabric

2001

2003

2005

Cotton fabric
Wool fabric

2007

2009

Man-made fabric

Notes: Based on Tornqvist price index constructed using hs 6-digit unit values obtained from
UnComtrade trade data. Hs 6-digit product lines for fabric (HS (50 - silk, 51-wool, fine animal hair, 52cotton, 54-man made fiber, 55 - man-made staple).

Figure 8: Import weighted average price relative to Lesotho
Import weighted average price relative to Lesotho (using Lesotho exports as weights)

Import weighted average unit value
relative to Lesotho

2.30
2.10
1.90
1.70
1.50
1.30
1.10
0.90
0.70
0.50
1996

1997

1998

Bangladesh

1999

2000
China

2001

2002
India

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

AGOA less Lesotho

Note: The import weighted average price for country c is calculated as pct    pict piLt wiLt where
wiLt is the share of product i in Lesotho’s apparel exports to the US, PiLT is the price of Lesotho exports
and Pict is the price of the comparator country apparel exports.

67

68

Figure 9: Structural shifts in the composition of US apparel imports
Structural shifts in the composition of imports, import weighted US average
unit value ($) per SME

China
India
Bangladesh

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

9.0
8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0

Lesotho
LDC AGOA excl. Lesotho

Note: The import weighted average price for country c is calculated as psmect   mict pi where p i is
the median price of product i over the entire period and mict is the share of i in country c’s apparel
exports to the US.

68

69
Table A1: Price equation estimates by 4-digit HS level
Hypothesis tests (pvalue)

Coefficients
Hs4
code

Description

6101 men's or boys' overcoats etc, knit or crochet

ln(GDP
worker)

ln(pf)

ln(pva)

ln(e)

ln(Pcomp
ete)

ln(US ppi)

ln(1+t)

N

F

r2

Erate=
HOD
1 1+2=2 tariff

-0.186

0.329**

0.217***

-0.660***

0.062

-0.439

0.873**

2890

7.19

0.024

0.169

0.072

0.003

6102 women's or girls' overcoats etc, knit or crochet

-0.530***

0.199

0.420***

-0.704***

0.107**

-0.546

0.047

3833

14.3

0.035

0.719

0.048

0.397

6103 men's or boys' suits, ensembles etc, knit or croch

-0.282***

0.358***

0.326***

-0.672***

0.062**

6104 women's or girls' suits, ensemb etc, knit or croch

-0.319***

0.406***

0.358***

-0.812*** 0.070***

0.071

0.469***

0.331***

-0.678***

-0.149

0.231**

0.255***

6105 men's or boys' shirts, knitted or crocheted
6106 women's or girls' blouses & shirts, knit or croch
6107 men's or boys' underpants, pjs, etc, knit or croch
6108 women's or girls' slips, pjs, etc, knit or crochet
6109 t-shirts, singlets, tank tops etc, knit or crochet

8136

17.6

0.024

0.122

0.714

0.002

1.444***

-0.244

24243

76.2

0.030

0.001

0.011

0.772

0.150**

0.649*

-0.293

4272

14.8

0.035

0.118

0.001

0.928

-0.555*** 0.161***

0.539

-0.557*

5332

15.1

0.027

0.651

0.114

0.731

0.274

1.029

2321

3.96

0.018

0.902

0.008

0.658

0.238 -1.884***

10262

33.7

0.033

0.794

0.003

0.000

-0.384

0.752**

-0.13

-1.377***

0.262**

-0.454***

0.439***

0.370***

-0.912***

0.064*
0.023

0.774*** -1.265***

-0.105*

0.225***

0.273***

-0.632***

0.042

14877

39.1

0.025

0.067

0.000

0.027

-0.179***

0.574***

0.298***

-0.819*** 0.056***

0.406** -0.423***

29316

98.4

0.031

0.041

0.003

0.100

6111 babies' garments & accessories, knit or crocheted

-0.299

0.241

0.381***

-0.829*** 0.229***

1.329**

1.139

5254

20.8

0.048

0.054

0.101

0.082

6112 track suits, ski-suits & swimwear, knit or crochet

-0.442***

0.736***

0.286***

-1.101***

1.894***

-0.367

6478

24.4

0.033

0.004

0.067

0.239

6110 sweaters, pullovers, vests etc, knit or crocheted

6113 garments, knit etc, coated etc rubber, plastic etc
6114 garments nesoi, knitted or crocheted
6115 pantyhose, socks & other hosiery, knit or crochet

0.079**

0.780***

0.037

1.015***

-0.034

-1.180***

0.076

0.989

4.128*

2653

8.76

0.030

0.162

0.036

0.099

-0.375***

0.647***

0.279***

-1.028***

0.016

-0.181

-0.43

9940

33.5

0.031

0.484

0.004

0.114

1.775**

-0.564

5535

18

0.030

0.036

0.379

0.728

0.725 -1.525***

5314

21.5

0.032

0.132

0.779

0.005

-0.348**

0.151*

0.609***

-0.718***

0.047

6116 gloves, mittens and mitts, knitted or crocheted

-0.677***

0.689***

0.441***

-1.108***

-0.054

6117 made-up clothing access nesoi. parts etc. knit etc

-0.561***

0.367**

0.392***

-0.678*** 0.096***

6201 men's or boys' overcoats, cloaks etc, not knit etc

0.032

0.343***

0.351***

-0.638***

0.068**

6202 women's or girls' overcoats etc, not knit or croch

-0.043

0.410***

0.354***

-0.788***

6203 men's or boys' suits, ensembles etc, not knit etc

0.057

0.238***

0.358***

6204 women's or girls' suits, ensemb etc, not knit etc

3.312***

-0.866

5824

15.7

0.023

0.000

0.304

0.435

-0.403

-0.225

12265

34.8

0.026

0.089

0.050

0.556

0.013

-0.509 -0.438**

14450

57

0.035

0.294

0.183

0.296

-0.573*** 0.100***

0.698*** -0.579***

22945

72.3

0.030

0.026

0.199

0.398
0.043

-0.009

0.447***

0.368***

-0.822*** 0.044***

0.797*** -0.504***

50694

245

0.044

0.019

0.510

6205 men's or boys' shirts, not knitted or crocheted

0.113

0.368***

0.319***

-0.641***

-0.035

0.924*** -0.718***

6467

19.2

0.029

0.087

0.168

0.198

6206 women's or girls' blouses, shirts etc not knit etc

0.028

0.453***

0.205***

-0.704***

0.052*

0.989*** -0.687***

7965

38.3

0.042

0.037

0.085

0.119

-0.987***

-0.071

6207 men's or boys' undershirts etc, not knit or croch

-0.068

0.352

0.263

6208 women's or girls' slips etc, not knit or crochet

-0.095

0.306***

0.195***

6209 babies' garments & accessories, not knit or croch

-0.577*** 0.116***

-2.315

2337

4.27

0.024

0.893

0.105

0.249

-0.463 -1.424***

0.628

7748

15.5

0.021

0.064

0.077

0.001
0.118

-0.358**

0.602***

0.238**

-1.258***

-0.084

0.923

-0.923

3786

19.9

0.054

0.329

0.002

6210 garments, of felt etc, or fabric impregnated etc

-0.299***

0.429***

0.149**

-0.577***

-0.052

-0.093

-0.137

7067

5.03

0.007

0.315

0.978

0.561

6211 track suits, ski-suits & swimwear, not knit etc

-0.046

0.386***

0.289***

-0.674*** 0.079***

0.582***

0.555**

28191

54.1

0.018

0.144

0.937

0.001
0.072

6212 bras, girdles, garters etc., knitted etc or not
6213 handkerchiefs
6214 shawls, scarves, mufflers, mantillas, veils etc.
6215 ties, bow ties & cravats, not knitted or crocheted

-0.117

0.509***

0.390***

-0.854***

-0.049

5872

21.8

0.032

0.101

0.382

-0.758**

0.147

0.053

-1.064***

-0.044

11.178***

1.165* -1.159**
1.781

1049

4.38

0.046

0.001

0.001

0.428

-0.097

-0.04

0.208*

-0.099

0.156*

2.429

-0.055

3625

2.66

0.007

0.246

0.448

0.162

-0.817***

-0.157

0.733***

-0.472***

0.126**

0.823

0.318

1974

6.86

0.031

0.519

0.247

0.284

69

70
6216 gloves, mittens and mitts, not knit or crocheted

-0.027

0.897***

0.232*

-0.945***

-0.033

-1.059

-0.737

2991

3.62

0.013

0.305

0.110

0.366

6217 made-up clothing access nesoi, garment etc parts nesoi

-0.571**

0.102

0.323**

-0.627***

-0.006

8.474***

-0.019

4782

9.05

0.020

0.000

0.034

0.652

6406 parts of footwear: insoles etc: gaitors etc, parts

-1.000**

-0.699

0.713**

-0.06

-0.012

4.351**

1.158

691

2.79

0.045

0.045

0.900

0.558

0.359

1.500*

-0.629

-0.838

-0.054

1.703

-2.434

381

0.885

0.027

0.401

0.893

0.528

-0.243

0.656

-0.117

-0.75

0.136*

3.266*

-0.79

671

3.31

0.043

0.074

0.382

0.657

0.498

2.189

-0.012

-2.288**

-0.046

1.255 -81.49***

243

9.51

0.347

0.535

0.657

0.000

-0.099

0.126

0.214

-0.595**

0.228**

-0.658*

1653

4.05

0.019

0.683

0.062

0.557

-0.300***

0.545***

0.278***

0.554** -1.285**

9802

24.2

0.027

0.044

0.867

0.039

6501 hat forms/bodies, hoods, plateaux & manchons of felt
6502 hat shapes, plaited or assembled strips any material
6503 felt hats & other felt headgear from heading 6501
6504 hats & other headgear,plaitd/assmbld strips any material
6505 hats & headgear, knit etc, lace, etc in pc, hr net

-0.817*** 0.151***

0.754

Note: Year fixed effects are not included as the fabric costs do not vary across products for some of the HS 4-digit groups. Estimates are robust to heteroscekasticity.

Overall, the coefficients are broadly consistent with expectations. In most sectors the coefficient on fabric prices is positive and ranges from 0.23
to just over 1. Similarly, the coefficients on value added prices and the exchange rate are mostly of the correct sign. The estimates for Headgear
(HS 64) and Footwear (HS 65) products are poor, but is likely that the fabric costs indices do not adequately reflect the inputs used in the
production of these products. For example, HS 6406 covers Parts of Footwear; Removable In-Soles, Heel Cushions And Similar Articles;
Gaiters, Leggings etc. HS65 covers headgear products often comprising of felt, strips of any material, lace, etc. These products also make up a
very small proportion of AGAO country exports. Most estimates fail to reject the homogeneity and symmetric pass-through (both the tariffs and
exchange rate & exchange rate and production costs) hypotheses. Each hypothesis is rejected at most 12 times (out of 40).

70

