NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PERONIST BELIEFS AND INTERVENTIONIST POLICIES
Rafael Di Tella
Juan Dubra
Working Paper 16621
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16621

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

We thank Esteban Aranda for suggestions and exceptional research assistance and Andres Velasco
for introducing us to Acario Cotapos. We also thank Juan Carlos Torre, Torcuato Di Tella, Lucas Llach,
Juan Carlos de Pablo as well as participants at the Argentine Exceptionalism seminar in Cambridge
2009, for helpful comments and discussions. For support, Di Tella thanks the Canadian Institute for
Advance Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Rafael Di Tella and Juan Dubra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Peronist Beliefs and Interventionist Policies
Rafael Di Tella and Juan Dubra
NBER Working Paper No. 16621
December 2010
JEL No. D64,J42,L40
ABSTRACT
We study the logic of Peronist interventionist polices and the beliefs that support them. Instead of
a comprehensive approach, we focus on three elements. First, we study beliefs and values about the
economic system present in Peron’s speeches during the period 1943-55. Second, we study survey
data for the 1990’s on the beliefs of Peronist and Non Peronist voters in Argentina and Democrat and
Republican voters in the US. While income and education suggest that Peronists (in relative terms)
look like the American Democrats, their beliefs and values suggest that Peronists are the Argentine
equivalent of the Republicans. Third, given that these beliefs are non-standard (for economists) we
present a model formalizing some of their key aspects (for example, the idea that there is something
more than a material exchange in labor relations).

Rafael Di Tella
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Rd
Boston, MA 02163
and CIFAR
and also NBER
rditella@hbs.edu
Juan Dubra
Universidad de Montevideo
Montevideo, Uruguay
dubraj@um.edu.uy

I.

Introduction

In a seminal study, Diaz Alejandro (1970) blamed Argentina’s relative decline to the low rates of capital
accumulation which followed the replacement of the export‐oriented, market friendly policies by
populist, interventionist policies around the time of the great depression (see also Taylor, 1994). In this
account, broadly, Argentina’s relative decline during the 20th century can be attributed to the
prevalence of populist policies supplied by leaders who often exploit a mass of uneducated, poor voters.
Peron and his followers play a prominent role in such narratives of Argentina’s exceptional
underperformance. There are variations in this basic account. For example, it is often claimed that
policymaking, even during relatively centrist administrations, was complicated enormously by the
presence of a populist party demanding government intervention. And that political instability arising
from attempts at suppressing the Peronists, particularly since the 1960’s and until the 1980’s, has been
responsible for the low levels of private investment and weak overall economic performance of the
country. In other words, in this account the problem has been Argentina’s populist tradition which has
fueled bad policies and political instability.
A troubling aspect of this account, however, is that it does not explain why voters find populist policies
appealing. As stated, this narrative soon has to conclude that democracy is not a reasonable way to
elect the country’s leaders. Paradoxically, it should somehow also question the benefits of markets.
Indeed, humans in this account must have some type of dual type of rationality: on the one hand they
are able to make reasonable use of information so that markets are in fact quite efficient, but on the
other hand they are unable to see that the leaders they elect are bad for them. Rationality in this
account of democratic capitalism is a bit like the Cheshire cat of Alice in Wonderland: now you see it,
now you don’t. In brief, while it is clear that populist policies play a big role in Argentine exceptionalism
by interfering with capital accumulation, it is less clear in this narrative is what the logic of populist
policies and what explains their popularity. Our study is concerned with these questions.
Economists have not made significant progress in understanding Latin American populism because they
tend to find the interest group theory of policy quite compelling. In the standard account, bad policies
are put in place by special interests and voters would get rid of them if only they cared to vote.
Interestingly, however, voters do vote in large numbers, so the empirical appeal of the interest group
theory of policy formation, at least in its simplest form, is low. A more promising approach accepts that
populist policies are in fact appealing to (at least some group of) voters and tries to explain this appeal
within a rational model (by which we mean a model where agents try to do the best they possibly can,
given their objectives –which may be broader than material payoffs). That is, broadly, the strategy we
adopt here. The demand for populism is central to the political and economic legacy of Peronism which
has marked the period going from Peron’s ascent to the secretary of Labor in 1943 until the present.
Indeed, part of the political instability that characterizes Argentina after 1943 originates in the intense
appeal of Peronist policies to a large group of voters and the difficulty in generating consensus around a
set of basic policies that would have allowed the country to avoid macroeconomic instability.

2

Our analysis has three main parts, which follow a brief section on the historical and political background
of Peronist policies (section II). In the first substantive part (section III), we use qualitative data from
Peron’s early speeches (1944‐55) to provide some evidence on Peron’s beliefs (i.e., positive descriptions
of how the world works) and preferences (i.e., normative values describing how the world should work).
These speeches suggest to us three simple but important points. First, Peron’s policies were known to
his voters (in contrast to later Peronist presidents, such as Carlos Menem in the 1990’s, who was elected
on a platform but changed it upon being elected). Second, what Peron is doing in the speeches, at least
in part, is providing “meaning” by interpreting the evidence available in the light of (what we would call)
a coherent model of the world. Although such “interpretation” is unusual in economic models, it is often
discussed by scholars who study beliefs (and in “discourse analysis”). The third and final element in his
speeches that we think is worth emphasizing is that he gives a prominent role to the forces that
determine income. In contrast to what the literature on varieties of capitalism has emphasized in terms
of the origins of income (distinguishing between effort versus luck), Peron emphasizes the role of others
in determining (reducing) our income through exploitation. This emphasis results in a focus on actors
(foreign countries and rich local elites, who would rather be living in Europe than in Argentina).1 And in
a focus on distinguishing the components of welfare: there are utility losses from being “exploited”,
which go beyond the material losses (losing one’s dignity).
In the second part (section IV), we study Peronist beliefs after Peron’s death and place them in
comparative perspective by looking at data from the World Values Survey in the 1990’s. Respondents
that declare an intention to vote for Peronism are also those on relatively low income and education.
This is consistent with our analysis of Peron’s speeches of the 1944‐55 period, which appear to be on the
left side of the political spectrum, and with specific events of that period (the burning of the Jockey Club,
the anti‐American slogans, etc). Indeed, a small literature on the subject has claimed that Peronism is
the local version of the American Democrats or the British Labour Party. However, we can investigate
the beliefs of these Peronist voters with respect to the origins of income (e.g., luck vs effort) and
compare them with those of American voters. Our results suggest that Peronist beliefs tend to be more
on the right of the political spectrum than the opposition (although all Argentine voters are quite lefty).
In relative terms, Peronist beliefs in the 1990’s appear to be similar to Republican beliefs. In other
words, the opposition to Peron seems to have come from the conservatives while the opposition to the
Peronists in the 1990’s seems to have come from the ideological left (although in both periods the
opposition seems to have been on higher income than the Peronists).
In the third and final section (Section V) we develop a model to explain this low “demand for
capitalism”. If voters maximize something else than just their material payoff, then even with correct
beliefs about how the world works, they may demand bad policies (from the narrow point of view of
1

One of the Spanish words for “traitor” is “vendepatrias” (literally “seller of the motherland”). Acario Cotapos, a
Chilean artist, once commented on the possibility of selling the motherland, adding “yes, and let’s buy something
smaller, but closer to Paris”. Betrayal by the oligarchy during the decade prior to Peron’s first government is
emphasized for example, in Torres, (1973) and Hernandez Arregui (1973).

3

maximizing income). A voter concerned with the fairness of outcomes is a case in point. Specifically, we
assume that voters demand that firms behave kindly (and this must be true in some scenarios). When
they do not, voters experience anger which decreases when such firms are punished. In Argentina firms
are more likely to misbehave than in rich countries (perhaps because of low competition or because of
low productivity) so the State must intervene (“regulate to humanize Capital”). Section VI concludes.

II.

Peron, Interventionist Policies and Argentine Politics: Background

Beyond the obvious interest in a better understanding of the demand for populism, work on Peronism is
important because of the crucial role of political instability in Argentina’s relative decline. In 1930, as
the World economic crisis affected Argentina, a military coup by a group with neo‐fascist inclinations
resulted in the first military government of the country. The succession of non‐democratic governments
(seven) which followed included episodes of serious violence, and ended in the presidency of Juan Peron
in 1946. Since 1930, and until the Menem administration of the 1990’s, no democratic president was
able to complete its term, with the exception of the first Peron government. This coincided with
Argentina’s economic woes. Indeed, Argentina’s comparative economic performance (see Figure 1 in
Llach, 2010) reveals two periods where divergence appears to be present: the 1930’s, when the series
appears to begin to fall (with the exception of the Peron administration), and the 1970’s, another period
of heavy political instability, when the decline appears to accelerate.
This suggests, at least at this broad level of generality, that there is some merit in the hypothesis that
political instability and relative economic decline are positively correlated. Interestingly, the rate of
investment during 1930‐40 (the “infamous decade”) appears low (9.1%), particularly when compared
with that of the XXth century (14.4%), or with the rate of investment prevailing during the decade prior
to the start of the First World War (19.3%), one of the periods where the government was in the hands
of “elitist” governments and the economy was relatively open to international trade. Figure 1 reveals
that investment over GDP rises with Peronism, with an increasingly larger role taken by public
investment (whereas in the early years it is mainly private investment) until the fiscal crisis of the early
1980’s.2 A simple hypothesis suggested by the data is that political instability causes lower private
investment, and that this is the main cause for Argentina’s relative decline. This is a natural complement
to theories of Argentina’s relative decline emphasizing investment. Diaz Alejandro (1970, 1988), for
example, has emphasized the difficulties in maintaining high levels of investment once the export‐
oriented, market friendly regime was replaced by the more interventionist regimes that follow the great
depression. Taylor (1994) also emphasizes the role of the extremely high rates of capital accumulation
pre 1913, explaining that low savings rate constrained capital accumulation until the 1930’s while the
subsequent protectionist policies resulted in a high relative price of imported capital goods also
contributed to retard capital accumulation (for evidence on the role of machinery investment in growth,
see De Long and Summers, 1991). A natural extension of this line of research is that political instability
2

For an alternative view of the Investment performance, see Taylor (1998).

4

plays a similar role interfering with private investment and contributing to Argentina’s decline. Of course
then, a key is why do these interventionist policies get implemented and why does political instability
persist.

Investment/GDP
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
I/GDP
0.1
0.05
0
1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

Figure 1: Total Investment over GDP. Source Gerchunoff and Llach (1998).

Several authors have emphasized the role of Peronism in Argentina’s development.3 Since General
Peron’s ascent to the Labor Secretariat in 1943 (with the Military Government of General Ramirez) he
was the preeminent political figure of Argentina. Even after his death policies have been defined with
relation to the Peronist political legacy (see, for example, O’Donnell, 1977 and Portantiero, 1973).
Several hypotheses have been advanced to explain the causes of Peronist support. Germani (1962), for
example, has emphasized the emotional fragility of internal migrants (from the provinces) and the
charismatic, paternal nature of Peron’s leadership. He provides an estimate of 83,000 migrants per year
to the greater Buenos Aires area for the period 1936‐47, increasing thereafter. By 1957, Germani
estimates a doubling of the population in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area (form 3.4 to 6.3 million).
Thus, labor became a central economic and political force in the country. During this period, the share of
output accounted for by industry increased, so that the Peronist pro‐labor policies go a long way in
explaining its popular support, even if voters only had material concerns. Some authors estimate the

3

There is, of course, a large literature on Argentina’s economic performance and on the role played by Peronism
which is in no way summarized or reviewed in the short paragraphs offered here as context for the relatively
narrow set of points we try to emphasize. For a description of economic policies under the 1946‐55 Peron
government, see Gerchunoff (1989). See also Diaz Alejandro (1970), Cortes Conde (1998), Waisman (1987),
Halperin Donghi (1994), Llach and Gerchunoff (1989), inter alia.

5

increase in the real wage of unskilled labor in the Buenos Aires area at 17%.4 It is unclear how much of
this increase was sustainable, although there were presumably some economies of scale as the internal
market expanded and higher profits from the continuing program of import substitution (see Galiani and
Somaini, 2010). It is worth pointing out that anti‐export policies also contributed to the increase in real
wages through lower prices of food (see Brambilla, Galiani and Porto, 2010). Besides policies that
directly supported labor, a variety of social programs in different areas were put in place, ranging from
increased access to the free health care, to the creation of a comprehensive housing program to the
establishment of a generous system of social security (for a good description see, for example, Gaggero
and Garro, 2009). There was also the public‐private partnership symbolized by the Eva Peron
Foundation, a private entity run by Peron’s wife, funded through contributions from the private and
public entities and which distributed considerable amounts of social assistance (see, Stawski, 2005 ).
At the same time, institutional weaknesses played an increasing role in limiting the ability to generate
political answers to the country’s economic problems. Some have argued that specific aspects played a
key role, such as electoral institutions giving preeminence to the party in the decision to re‐elect
politicians (see Jones, Saiegh, Spiller and Tommasi, 2000). Others have pointed out that there have been
many political institutions, particularly since 1946, that directly led to unexpected changes in economic
policy (see, for example, Spiller and Tommasi, 2004), although electoral fraud preceded Peron and may
have lent some legitimacy to some of the abuses of the Peronist regime (see, for example, Alston and
Gallo, 2009). Naturally, the ability to protect the rights to property under weak institutions was limited
and there is the possibility that this is what led to weaker investment performance (see, for example,
Adelman, 1999, Cortes Conde, 1998 and Alston and Gallo, 2009). 5 It is worth noting that there was less
access to external capital after the great depression (see Taylor, 1994). Foreign direct investment fell
somewhat in importance, albeit from very high levels (Diaz Alejandro, 1970 reports that foreigner’s
share of the stock of capital in 1927 was 34%, down from 48% prior to the First World War).
A somewhat different picture emerges from the period leading to the Peronist administration of the
1970’s. The relatively closed economy of the 1960’s experienced difficulties adjusting to economic
expansions as increased imports often led to periodic balance of payments crises and inflation. Against
this background, and with the political proscription of Peronism, attempts at using wage and income
policies to stabilize the economy were unsuccessful. More often the military governments focused on
reducing wage pressure, typically by restricting trade unions (for example the Ongania government
4

See Murmis and Portantiero (1971). On the role of the support of socialist trade unions, see Torre (1989). See
also Horowitz (1990), Di Tella (2003) and Torre (1990), as well as O’Donnell (1977), and the contributions collected
in Brennan (1998) and Miguens and Turner (1988).
5

Saiegh (2007) emphasizes that, even during the early market‐friendly phase following the passing of the liberal
constitution in 1853/60, the security of some rights to property (for example on public debt) depended on political
considerations such as the extent of partisan control over the legislature.

6

imposed a wage freeze, attempted to increase working hours, limited labour strikes and suspended the
legal status of several trade unions). Tensions soon fuelled the presence of left wing elements, and
fighting communism became a serious government concern. As riots erupted in Cordoba, left wing
terrorism became a political force, with some legitimacy (given the lack of democracy) and a claim to
centrality in the Peronist “movement”. There is some evidence that Peron himself encouraged this
identification with the left.6 During the 1970’s kidnappings and assassinations reached their peak, as the
terrorist organizations (the Marxist People’s Revolutionary Army and the Montoneros ‐of Peronist
extraction) clashed with the police and armed forces (see the data on the assassination of policemen in
the province of Buenos Aires in Boruchowicz and Wagner, 2010). Eventually, in the 1970’s, with the
terrorist organizations still active after his return to the country’s presidency, Peron broke with them in
a dramatic speech, ejecting them from the Plaza de Mayo. Thus, in contrast to the early years, when
Peronism arrived and launched a true workers movement opposed to the Conservatives, during the
1970’s the opposition to Peron seems to have come from the left. The survey data reported later is
consistent with this description.
In brief, it seems clear that Peron’s arrival on the political scene in the 1940’s coincided with the
increased importance of labor in Argentina’s economy, and a reduced importance of openness to
foreign capital and trade as the global economy was affected by the war and the Great Depression.
Accordingly, Peron’s ideology reflected a degree of nationalism and faith in government intervention
that would persist over time. The opposition, however, seems to have evolved from a traditional
conservative position to a position that is much more on the left of the political spectrum.

III.

Peron in his own words

There is some difficulty in defining exactly what Peron’s political legacy is. Some have argued that
because he was a fascist sympathizer, his ideological legacy must simply be fascism. This would answer
the question of how bad policies come to be implemented: Peron’s authoritarian rule imposed such
polices. For our purposes, the biggest problem is that such policies appear to be popular with the
electorate and they continued to be so even after Peron was deposed and the most egregious aspects of
his authoritarian rule (such as indoctrination) were no longer active.7 Furthermore, Peronism seems to
6

For example, while in exile in Madrid, Peron appears to have designated John William Cooke, a man who argued
for “armed struggle” based on the Cuban model, as his main representative in the country. There is ample
evidence of the armed group’s identification with Peron (see Baschetti, 2004).
7

One (of several) possible differences with fascism, for example, is that trade union leaders were closer (more
loyal) to members of the union than to the government (perhaps in spite of Peron’s wishes). Also, there were
attempts at constructing “Peronism without Peron” and instances of trade union leaders who were perceived to
be quite independent of Peron (leading to the extreme view that Peron himself was involved in the killing of trade
union leader Vandor). And, most importantly, large increases in the Labor share of GDP took place under Peronist
administrations (for historical evidence and a comparison with Australia, see Gerchunoff and Fajgelbaum, 2006).

7

involve opinions about economic independence that are central and easily compatible with less
authoritarian political forms. It is of some significance that Peron’s political ideology was developing in
the immediate aftermath of the First World War. Born in 1895, he was 28 years old as the Weimar
republic was struggling with the war reparations, which became a convenient scapegoat, together with
bankers, Jews and foreign speculators, so it is perhaps unsurprising that attribution (particularly to
external forces) plays a big role in his speeches. And he was 35 as the Great Depression affected the
world economy and rich countries were starting to cope through public works programs and
government spending (in part linked to rearmament). Perhaps even more significant, in 1935 one of the
first actions of the newly created central was a bailout of the banking system at a large social cost (della
Paolera and Taylor, 2002). Thus, it must have been clear to him that large shocks could disrupt the
macroeconomy to a very large extent, making individual effort often irrelevant in the determination of
income.
The Peronist regime of the 1940’s and 50’s accompanied the economic changes that were implemented,
first from the Labor Secretariat and then from the Presidency, with a powerful new rhetoric that gave
workers a preeminent role in the formation of policy. Keynesian ideas were becoming known, at least
through Roosevelt’s actions and some of the main ideas were making their way to Argentina.8 Rhetoric,
of course, was only one element in a broad attempt to create support for the social and political
changes that would sustain the redistribution of income at the core of Peronist policies. Other elements
included a set of political rituals linked to mass mobilization, the emotional appeal of Evita and a clear
attempt to influence people’s perceptions and beliefs through propaganda. Although we study Peron’s
speeches, we note that this might be a relatively narrow focus, particularly given the discussion of these
elements appearing for example in Plotkin (2003). Of course a potentially important determinant of
beliefs is the education system and the Peronist regime heavily intervened in the design of the national
curriculum and the public schools system (see, for example, Bernetti and Puiggros, 1993, Bianchi, 1992,
and Escude, 1990).
There is important previous work in the field of discourse analysis focused on Peron’s speeches by Sigal
and Veron (2003).9 They analyze several aspects of his speeches and put special emphasis on their

However much weight one gives to these considerations, it seems the distance between fascism and Peronism, at
least in their authoritarian styles and rhetoric, is not large. See Germani (1962) and Lewis (1980), for interesting
discussions.
8

Federico Pinedo and Luis Duhau, together with Raul Prebisch, put in place the Plan de Acción Económica Nacional
in 1933. They were influential in affecting foreign trade and in the creation of the Argentine Central Bank in 1935.
Della Paolera and Taylor (1999) describe heterodox monetary policy after 1929, the change in beliefs and
expectations following the shift in monetary regime and the relatively mild economic depression.
9

There are several interesting cultural aspects of Peronism that we do not discuss, including the focus on one date
(October 17th), when Peronism “starts”. For a discussion and several of the key details of the mass mobilization
that took place during October 17th, 1945, see James (1988).

8

political dimension. For example, Sigal and Veron put forward the interesting hypothesis that Peron
actively constructs the notion that he “arrives” to the State from the “outside” (a life dedicated to the
military) to provide unity/harmony to a divided country (during 1973‐4, the main focus of their analysis),
which is significant given some of the electoral decisions made at the time. In contrast we focus on the
economic dimension of his speeches. The material we studied was contained in 62 speeches, delivered
between October 15th 1944 and May 1st, 1953. They include a few speeches during rallies (as reported in
the media), some speeches during particular celebrations, as well as messages to congress and other
legislative bodies.

Peron’s Speeches
The first striking point (to an economist) of his speeches is their low informational content. In contrast to
what might be expected, they are not of the form: “I am informing the people of Argentina that we are
facing a shock with the following characteristics, and here is what we are going to do about it.” In other
words, they are not predominantly exercises in the transmission of information. Rather, they are heavily
interpreted narratives of what has happened in the past, and how the conclusions that we draw from
looking at history can help us shape policy in the present. In brief, a key element of the speeches is that
they are primarily centered on the reinterpretation of already available information. Also, scholars
working on analysis of discourse would say he is engaged in the “production of meaning”. In particular,
such research is concerned with establishing the “source’s relationship to the content” (related in this
case to the source’s status). Under the assumption that minds and memory are malleable in this way, an
economist would have no problem modeling it as a (self‐interested) activity of the politician. An example
is Glaeser (2004), where politicians supply stories and voters fail to investigate their accuracy. Finally,
the speeches can also be interpreted as trying to influence the system of values of the population. In this
regard, Rokeach (1973) is an influential study of value systems and their impact on behavior (also
focusing, in part, on the writings of major political figures). See also Converse (1964) and for a recent
review, Kinder (1998).
The second, and perhaps key part of this “interpretation exercise” is that Peron assumes the role of a
heroic whistleblower, denouncing a corrupt state of affairs where politicians are bought by one
particular group in society (the economic and cultural elite, who are seduced by all things foreign) in
order to enact policies against workers and the poor. It is a variation of the theme of Peron’s “arrival” as
an external player (as emphasized by Sigal and Veron but with special significance for the beliefs about
the generation of income). One example is:
It can be seen that, not knowledgeable of the art of pretending, I have exposed the anguishing
situations that burdened my feelings as I absorbed the Daedalus of laws and decrees (…) which
in a large number of cases restricted the rights of workers, or, if they recognized them, it would
be to kill the last trace of the hope of justice. May 1st 1945

9

I have been accused of having agitated the conscience of the country’s workers. Of having
created a social problem where none existed before … instead of silencing the inequalities and
social injustices, I have uncovered them so that we all could know where evil was and we could
find the more convenient medicines. ... The previous tactic consisted in faking a social welfare …
with the exclusive aim of not disturbing the good digestion of the golden Bourgeoisie. May 1st
1945.
Another characteristic of his speeches is the continuous attempt to reassure supporters that he has a
coherent view of the world. Examples take place in several speeches, but the one on May 24th, 1950 is
centered on explaining Peron’s theories. He begins by reacting to accusations that his is not a coherent
economic plan stating,
It has been said that … the Justicialista movement lacks an economic theory. Nothing more
untrue. We have a perfect economic theory. What happens is that we have not yet spelled it out
because we did not want that the oligarchs, or the capitalist consortia that exploited the country
through conscienceless and avaricious bosses, could, knowing our plan, stop our action … When
we have been able to dominate these international monopolies or the forces of the anti‐
motherland, then we will explain our theory to the world. May 24th, 1950.
And he explains (in the same speech) some details
… old economic theory … was based on a principle called “hedonic”. … what does it represent?
The capitalist says “my capital is the basis of the economy because I am the one who promotes,
pays and makes. As a consequence I produce 10, and don’t produce less or more as in both
cases I lose.” But me, the sociologist, I tell him: “Yes sir, you produce 10, but here this man has
to eat and he tells me that 10 is not enough, he needs 20”. Then the capitalist replies to me “Ah,
let him explode, let him eat with 10 because if I produce more of that I lose money.”… That is
when the hedonic principle stops being so naturally rational, least of all from the point of view
of welfare, which is the basis of all organized communities. … we do not want an economy
subordinated to capital, we want capital subordinated to the economy … If, after that, the
capitalist is able to fill its coffer with gold, let him do it; we don’t care; even better if he does.
But we can’t do that until the people is satisfied and happy and has the purchasing power
needed to achieve a minimum of happiness, without which life is not worth living. May 24th,
1950.

Types of Businesspeople
The “conspiracy” that Peron comes to uncover is relevant to workers because it identifies an
influence on their income. This representation requires that capitalists, at least until Peron’s
“arrival”, were unkind (inconsiderate or who made their money through corrupt means). The
speeches include constant references to such “bad types” amongst businesspeople.
10

People have been faced with the idea that a fateful lodge of demagogues was the ruling class of
the country, its elite, and as such was made up by wise, rich and kind people. It has to be
pointed out that the wise have rarely been rich and the rich have rarely been kind. October 15th,
1944.
In other words, those privileged by the capitalist regime are finished; those that had everything,
that took the cow in the ship when they went to Europe to have coffee with milk. No, let’s have
them have coffee with milk, but with powder milk. It is not that bad for them. May 12th, 1950.
It used to be easy for capitalists: when there was a strike workers were put in jail, they were
processed and they didn’t rise again. … Remember Vasena. … Workers confronted the situation
but the result was several thousand men dead. The oligarchs were all home doing the “five o’
clock tea”. … It used to happen that a capitalist who was almost bankrupt was made to earn,
with just a signature, two or three million pesos without him having the need to do more than
wake up in the morning and ask over the phone if the matter was ready. In this way favors were
being granted upon someone who perhaps was a shameless one. August 9th, 1950.

“Others” determine our income
With “bad types” amongst the capitalists, it was easier for Peron to press forward with the idea that
the process where income was generated was under their influence. This matches well with the
widespread belief that Argentina is a rich country and one has to find an explanation for why there
is want amidst plenty (for a discussion of belief formation when natural resources are important, see
Di Tella, Dubra and MacCulloch, 2010). Indeed, one part of his speeches can be reduced to
arguments in support of the idea that instead of individual effort (internal to the individual) or luck
(external but without intention), the relevant influence on income is an external force with human
intention. It is “others” who are actively taking actions which lower Argentinian’s income. It is not a
question of making a bigger effort at the individual level; nor a question of taking a collective stand
to reduce the influence of natural elements (through insurance or a better selection of activities and
crops). It is a question of actively opposing other actors that try to exploit Argentines (on the role of
corruption perceptions in explaining the appeal of capitalism, see Di Tella and MacCulloch, 2009).
There are numerous examples of this conception of the income generating process, and the support
of the State in enforcing it, in Peron’s speeches. One example is
The economic destiny of workers was exclusively in the hands of the bosses ... and if workers
organized a protest movement or adopted an attitude defensive of their rights, they were left
out of the law and exposed to the bosses’ response and the police repression. … A group of
capitalists, characterized the most by its continued, bloody opposition to workers’ vindications,
has plotted an unthinkable maneuver to neutralize the steps that had been adopted to stop the
rise in the cost of living … and counteract the effects of inflation. May 1st 1945
11

… we need arms, brains, capital. But capital that is humanized in its function, which puts the
public’s welfare before a greedy interest in individual profit. I express my strongest rejection to
the God of unproductive and static gold, to the cold and calculating supercapitalism that harbors
in its metallic gutters Shylock’s infamous sentiments. May 1st, 1947.
In the year 1943 our economy was in the hands of foreign capitalist consortia because, until
1943, those consortia were those that paid a vile price to producers, gathered, exported,
transported and sold to foreign consumers the produce of Argentine work. It cannot be doubted
that in such intermediation went most of the profits. March 5th, 1950
There might remain some former exploiter of human labor, who cannot conceive an Argentine
nation socially fair, … or some old lawyer of foreign companies who might yearn for the times of
the Bembergs, when treason was also profitable… May 1st, 1950.
300 families, in our country for example, put together their capital and enslaved 17 million
Argentines. August 9th, 1950.
We are in favor that a man might enrich himself working, but we oppose that he might do so
defrauding or taking advantage of other people’s weaknesses. We want (…) that each Argentine
has prosperity and good fortune within reach, but we do not accept that in order to obtain them
he would commit crimes against other Argentines or against the community that we all are a
part of. March 5th, 1952.
On some occasions, as in the reference to Bemberg above, Peron names specific members of the
elite, although less than one might imagine if he was stirring up hatred against the rich. In one case
they are described as guilty of exploiting capitalists themselves. One example is
The monopoly, be it called … Bunge y Born, Dreyfus, etc. … was the one doing the gathering …
the poor producer received six pesos and this intermediary octopus received thirty or forty for
what somebody else had produced … When this is organized properly, the small farmer will
produce, transport, gather, sell; and the product will go exclusively to him and not for the
“smart one”, who constitute a tumor that was placed in the middle. August 9th, 1950
Yet in some of these same speeches he distinguishes between local and foreign capitalists and
justifies the behavior of the former. This is often mentioned in the context of speeches with a strong
nationalist component.
When I have said that there was excessive exploitation, I have not blamed our bosses, because I
know full well that our bosses were themselves exploited from the other side (…) That is why we
have bought the railroads and everything else concerning public services (…) May 12th, 1950

Appropriate Government Policy
12

These descriptions of the state of affairs in Argentina at the time naturally lead to the justification of
a set of interventionist policies adopted to address the main problems. Interestingly, in these
portions of his speeches, the announced policies are not only linked to the solution of the set of
economic problems uncovered, but also to the type of people Argentines (who implement these
policies) are. There is a connection to identity in that there are (apparently discreet) categories of
people that take certain actions, so that when these actions change, identity also changes, which
appears inherently desirable (for a model of identity, see Akerlof and Kranton, 2003). It is as if
people who are able to defy their exploiters and stand up for their rights and cannot be fooled into
accepting compromise solutions are true Argentines.
The speeches provide several examples of the interventionist policies that match the needs created
by Peron’s description of the main problems faced by Argentina. These include,
We implement, in a loyal and sincere fashion, a social policy designed to give workers a human
place in society, we treat him as a brother and as an Argentine. October 15th, 1944.
No man should earn less than what he needs to live. … We said that there is a line for life
determined by the minimum essential wage, and those below that line were the submerged;
and that in our country there could not be “submerged”; everyone had to be “emerged”.
October 21st, 1946.
If we have intervened in some (enterprises) it has been because we had to somehow (avoid) the
constant outflow of national wealth. (…) not only we respect private activity, but we also help
and protect it. The only thing we don’t want is a return to the old age of monopolistic consortia
of exploitation. We want that men work (…) as they see fit but we do not want that it takes
place at the expense of the consumer or the producer. We want that he who produces wealth
may place it without pressure or exploitation of any type. February 7th, 1950.
The Estatuto del Peón, might not be to the liking of some exploiters‐without‐conscience, (…)
who have been upset at the possibility that I might defend with more enthusiasm the perfecting
of the human race than that of Argentine bulls or dogs. March 5th, 1950.
One of the barriers to national unity was undoubtedly the injustices committed by the capitalist
oligarchy exploiting workers with the complicity of the authorities … in charge of distributive
justice. ... A people with an immense majority of slaves cannot be free, just as a free people can
never be subjugated. … I am not exaggerating when I say that in 1943 there were slaves in the
Argentine Republic. May 1st, 1950.
Today, May 1st, the La Prensa newspaper … will be handed over to the workers … This
newspaper, which exploited its workers and the poor during years, which was refined
instrument of all foreign and national exploitation, which represented the crudest form of
treason to the motherland, will have to purge its sins serving the working people. May 1st, 1951.
13

The government is committed to enforcing price controls, even if that means hanging them all.
… They have a right to earn, but they don’t have a right to steal. May 1st, 1952.

This simple overview of Peron’s speeches suggests to us that a key component of Peronist beliefs is the
idea that welfare can be affected by others. This suggests two changes to the standard formulation in
economics, where agents are assumed to derive income from individual effort or from luck (which is
beyond anyone’s control). The first is that other players can affect an individual’s income (local elites,
foreign countries). The second is that labor relations have a non‐monetary dimension, which we
interpret as an influence of fairness in people’s welfare (and not just income). Given these beliefs, there
is a role for government in ensuring that workers are treated with dignity (“humanize capital”), which
we interpret as some reassurance that firms are behaving with some reasonable amount of concern for
workers’ well‐being.

IV.

Peronism and the American Democrats: Differences in Survey data on Beliefs and Values

Given Peron’s continued influence on political and economic events even after the 1955 coup, it is of
interest to provide at least some evidence on the later evolution of Peronist beliefs and values and to
place them in comparative perspective (for example, by comparing them to American beliefs as a
benchmark). The approach we follow is to focus in a snapshot of the public’s interpretation of Peronism
at a later date. Unfortunately, continued survey data from different periods is unavailable. However, we
have data on beliefs and voting pertaining to the 1990’s from a comparative survey that contains data
for the US and Argentina (and other countries). Of course, the 1990’s was a period where both the US
and Argentina are ruled by two politicians, Menem and Clinton, that are elected on a platform that is on
the left of the political spectrum but who end up implementing reforms that are more consistent with
centrist/conservative values. In the case of the US this happens only after there are mid‐term electoral
losses and mainly involve welfare reforms and the dropping of some of the less popular initiatives such
as healthcare reform, whereas in the case of Menem they were larger and made from the start of the
term, and they involved a complex relationship with the labour movement which was an important
supporter (see Murillo, 2001, Levitsky, 2003 and Etchemendy and Palermo, 1998, for discussions; on
policy reversals in Latin America during this period, see Stokes, 2001).
Our interest in comparisons with the US comes from a hypothesis “explaining” Peronism, namely that it
is the Argentine version of the American Democrats (given that they are supported by similar
demographic and socio‐economic groups). A similar point is also made with respect to Peronism’s
association with the British Labour Party. Cross‐country survey data on people’s opinion about elements
of capitalism is available from the World Values Survey. Coordinated by Ronald Inglehart, the 1995‐97
wave asks adults (older than 18) in over 50 countries several questions of interest. In the US, the data is
obtained from a representative sample of individuals age 18 and older through face to face interviews.
14

In Argentina, sampling was limited to the urbanized central portion of the country, where about 70 per
cent of the population is concentrated.10
Importantly for our purposes, the survey contains data on (self‐reported) voting, allowing us to derive
measures of vote intention, or at least sympathy, towards the main parties in the country, including
Peronists. Thus, we first divide the sample in Argentina in two groups: between those that declare to
vote for Peronists and those that declare to want to vote for other groups. The precise question asked
is: “If there were a national election tomorrow, for which party on this list would you vote? Just call out
the number on this card.” Then a card with “1. Partido Justicialista, 2. Union Civica Radical, 3. Frepaso, 4.
Modin and 7. Blank ballot” is shown. Peronists are those answering 1, while Non Peronists are those
answering 2, 3 and 4. In the US, a similar procedure allows us to determine two subsamples:
Republicans and Democrats.
We then used a measure of income to divide the sample into two categories (rich and poor). The
question asked was “Here is a scale of incomes. We would like to know in what group your household
is, counting all wages, salaries, pensions and other incomes that come in. Just give the letter of the
group your household falls into, before taxes and other deductions.” Then a scale with 10 groups,
corresponding to the income deciles in the country is shown (this scale is different in each country). We
classify as poor those in the lowest 5 categories. Table I shows that 69 percent of Peronists, whereas 59
percent on Non Peronists, report incomes that are in the lowest 5 categories. In the US, within those
admitting a preference for voting a particular group, we note that within those that prefer the
Democrats, 42 percent declare to be in the lowest 5 deciles while only 29 percent or Republicans. This
broadly corresponds to the idea that Peronists and Democrats share a similar base of support (at least in
the limited sense that they have more support amongst the poor than the opposition). Table I, also
shows results using educational attainment and reaches a similar conclusion.11 These results echo the
conclusion of a Peronist politician who declared upon looking at an electoral map, “progress complicates
us, education kills us”. In auxiliary tests (not reported) we tried self‐reported social class and reached
similar results: Peronists and Democrats seem to represent similar groups in their societies (the poor
and those with low educational attainment).12

10

Within this region, 200 sampling points were selected, with approximately five individuals being interviewed in
each sampling point through multi‐stage probability sampling. Regions include the nation’s capital, the greater
Buenos Aires area, Cordoba, Rosario, Mendoza and Tucuman.
11

The question asks “What is the highest educational level that you have attained?” and it provides as possible
answers the (functional equivalent for each society) of “1. No formal education, 2. Incomplete primary school, 3.
Complete primary school, 4. Incomplete secondary school: technical/vocational type, 5. Complete secondary
school: technical/vocational type, 6. Incomplete secondary: university‐preparatory type, 7. Complete secondary:
university‐preparatory type, 8. Some university‐level education, without degree, 9. University‐level education, with
degree”.
12
The question used reads “People sometimes describe themselves as belonging to the working class, the middle
class, or the upper or lower class. Would you describe yourself as belonging to the: 1. Upper class, 2. Upper middle
class, 3. Lower middle class, 4. Working class, 5. Lower class”

15

Given our interest in the role of beliefs, it is of interest to see if these similarities extend to beliefs about
the role of luck and other economic issues. The classic belief concerns the role of luck (versus effort) in
the generation of income. The question usually used to capture this belief is “Why, in your opinion, are
there people in this country who live in need? Here are two opinions: Which comes closest to your
view? 1. They are poor because of laziness and lack of will power, 2. They are poor because society
treats them unfairly”. The results are summarized in Table II. The main pattern is that the whole
electorate in Argentina seems to be on the left of the political spectrum, as most people seem to believe
that poverty is the result of luck (or that society treats them unfairly) rather than laziness. However, in
relative terms the Peronists seem to exhibit a pattern closer to the one of the Republicans instead of the
Democrats. Indeed, the biggest proportion of believers in laziness as a source of poverty takes place
amongst Peronists and the Republicans. The Peronist ratio of believers in Laziness (39%) to believers in
an unfair society (61%) is 0.64, whereas amongst Non‐Peronists it is 20% to 80%, for a ratio of 0.25. On
the other hand the percentage of believers in laziness (unfair society) amongst the Democrats is 49%
(51%), whereas amongst the Republicans is much higher 75% to 25%. Focusing on the ratios of laziness
to unfairness, the Democrats have a ratio of 0.96, whereas that for the Republicans is 3.
As another illustration, Table II considers the question “Generally speaking, would you say that this
country is run by a few big interests looking out for themselves, or that it is run for the benefit of all the
people?” with answers “1. Run by a few big interests, and 2. Run for all the people”. Again we find that
the two groups in Argentina (Peronists and Non Peronists) tend to give the answer that is presumably on
the left of the political spectrum (Run by a few big Interests), but the relative position of Peronists in
Argentina is more like the relative position of Republicans than of Democrats.
Table III considers several beliefs that are relevant to understanding Peronists beliefs and values. They
all point out in a similar direction in relative terms: the Peronists (relative to the opposition) tend to look
like the republicans (relative to the Democrats). In all cases the ratio in Argentina and in the US are on
the same side of 1. Take for example the idea that workers should follow instructions at work. We split
answers into two groups, those answering “they should” on the one hand and those that answer either
“it depends” or “they should be convinced first”. The majority of republican voters (77% of them, or in a
proportion 3.35 to 1), perhaps not surprisingly, tend to answer that workers should follow instructions.
Democrats have a similar position but less intense (the proportion is under 1.4 to 1). So, in relative
terms, Republicans are somewhat more likely to agree with this statement. In Argentina we have the
opposite absolute tendency: most people disagree with this statement, as reflected by both Peronists
and Non‐Peronists having ratios that are lower than one. However, the ratio for Peronists is somewhat
higher than that for Non Peronists, suggesting that in relative terms, Peronists are more likely to agree
with the idea that workers should follow orders than Non Peronists, which is somewhat surprising given
Peronist’s affinity with labor causes, at least as detected in Peron’s speeches.

16

The rest of Table III investigates a number of other beliefs and values appearing in Peron’s speeches. For
example, he discusses competition on his speech of March 5, 1952 “Progress and individual prosperity
cannot be based rationally in the harming of others because that unleashes an egoist and merciless
struggle, which cancels all cooperation, destroys solidarity and ends in dissociation”. The beliefs covered
in the Table include those related to the role of luck versus effort in the determination of income and
the role of others in affecting individual fates (already discussed), as well as those related to feminism
(Jobs for Men), authoritarian views (Respect for Authority), materialism (Less Emphasis on Money),
honesty (Acceptable to Cheat), competition (Competition is Harmful) and economic organization
(Ownership of Business). In all cases, the answers given by Peronist voters (relative to those given by the
opposition) are similar to the answers given by Republicans (relative to the Democrats).
In brief, the evidence from the 1990’s suggests that the opposition to Peronism is on the ideological left,
even though they are on higher income and educational achievement than the Peronists. If it is true that
the opposition to Peron came from the conservatives, then it is plausible to conclude that Peronism has
experienced less ideological change than the rest of the country.

V.

A Model of Labor Market Exploitation based on Altruistic Preferences

The previous sections highlight the role of several elements that are non‐standard in economic models.
Two that are of particular interest to us are the idea that there is something more to market
transactions in the labor market than just the exchange of work for money. There is also the possibility
of exploitation, connected to firms owners who do not care about the welfare of their workers. The
speech of August 9, 1950 is typical. Note that the part where Peron states “Workers confronted the
situation but the result was several thousand men dead. The oligarchs were all home doing the ‘five o’
clock tea’.” he says “five o’clock tea” in English, which serves to stress the contrast the fate of workers
whose life is in danger while the employers are oblivious to their predicament and more preoccupied
with engaging in a social practice that is the norm in England. Accordingly, the model we develop is one
where there is the possibility of worker exploitation by “unkind” elites, and Peron’s punishment of these
elites provides increases in worker total utility through an emotional (non‐material) channel.
The model in this section is an adaptation of the model in Di Tella and Dubra (2009) to labor markets. It
stresses the idea that a policy that may not be optimal under “standard” models (that ignore emotions),
may become optimal if workers experience anger when they are exploited, and the government knows
it. In order to make our point, we introduce emotions in the form of worker anger at perceptions of
insufficient firm altruism (as in Levine, 1998 and Rotemberg, 2008) in a textbook version of Salop (1979).
There are n workers, each characterized by a parameter x interpreted, as either a
1) "preferred variety; preferred workplace" this can represent
a. A taste for working in one industry over another
b. A cost of reconverting the workers’ human capital to another industry.
17

2) ”location parameter; how far away do I live from my workplace".
For each worker, his location is drawn from a uniform distribution on the circle of circumference 1.
There are m evenly distributed firms along the circle (there are m firms, but we use b=1/m as the
relevant parameter measuring concentration); firms are of one of two types, altruistic or selfish.
Workers can supply either one unit of labor, or 0; this binary choice is a simplification, which is in line
with the indivisibilities postulated in Hansen (1985). Individuals’ gross utility of not working is s; when
they work, if they have to travel a distance x (or they are x away from their preferred job) and they
receive a pay of w, their net surplus is w‐tx‐s (i.e. they have a transport cost of t per unit of distance
traveled).
In addition to these material costs, the worker may become angry with the firm for which he works.
There are several reasons why incorporating emotions in this setup makes sense. First, simple
introspection tells us that we don’t always do what is best from a narrowly defined “economic”
perspective. Second, a large body of literature has shown in the laboratory that individuals don’t always
maximize the amount of money they receive (even when the choices don’t involve effort), and that
emotions play a significant role. This reaction has been modeled as a preference for fair outcomes (see,
for example, Fehr and Schmidt, 1999), or in the above cited papers by Levine (1998) and Rotemberg
(2008) who show how the introduction of a reciprocal altruism term in the utility function can explain
quite well the seemingly paradoxical evidence from ultimatum games. Finally, a third motivation to
include emotions in our model of the labor market is that Peron’s speeches contain several direct
references to the effect of Peronist policies on emotions. For example, he states:
What is the social economy? It is a change in the old system of exploitation, not like the
communists want, but in a gentler form. The capitalist regime is an abuse of property. The
communist solution is the suppression of property. We believe the solution is not the
suppression of property but rather the suppression of the abuse of property. … We are not
involved in social ordering that will take the country into a fight but rather to calmness. June
24th, 1948.
If a worker is angry, we must subtract to his utility, a term λ(π+p‐w) where p is the productivity of the
worker in the firm and π is the profit the firm obtains from the other workers. This term is just a "spite"
term: when angry, the worker dislikes the firms making a profit, and he is angrier when he contributes
to those profits. What triggers anger is that the individual rejects the hypothesis that the firm is
altruistic.
In this market, firms choose wage levels (i.e. it is not a competitive market) w and get in exchange a
product of p per worker, so when total employment is E its profits are (p‐w)E. If the firm is not altruistic,
that is all there is in the firms' utility (utility = profits). If the firm is altruistic, its utility is profits plus a
term that depends on the utility of the worker. The altruistic firm has a cost of α if worker utility is lower
than a certain level (this level is exogenous for this model, but can come from learning, adaptation,
18

history, etc). We call the threshold τ; we will set it to be the utility the worker would obtain in a “fairly
competitive” labor market (see below).
In what follows, and without loss of generality, we normalize t = 1 and all other parameters are just
“normalized by t”. This normalization is completely general. We also assume (without loss of generality)
that the number of workers is n=1.
Equilibrium
We will analyze a signaling game, in which firms, when choosing a wage level, signal their type. An
equilibrium in this setting is a triplet [e(w,x;μ),w(θ);μ(w)] where:
 e(‫ )ڄ‬is an "employment" decision strategy (the same for all workers; we are looking at symmetric
equilibria) as a function of wage, tastes x (or distance) and beliefs μ (of whether the firm is altruistic
or not) into {0,1}, where a=1 means "work" and a=0 means "don't work";
 w(‫ )ڄ‬is a function that maps types into wages (one wage for each type; the same function for all
firms);
 μ(‫ )ڄ‬is a function that maps wages into [0,1], such that μ(w) is a number that represents the
probability that the worker assigns to the firm being altruistic.
 e is optimal given x,w and μ; w is optimal given e (and other firms playing w); μ is consistent (it is
derived from Bayes' rule whenever possible).
We will focus on equilibria where beliefs are of the sort “I reject the firm is altruistic iff its wage w is such
that w < w* ” for some w* (it may be a target wage). We are ruling out (for example) equilibria in which
the worker rejects that the firm is altruistic if the firm pays a wage w > w* (i.e. the worker comes to
believe the firm is selfish even if it is paying a wage above the “target” wage; which would be of course
unnatural); in standard signaling models, beliefs like these may still be part of an equilibrium, because in
equilibrium one does not observe wages w > w* and so the consistency condition (that beliefs be
derived from Bayes rule) places no constraint on beliefs.
Oligopoly
In this section we characterize the pooling equilibria in an oligopoly. Of course, there may be separating
equilibria too. But we focus the analysis of pooling equilibria for four reasons.
1.The first is "analytic": we want to know whether the set of parameters for which there exists a pooling
equilibrium shrinks as the number of firms decreases; since there is no anger in pooling equilibria, this
would establish that the "chances" of anger appearing are larger when there is less competition.
2. The second reason for focusing on pooling equilibria is “historic”: in Peron’s speeches there is a
reference to the possibility that capitalism works well in some circumstances (for example, there is a
19

reference to this “calmness” in the speech of May 1st 1945). This “benchmark” case, form which the
local elites have departed, is represented as a pooling equilibrium.
3. The third is to avoid making choices that would need to be made, and that however we resolved
them, would leave some readers unsatisfied. Take for example the following. In a separating
equilibrium, workers are angry at some firms; when they are, the optimal wage by the firms is higher
(than if they are not); this leads to a larger material utility for workers. This leaves us with the
conundrum that selfish firms are giving to their employees a higher material utility, and yet they are
angry. This begs the question: are workers (in reality, not in the model) angry because the firm is selfish,
or because the firm acts in ways that harms its employees? Put differently, would you be angry at
somebody you know is nasty, but is temporarily pretending to be nice (not because he is trying to
change, but just to avoid some punishment)? Psychological research has not answered this question in a
satisfactory manner yet.
4. The final reason is tractability: in a separating equilibrium when there are many firms the patterns of
combinations of firms becomes complicated (a selfish firm surrounded by two selfish firms, or by one
selfish and one altruistic, or by two altruistic, etc; similarly for an altruistic firm and its neighbors). In ex‐
ante terms, though, each firm does not know whether its neighbors will be of one kind or the other.

Pooling Equilibria
Our first step is to find necessary conditions under which a wage wo is part of a pooling equilibrium in
which workers attain their target level of utility. Consider a firm who maximizes profits in a deviation
from a pooling equilibrium with wage wo (we are not including a utility cost of the deviating firm, since
we assume for the time being that the equilibrium is such that workers attain their target utility level τ).
If the firm increases its wage, workers won't be angry. In that case, labor supply is given by the sum of all
(unit) supplies of workers who are closer to the deviating firm than the two workers (one to each side)
who are indifferent between working for the firm we are analyzing and working for its neighbor:
w‐s‐x= wo ‐s‐(b‐x) ֞ S=2x=b+w‐ wo
Profits are then
(p‐w)(b+w‐ wo).
When the firm maximizes this expression, we obtain an optimal wage of

p  wo  b
w
2

20

For the firm not to want to deviate from wo, it must be the case that this optimal wage is lower than wo,
or equivalently

p  b  wo

(1)

In words, if the oligopoly wage is too low, the firms are better off increasing their wage, and workers will
not punish them (by getting angry). If the firm lowers its wage, consumers become angry, and labor
supply is given by the condition that

w  s  x    p  w  wo  s  b  x   S  b  1   w  p  wo
In that case, profits are
(p‐w)(b+(1+λ)w‐λp‐ wo).
For the firm not to want to deviate and offer the optimal wage in this deviation,



wo  b  p 1  2 
b  wo  p
w
 
21   
41   



2

it must be the case that profits in the equilibrium are larger than these deviation profits. Formally,

p  w

o

b  b 4w1   p 

2

o



 w o  p  b 1  2  2  1   



(2)

Notice that when λ= 0 (the standard Salop case), we obtain
wo = p ‐ b
An additional restriction is that for a given τ, as we decrease the number of firms the wage must also
increase to achieve the target utility. Worker utility (in a pooling equilibrium with wage wo) is the
number of firms, 1/b, times the total utility of workers hired by each firm (the 2 is because each firms
hires workers to both sides):
b





2 2 o
b
w  s  x dx  w o  s 

4
b 0
This utility is larger than τ if and only if

wo  s 

b
b
   wo    s 
4
4

(3)

We now present one important result: as competition decreases (enough), anger is more likely. The
following proposition shows that as competition decreases, a pooling equilibrium is less likely. But since
21

pooling equilibria have no anger, and separating equilibria do (in expected terms there will be some
selfish firms), when pooling equilibria disappear, anger appears.
Proposition 1. There is a critical n* such that for all n′> n ≥ n*, the set of pooling wages is smaller when
there are n firms than when there are n′. That is, as competition decreases, anger is more likely.
Proof. Define b* so that equations (3) and (1) hold with equality and are equated:

b*
4
 s
 p  b*  b*   p  s   
4
5
Let n*=1/b*. For b* > b the set of equilibrium wages is increasing in b (decreasing in n) because:
equation (3) is not binding; the slope of (2) is smaller (in absolute value), than the slope of (1). QED
The plot below illustrates the three constraints on wo imposed by equations 1‐3. The wage wo must lie
between the two loci with negative slopes (the flatter one is equation 2 and the steeper, 1) which arise
from the firms’ incentives not to deviate. The wage must also lie above the positively sloped constraint
(equation 3 that arises from the condition that fewer firms imply higher wages if workers are to obtain
their target utilities).
Admissible Region
Bounds on w

b
Next we present another relevant result, connecting the productivity of firms, the rise in anger, and the
possible subsequent regulation. This result provides a potential explanation for why people in less
developed countries don't like capitalism. If productivity is lower and more volatile in LDCs, that would
explain why capitalists and capitalism are not popular.
Proposition 2. When productivity decreases, or when it becomes more volatile, anger is more likely.

22

Proof. When productivity decreases, the two loci of equations (2) and (1) move downwards by the
amount of the decrease in productivity. Since equation (3) is unchanged, the set of pooling equilibrium
wages shrinks.
A larger volatility in productivities makes it more likely that a low (pooling breaking) cost will happen,
and then the selfish firms will reveal themselves as such and anger will arise. QED
An interesting point to note is that higher variability in productivity in LDCs could be the consequence of
higher regulations to begin with: firms in sectors with a comparative advantage could have higher
worker productivities while firms in protected sectors, lower productivities (even considering
government regulations to protect them). In a sense, then, Peronism by introducing distortions
generates anger towards capitalists, and perpetuates the beliefs that Peronism fostered.
The next result illustrates another obvious feature of the rise in anger: when for some exogenous reason
workers become “captive” of one particular firm, anger is more likely. The mechanism is as one would
expect: when worker's labor elasticity of supply decreases, local monopolies have an incentive to lower
wages. The temptation may be large enough that an anger‐triggering wage decrease may be profitable.
In countries with concentrated industries, like Argentina, and with little inter‐industry mobility, workers
do not have mobility and so elasticity of supply is lower.
We model this increase in captivity by changing the cost of reconverting to another industry, while
keeping rival's wages fixed. The reason for this assumption is simple: if it is suddenly harder for workers
employed in firm i to work in firm i‐1 or i+1, those firms will keep their wages fixed: if they didn't wish to
attract the marginal worker before the change in re‐conversion costs, they don't want to after, so there
is no incentive to raise wages; if firm i‐1 didn’t want to lower its wage before the change in costs, they
don't want to do so after, since the incentives of the marginal worker working for them haven't
changed. As will become transparent in the proof, an equivalent way of modeling this is assuming that
the two neighbors of the firm being analyzed move farther away, as if there had been a decrease in the
number of firms.
Proposition 3. Assume that for a given parameter configuration, there is a pooling equilibrium with a
wage of wo. If the cost of re‐converting to firms i‐1 or i+1 increases from 1 to t > 1, but the cost to firm i
remains constant, the firm’s incentives to decrease its wage increase. There is a threshold t* such that if
t ≥ t* firm i lowers its wage and workers become angry.
Proof. When the cost of converting to firms i‐1 and i+1 increases to t, the supply faced by firm i (after an
anger triggering decrease in wage) and its profits, are

S2

w  w o  w  p   bt
w  w o  w  p   bt
    p  w 2
t 1
t 1
23

and the optimal wage and profit are





p  w  2 p  bt
p  w o  bt
 
w
2  1
2  1t  1
2

Notice that in the equation for the optimal wage, an increase in t is equivalent to an increase in b: a fall
in the number of firms. For large enough t, these profits exceed the oligopoly profit, and the firm lowers
its wage its price, causing anger. QED
In the above proposition we have assumed that workers continue to make inferences based on the
equilibrium prior to the shock. Although one could argue that a new equilibrium (one with fewer firms,
or with higher t) should be the benchmark, we believe that keeping the old equilibrium beliefs is also
plausible. In addition, the case of fewer firms also leads to more anger, as established by Proposition 1.
The previous proposition may be particularly relevant for the rise of Peronism and Peronist beliefs. In a
time of rising speed of technological change, the cost of re‐converting to other industries also rises.
Hence, we may view the ascent of Peron as a consequence of the increasing exploitation by firms that
had gained more power over their workers.
Any wage wo in the range determined by equations (2) and (1) can be part of a pooling equilibrium if we
choose τ or α appropriately. Note that if the firm is altruistic and it lowers its wage enough, there could
be a utility cost of providing workers with a very low level of utility. Since we found necessary
conditions, we focused only on the incentives of the selfish firm. When we want to build an equilibrium
with a wage wo within the range we have just identified, we need to take into account this utility cost for
the altruistic firm. But choosing τ or α low enough, any one of these wages is part of an equilibrium. We
do not elaborate, because the construction is simple.
A brief discussion of policies in this model.
In this model there are three channels through which regulation (setting minimum wages and making a
transfer to the firm) affects welfare. First, there is the standard channel: a minimum wage larger than
market wages, but still below productivity increases total welfare by attracting workers to the firm (to
produce something worth p at a cost in terms of lost leisure and transportation cost of less than p). A
second, quite direct and simple, channel is through the reduction in anger: since an increase in wages
lowers firms’ profits, and total anger depends on the size of profits, a rise in wages reduces anger and
increases welfare. Finally, any channel that reduces anger (whether it increases wages or not) induces
workers to start working, and that further increases welfare. The second channel does not depend on
individuals changing behavior; this third channel arises because workers re‐optimize. Imagine for
example a policy that keeps wages at their pre‐policy levels, but "expropriates" the profits from the firm
(through a fine for example). In that case, in the standard model, welfare would be unchanged. In the
24

current model welfare increases for two reasons: first, each worker who was employed is happier, but
some who were not working will now enter the workforce and become available at the fined firm.
Intuition and some simple calculations show that in this model the appeal of fines to the firms and other
“populist” policies increases relative to their appeal in a setting where anger plays no role (that is λ = 0).
To illustrate, imagine that a policy with wage w and transfer T > 0 to the firm is slightly better in terms of
total welfare (in a standard model with no anger) to the policy (w, T = 0). In the model with anger, when
consumers are angry, the second policy that “beats on the firm” is preferred, since it reduces the
amount of anger. This is an example of a policy that looks bad in a standard model (a bad “populist”
policy), but that is potentially welfare enhancing when emotions are taken into account. Although we
don’t claim that all of the bad Argentine policies are driven by attention to emotions, we believe that
there is at least some truth to the idea that policies that are bad for long run material growth may be
optimal when workers (or consumers more generally) are angry at certain business sectors.

VI.

Conclusions

A central observation in Argentina’s relative decline is that it was accompanied by a strong reduction in
private investment: from the formidable rates of capital accumulation pre‐1913 financed primarily by
foreigners to the dismal later performance. Diaz Alejandro (1970) and Taylor (1994) have emphasized
the low savings rate and the high relative price of capital goods pre 1960. In this study we have focused
on the possibility that the decline in investment is connected to the country’s populist tradition, which
helped spread interventionist policies and fueled political instability. In particular, we have tried to
identify the nature of Peronist policies and the elements that made them so attractive, even when there
was a clear associated material cost.
Argentina’s relative decline becomes visible in the 1930’s and appears to accelerate in the 1970’s. These
two periods coincide with political instability: 1930 is the year of the first of several military coups and
marks the beginning of the “infamous” decade that would set the stage for the first Peron
administration; while the 1970’s is marked by the armed conflict involving left wing guerrillas and the
military (and paramilitary) forces which led to the military coup of 1976. Indeed, following Peron’s
ascent to the labor secretary in 1943, Peronism has been the preeminent political force in the country,
leading many to assume that no government could succeed without its explicit support. One reason for
its enduring legacy is that Peron’s interventionist policies where in tune with the times: after the 1930’s,
the increased presence of the State the economy was the norm, both in Argentina and in other
countries. But there are other factors that have made Peronist policies attractive to voters for such a
long period of time, even if they have contributed to its relative material decline. In this paper we focus
on three elements that help us throw light on the nature of Peronist policies and their enduring
significance.
25

First, we study some beliefs and values about the economic system present in Peron’s speeches during
the period 1943‐55. We emphasize that Peron appears to be concerned with the income generating
process, and note that he insists on the possibility that it is influenced by “others” and of there being
“exploitation”. Indeed, whereas economists have emphasized the role of luck versus individual effort in
the determination of income and how beliefs about their relative impact can affect economic system
(see for example, Piketty, 1995), it seems that Peron is focused on the influence of actors (elites,
foreigners) and how they can corrupt authorities and change the income of Argentines (as in Di Tella
and MacCulloch, 2009). This provides one possible explanation for why the process of learning in
policymaking might be less rational than the one described in Buera, et al (2010), in particular because it
is affected by attempts to understand/discover the intentions of different political actors (which by their
very nature are hard to verify). In Peron’s speeches, there are also a number of references to the idea
that labor relations can have non‐monetary dimensions and the speeches connect exploitation to this
“non‐material” dimension. This (trivially) explains why markets that are interpreted (and regulated) in
this way may perform poorly (from a material standpoint).
Second, we study survey data for the 1990’s on the beliefs of Peronist and Non Peronist voters in
Argentina and Democrat and Republican voters in the US. While Peronist have low income and
education relative to the opposition (so that they look like the US Democrats), their beliefs and values
suggest that Peronists are the Argentine equivalent of the Republicans. For example, whereas all
respondents in Argentina tend to believe that the poor are unlucky rather than lazy, Peronists (just like
Republicans in the US) are somewhat more inclined than the opposition (e.g., Non‐Peronists) to believe
that the poor are Lazy. In other words, while the opposition to Peron during 1943‐55 came from the
conservatives, the opposition to Peronism in the 1990’s comes from the left of the ideological spectrum.
It is worth reiterating that in both periods, the Peronists seem to have lower income and educational
achievement than the opposition. This suggests, at the very least, that the Peronists are changing less in
terms of political ideology than the opposition.
Finally, given that these beliefs are non‐standard (for economists), we present a model formalizing the
possibility that they are sub‐optimal from a narrow material perspective, but that they may be
associated with improved well‐being (for example, they reduce anger at aspects of economic
organization). In particular, we present a formal model of “exploitation” in the labor market where
agents derive pleasure from treating well (badly) those that have behaved well (badly) towards them.
Firms are of two types: one is a standard firm which might “exploit” the worker by paying him/her the
minimum possible wage, whereas the other type of firm “cares” for the worker. Even with few
“altruistic” firms, the equilibrium might involve no exploitation, as long as there is sufficient amount of
competition. With monopsony power, the “good” equilibria break down and there is scope for
regulation (of the kind proposed by Peron in his speeches) that generates first order welfare gains
(beyond Harberger triangles). We note that a firm might be exploiting workers even if it is paying the
same wage than other firms, as long as workers believe this firm is doing it out of “unkindness”
(formalized as reciprocal altruism).
26

Appendix 1: Peron’s Speeches quoted in the text
“Cuidaremos el factor brazo y haremos una Argentina de hombres libres”, 15 de octubre de 1944.
Buenos Aires, 1944, Secretaría de Trabajo y Previsión, Difusión y Propaganda.
“Las reivindicaciones logradas por los trabajadores argentinos no podrán ser destruidas”, 1 de Mayo
de 1945. Buenos Aires, 1945, sin datos de imprenta.
Discurso pronunciado en el Congreso de la Nación, 21 de Octubre de 1946, Habla Perón, Subsecretaría
de Informes, Buenos Aires.
Discurso pronunciado en el Congreso de la Nación, al declarar inaugurado el período de sesiones, 1 de
Mayo de 1947, Los Mensajes de Perón, Serie Azul y Blanca, Mundo Peronista Ed., Buenos Aires, 1952.
Manifestaciones del general Perón ante los representantes patronales de la Producción, Industria y
Comercio de la Nación, 24 de Junio de 1948, Habla Perón, Subsecretaría de Informes, Buenos Aires.
“Perón, leal amigo de los trabajadores del campo”, 5 de Marzo de 1950, Subsecretaría de
Informaciones de la Presidencia de la Nación.
Discurso pronunciado en el Congreso de la Nación, al declarar inaugurado el período de sesiones, 1 de
Mayo de 1950, Los Mensajes de Perón, Serie Azul y Blanca, Mundo Peronista Ed., Buenos Aires, 1952.
“Economía y sindicalismo justicialista”, 24 de Mayo de 1950, sin datos de fecha de publicación ni de
imprenta.
“La CGT escucha a Perón”, 9 de Agosto de 1950, sin datos ni de fecha ni de imprenta.
“Una etapa más en la ejecución de la doctrina peronista en el orden económico”, 7 de Febrero de
1950, Subsecretaría de informes de la presidencia de la Nación.
“Perón habla sobre la organización económica del país”, 12 de Mayo de 1950, sin datos ni de fecha ni
de imprenta.
“Perón y Eva hablan en el Día de los Trabajadores”, 1 de Mayo de 1951, Presidencia de la Nación,
Subsecretaría de Informaciones.
Discurso pronunciado el 5 de marzo de 1952, sin datos de imprenta ni de fecha.
Discurso pronunciado en el Congreso de la Nación, al declarar inaugurado el período de sesiones, 1 de
Mayo de 1952, Los Mensajes de Perón, Serie Azul y Blanca, Mundo Peronista Ed., Buenos Aires, 1952.

27

Appendix 2: Definitions of Variables used (form the World Values Survey)
Poor are Lazy refers to the question: “Why, in your opinion, are there people in this country who live in
need? Here are two opinions: Which comes closest to your view? 1. They are poor because of
laziness and lack of will power, 2. They are poor because society treats them unfairly”. Group 1
is that answering option 1, while Group 2 is that answering option 2.
Run by a few big Interests refers to the question: “Generally speaking, would you say that this country is
run by a few big interests looking out for themselves, or that it is run for the benefit of all the
people? 1. Run by a few big interests, 2. Run for all the people”. Group 1 is that answering
option 1, while Group 2 is that answering option 2.
Workers Should Follow Instructions refers to the question: “People have different ideas about following
instructions at work. Some say that one should follow one's superior's instructions even when
one does not fully agree with them. Others say that one should follow one's superior's
instructions only when one is convinced that they are right. With which of these two opinions do
you agree? 1. Should follow instructions, 2. Depends, 3. Must be convinced first.” Group 1 is that
answering option 1, while Group 2 is that answering options 2 and 3.
Jobs for Men refers to the question “Do you agree or disagree with the following statements? When jobs
are scarce, men should have more right to a job than women. 1. Agree, Neither Agree nor
Disagree, 3. Disagree”. Group 1 is that answering option 1, while Group 2 is that answering
option 3.
More Respect for Authority refers to the question: “I'm going to read out a list of various changes in our
way of life that might take place in the near future. Please tell me for each one, if it were to
happen, whether you think it would be a good thing, a bad thing, or don't you mind? Greater
respect for authority. 1. Good, 2. Don’t mind, 3. Bad”. Group 1 is that answering option 1, while
Group 2 is that answering option 3.
Less Emphasis on Money refers to the question: “I'm going to read out a list of various changes in our
way of life that might take place in the near future. Please tell me for each one, if it were to
happen, whether you think it would be a good thing, a bad thing, or don't you mind? Less
emphasis on money. 1. Good, 2. Don’t mind, 3. Bad”. Group 1 is that answering option 1, while
Group 2 is that answering option 3.
Acceptable to Cheat refers to the question: “Please tell me for each of the following statements whether
you think it can always be justified, never be justified, or something in between, using this card.
Cheating on taxes if you have a chance (scale 1 to 10 is shown with Never Justifiable below 1
and Always Justifiable below 10)”. Group 1 is that answering options 1 and 2, while Group 2 is
those answering options 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 10.
Competition Good refers to the question: Now I'd like you to tell me your views on various issues. How
would you place your views on this scale? 1 means you agree completely with the statement on
the left; 10 means you agree completely with the statement on the right; and if your views fall
somewhere in between, you can choose any number in between. A scale is shown with a 1 to 10
scale with the words “Competition is good. It stimulates people to work hard and develop new
ideas” below 1 and “Competition is harmful. It brings out the worst in people” below 10.

28

Table I: The Education and Income of Peronists and Democrats

Peronists

Non
Peronists

Percentage of group answering
Family income is in Lowest 5 of
10 categories

69

59

42

29

Percentage of group answering
education is in Lowest 6 of 9
categories

88

69

56

47

Democrats Republicans

Note: Peronist (Non‐Peronist) is the sub‐sample of Argentines that declare an intention to vote for the
Peronist Party (Any party that is not the Peronist Party). Democrats (Republicans) is the sub‐sample of
Americans declaring an intention to vote for the Democrat (Republican) Party. Family Income is the
respondent’s answer to a question about total family income. Education is the respondent’s
educational achievement.

29

Table II: The Beliefs of Peronists and Democrats: Luck vs Effort

Peronists

Non
Peronists

Laziness

39

20

49

75

Unfair Society

61

80

51

25

0.64

0.25

0.96

3

Peronists

Non
Peronists

Run by a few big Interests

71

95

76

68

Run for all

29

5

24

32

2.4

19

3.2

2.1

Ratio

Ratio

Democrats Republicans

Democrats Republicans

Note: (1) Peronist (Non‐Peronist) is the sub‐sample of Argentines that declare an intention to
vote for the Peronist Party (Any party that is not the Peronist Party). Democrats (Republicans) is
the sub‐sample of Americans declaring an intention to vote for the Democrat (Republican)
Party. (2) “Laziness” is the fraction of these groups answering “They are poor because of
laziness and lack of willpower” to the question “Why in your opinion are there people in this
country who live in need?”, whereas “Unfair Society” is the group answering “They are poor
because society treats them unfairly”. (3) “Run by a few big interests” is the group giving that
answer to the question “Generally speaking, would you say that this country is run by a few big
interests looking out for themselves, or that it is run for the benefit of all the people?”

30

Table III: Beliefs in Argentina and the US: Peronists look like Republicans

Poor are Lazy
Workers should follow
instructions

Run by few big interests

Jobs for Men instead of women

More respect for authority

More importance of money

Acceptable to cheat

Competition good

Argentina

United States

Ratio

Ratio

(Peronist/Non‐Peronist)

(Republican/Democrat)

2.6=0.64/0.25

3.1=3/0.96

0.64=39/61; 0.25=20/80

3=75/25;0.96=49/51

1.6

2.4

=0.81/0.51; 45/55;34/66

=3.35/1.4, 77/23;58/42

0.1

0.7

=2.4/19; 71/29;95/5

=2.1/3.2, 68/32;76/24

2.1

1.3

=0.59/0.28, 34/58;20/71

=0.37/0.3, 23/63;21/71

4.4

2.2

=15/3.4, 75/5;54/16

=28/12, 84/3;75/6

0.5

0.8

=3.3/6.5; 66/20;72/11

=9.6/11, 67/7;70/6

1.9

1.2

=4.9/2.6, 83/17;72/28

=6.1/4.9, 86/14;83/17

1.2

2.1

=1.2/1, 55/45;50/50

=2.7/1.3, 73/27;57/43

Note: Note: (1) Peronist (Non‐Peronist) is the sub‐sample of Argentines that declare an intention to vote
for the Peronist Party (Any party that is not the Peronist Party). Democrats (Republicans) is the sub‐sample
of Americans declaring an intention to vote for the Democrat (Republican) Party. (2) Definitions of beliefs in
the appendix.

31

References
Adelman, Jeremy (1999) Republic of Capital. Buenos Aires and the Legal Transformation of the Atlantic World,
Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.
Baschetti, Roberto (2004) Documentos 1970‐1973, Volumen 1: De la Guerrilla Peronista al Gobierno Popular,
Buenos Aires: Editorial de la Campana.
Bernetti, Jose Luis and Adriana Puiggrós (1993) “Peronismo: Cultura política y Educación (1945‐1955)”, in Historia
de le Educación en Argentina V, Adriana Puiggrós (editor), Buenos Aires: Galerna.
Bianchi, Susana (1992) "Iglesia católica y peronismo: la cuestión de la enseñanza religiosa (1946‐ 1955)", EIAL, Vol.
3, No. 2, 89‐103.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2000) “"Beyond the Melting Pot": Cultural Transmission, Marriage, and the Evolution of
Ethnic and Religious Traits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3), 955‐988.
Brambilla, Irene, Galiani, Sebastian and Guido Porto (2010) “Argentine Trade Policies in the XX Century: 60 Years of
Solitude”, forthcoming in Rafael Di Tella and Ed Glaeser (editors) Argentine Exceptionalism.
Brennan, James (1998) Peronism and Argentina, editor, New York: SR Books.
Buera, Francisco, Monge, Alex and Giorgio Primiceri (2010) “Learning and the Wealth of Nations”, mimeo
forthcoming Econometrica.
Boruchowicz, Cynthia and Rodrigo Wagner (2010) “Institutional decay: The failure of Police in Argentina and its
contrast with Chile”, forthcoming in Rafael Di Tella and Ed Glaeser (editors) Argentine Exceptionalism.
Converse, P. (1964) “The Nature of Belief Systems in Mass Publics”, in D. Apter (ed) Ideology and Discontent, pp.
206‐261. New York: Free Press.
Cortes Conde, Roberto, (1998) Progreso y declinación de la economía argentina. Un análisis historico institucional.
Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura Economica.
Cortes Conde, Roberto, (2000) “The Vicissitudes of an Exporting Economy: Argentina, 1875‐1930”. In Cardenas,
Enrique, Ocampo, Jose Antonio and Thorp, Rosemary (editors), An Economic History of Twentieth Century
Latin America. Volume 1. The Export Age: The Latin American Economies in the Late Nineteenth and Early
Twentieth Centuries. Oxford: Palgrave/St. Anthony’s College.
Cukierman, Alex and Mariano Tommasi, (1998) “When Does it Take a Nixon to go to China?” American Economic
Review, March, Vol. 88(1), 180‐97.
della Paolera, Gerardo and Alan M. Taylor. (1999) “Economic Recovery from the Argentine Great Depression:
Institutions, Expectations, and the Change of Macroeconomic Regime.” Journal of Economic History 59
(September): 567–99.
della Paolera, Gerardo and Alan M. Taylor. (2002) “Internal Versus External Convertibility and Emerging‐Market
Crises: Lessons from Argentine History.” Explorations in Economic History 39 (October): 357–89.
De Long, Bradford and Lawrence Summers (1991) “Equipment Investment and Economic Growth”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106 (May), 445‐502.
Diaz Alejandro, Carlos (1970) Essays on the Economic History of the Argentine Republic, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Diaz‐Alejandro, Carlos (1988) “No Less than One Hundred Years of Argentine Economic History Plus Some
Comparisons”, In Trade, Development, and the World Economy: Selected Essays of Carlos Diaz‐Alejandro,
edited by Andres Velasco, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch (2009), “Why Doesn’t Capitalism Flow to Poor Countries?”, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2009, Spring, 285‐321.
Di Tella, Rafael, Dubra, Juan and Robert MacCulloch (2010), “A Resource Belief Curse? Oil and Individualism”,
chapter 4 in William Hogan and Federico Sturzenegger (editors) The Natural Resources Trap: Private
Investment without Public Commitment, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Juan Dubra (2009), “Anger and Regulation,” NBER Working Paper No. 15201.
Di Tella, Torcuato (2003) Perón y los Sindicatos, Buenos Aires: Ariel Historia.
Escudé, Carlos (1990) El fracaso del proyecto argentino: Educación e ideología, Buenos Aires: Tesis.
Etchemendy, S. and V. Palermo (1998) “Conflicto y Concertación: Gobierno, Congreso y Organizaciones de Interés
en la Reforma Laboral del Primer Gobierno de Menem”, Desarrollo Económico, 37 (Marzo), 559‐90.

32

Fehr, E. and K. Schmidt (1999) “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Cooperation,” the Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 114(3), 817‐68.
Gaggero, Horacio and Alicia Garro (2009) Mejor que Decir es Hacer, Mejor que Prometer es Realizar. Estado,
Gobierno y Politicas Sociales durante el Peronismo (1943‐1955): Proyectos y Realidades, Buenos Aires:
Editorial Biblos/Fundacion Simon Rodriguez.
Galiani, Sebastian and Paulo Somaini (2010) “Path Dependent Import Substitution Policies: The Case of Argentina
in the XX Century”, forthcoming in Rafael Di Tella and Ed Glaeser (editors) Argentine Exceptionalism.
Gerchunoff, Pablo (1989) “Peronist Economic Policies, 1946‐55”, in The Political Economy of Argentina, 1946‐83,
Guido Di Tella and Rudiger Dornbusch (editors), London: Macmillan Press.
Gerchunoff, Pablo and Lucas Llach, (1998) El ciclo de la ilusión y el desencanto: un siglo de políticas económicas
argentinas, Buenos Aires: Ariel Sociedad Económica.
Gerchunoff, Pablo and Pablo Fajgelbaum, (2006), ¿Por que Argentina no fue Australia?, Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI.
Germani, Gino (1962) Política y Sociedad en una Época de Transición: de la Sociedad Tradicional a la Sociedad de
Masas, Buenos Aires: Paidos.
Glaeser, Edward, (2005) “The Political Economy of Hatred,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXX, 45‐86.
Halperin Donghi, Tulio (1994) La Larga Agonía de la Argentina Peronista, Buenos Aires: Ariel.
Hansen, G. (1985) “Indivisible labor and the Business Cycle”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 16, 309‐28.
Hernández Arregui, Jose (1973) La Formación de la Conciencia Nacional, 1930‐60, Buenos Aires: Plus Ultra.
Horowitz, Joel (1990) Argentine Unions, the State and the Rise of Peron, 1930‐43, Berkeley: Institute of
International Studies.
James, Daniel (1988) “October 17th and 18th, 1945: Mass Protest, Peronism and the Argentine Working Class”,
Journal of Social History, 2, 441‐62.
Jones, Mark, Saiegh, Sebastian, Spiller, Pablo, and Mariano Tommasi, (2002) “Amateur Legislators‐Professional
Politicians: The Argentine Congress”, American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 46, No. 3: 656‐669
Kinder, D. R. (1998) “Opinion and Action in the Realm of Politics”, in D. Gilbert, S. Fiske and G. Lindzey, (eds)
Handbook of Social Psychology, Vol. 1, pp. 778‐867. New York: Oxford University Press.
Levine, D.K., (1998) “Modelling Altruism and Spitefulness in Experiments”, Review of Economic Dynamics 1, 593‐
622.
Levitsky, Steve (2003) Transforming Labor‐Based Parties in Latin America: Argentine Peronism in Comparative
Perspective, Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, Paul (1980) “Was Peron a Fascist?”, Journal of Politics, 42, 1, 246‐50.
Llach, Lucas (2010) “ Newly Rich, Not Modern Yet: Argentina Before the Depression”, forthcoming in Rafael Di Tella
and Ed Glaeser (editors) Argentine Exceptionalism.
Miguens, Jose Enrique and Frederick C. Turner (1988) Racionalidad del Peronismo, Buenos Aires: Planeta.
Murillo, Maria Victoria (2001) Labor Unions, Partisan Coalitions and Market Reforms in Latin America, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Murmis, Miguel and Juan Carlos Portantiero (1971) Estudios sobre los Orígenes del Peronismo, Buenos Aires: Siglo
XXI Argentina
O’Donnell, Guillermo (1977) “Estado y Alianzas en la Argentina, 1956‐76”, Desarrollo Económico, 64.
Piketty, T. (1995) “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (3): 551–84.
Plotkin, Mariano (1993) Mañana es San Perón: Propaganda, Rituales Políticos y Educación en el Régimen Peronista
(1946‐1955), Buenos Aires: Ariel.
Portantiero, Juan Carlos (1973) “Clases Dominantes y Crisis Políticas en la Argentina Actual”, in Oscar Braun
(editor), El Capitalismo Argentino en Crisis. Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI.
Rokeach, M. (1973) The Nature of Human Values, New York: Free Press
Rotemberg, Julio J. (2008), “Minimally acceptable altruism and the ultimatum game,” Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization, 66, 457‐76.
Saiegh, Sebastian M. (2007) “Credible Commitments and Public Borrowing in Nineteenth‐Century Argentina”,
mimeo UCSD, (September). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1017630
Salop, S. (1979), "Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods," the Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 141‐56.

33

Sigal, Silvia and Eliseo Veron (2003) Perón o Muerte: Los Fundamentos Discursivos del Fenómeno Peronista,
Buenos Aires: Eudeba.
Spiller, Pablo and Mariano Tommasi, (2004) “The Institutional Foundations of Public Policy: A Transactions
Approach with application to Argentina,” Journal of Law Economics and Organization, Vol.19, No.2.
Stawski, Martin (2005) “El Populismo Paralelo: Política Social de la Fundación Eva Perón, 1948‐55”, in Patricia
Berrotaran, Anibal Jauregui and Marcelo Rougier (editors), Sueños de Bienestar en la Nueva Argentina:
Estado y Politicas Publicas durante el Peronismo, 1946‐1955, Buenos Aires: Imago Mundi.
Stokes, Susan (2001) Mandates and Democracy: Neoliberalism by Surprise in Latin America, Cambridge University
Press.
Taylor, A. M. (1994) “Tres fases del crecimiento económico argentino.” Revista de Historia Económica 12: 649–83.
Taylor, A. M. (1998) “Argentina and the World Capital Market: Saving, Investment, and International Capital
Mobility in the Twentieth Century.” Journal of Development Economics, 57: 147–84.
Torre, Juan Carlos (1990) Perón y la vieja guardia sindical, Buenos Aires: Sudamericana.
Torre, Juan Carlos (1989) “Interpretando (una vez más) los orígenes del Peronismo”, Desarrollo Económico, 28
(112), 525‐48.
Torres, Jose Luis (1973) La Década infame, Buenos Aires: Freeland.
Waisman, Carlos (1989) Reversal of Development in Argentina: Postwar Counterrevolutionary Politics and their
Structural Consequences, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

34

