                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          UNEXPLOITED GAINS FROM INTERNATIONAL DIVERSIFICATION:
            PATTERNS OF PORTFOLIO HOLDINGS AROUND THE WORLD

                                           Tatiana Didier
                                         Roberto Rigobon
                                        Sergio L. Schmukler

                                        Working Paper 16629
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16629


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




For very helpful comments, we would like to thank Andres Almazan, Fernando Broner, Ricardo Caballero,
Charlie Calomiris, V.V. Chari, Bob Gibbons, Julian di Giovanni, Alejandro Drexler, Pierre- Olivier
Gourrinchas, Graciela Kaminsky, Mark Kritzman, Michael Klein, Tarun Ramadorai, Rafael Repullo,
Dani Rodrik, Rafael Chaves Santos, Luis Servén, Steven Snider, Frank Warnock, and participants
at presentations held at the AEA Annual Meetings (Chicago), the European Central Bank, Harvard
University, the IMF, the IMF Ninth Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, the LACEA Annual
Meetings (Buenos Aires and Mexico City), MIT, the NBER Summer Institute, the NIPFP-DEA Workshop
on Capital Flows (New Delhi), and the XII Workshop in International Economics and Finance (Rio
de Janeiro). We are grateful to Tiago Caruso, Francisco Ceballos, Juan Carlos Gozzi, Jennifer Kim,
Ricardo Leal, Paula Pedro, Mercedes Politi, Virginia Poggio, Juliana Portella, and Mira Olson, who
provided excellent research assistance at different stages of the project, and Judith Goff, who helped
with the editing. The World Bank provided generous financial support through its research program.
The views expressed here do not necessarily represent those of the World Bank or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Tatiana Didier, Roberto Rigobon, and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Unexploited Gains from International Diversification: Patterns of Portfolio Holdings Around
the World
Tatiana Didier, Roberto Rigobon, and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 16629
December 2010
JEL No. F30,F36,G11,G15,L20

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies how portfolios with a global investment scope are actually allocated internationally
using a unique micro dataset on U.S. equity mutual funds. While mutual funds have great flexibility
to invest globally, they invest in a surprisingly limited number of stocks, around 100. The number
of holdings in stocks and countries from a given region declines as the investment scope of funds broadens.
This restrictive investment practice has costs. A mean-variance strategy shows unexploited gains from
further international diversification. Mutual funds investing globally could achieve better risk-adjusted
returns by broadening their asset allocation, including stocks held by more specialized funds within
the same mutual fund family (company). This investment pattern is not explained by lack of information
or instruments, transaction costs, or a better ability of global funds to minimize negative outcomes.
Instead, industry practices related to organizational factors seem to play an important role.


Tatiana Didier                                       Sergio L. Schmukler
The World Bank                                       The World Bank
1818 H Street NW                                     MSN MC3-301
MSN I8-808                                           1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, DC - 20433                               Washington, DC 20433
tdidier@worldbank.org                                Sschmukler@worldbank.org

Roberto Rigobon
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-516
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu
1. Introduction

The increase in global financial integration over the last twenty years has been
remarkable, and U.S. institutional investors that purchase foreign assets have been
significant participants in this growth. 1 Given standard economic theory, one would
expect to see greater international diversification accompanying the expansion of global
investment opportunities. Indeed, a number of studies show the gains that may be
achieved from such diversification. 2 To date, however, evidence on how investors
actually allocate their portfolios around the world and what determines it is still limited.
        In this paper, we aim to fill the gap in the literature by constructing a unique
micro dataset of asset-level portfolios for a group of important institutional investors. We
then document the main stylized facts regarding their global asset allocations and study
the factors behind their portfolio decisions, in particular how the organizational structure
of financial intermediaries affects international investments. To conduct the research, we
analyze U.S. equity mutual funds with an international investment scope. We find that,
although mutual funds that invest globally have significantly expanded the size of their
assets, they have been noticeably restrictive in the range of stocks they hold. In fact, they
tend to invest in about the same number of stocks (100 stocks) than mutual funds with a
more limited (regional or country) mandate do. Moreover, they forgo potential gains from
international diversification. This investment practice is not explained by lack of
information or instruments, transaction costs, or a better ability of global mutual funds to
minimize tail risk. Instead, it seems to be largely driven by industry practices related to
how mutual fund families structure their operations. These organizational factors seem
important to understand how managers and families (companies) allocate their portfolios
internationally.


1
  See, for example, Obstfeld and Taylor (2004), Stulz (2005), and Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009).
2
  On the supply side of funds, investors can reduce risk for a given level of expected returns (or increase
returns for a given level of risk) by investing internationally. A number of studies provide some evidence
on the gains from international diversification. See, for example, Grubel (1968), Harvey (1995), De Santis
and Gerard (1997), Errunza, Hogan, and Hung (1999), De Roon, Nijman, and Werker (2001), Goetzmann,
Li, and Rouwenhorst (2005), and Driessen and Laeven (2007). On the demand side, firms and governments
can reduce the cost of capital, finance new projects, and decrease the exposure of their balance sheets to
some domestic macroeconomic shocks by tapping international investors. See, for example, Rajan and
Zingales (1998), Stulz (1999), Van Wincoop (1999), Bekaert and Harvey (2000), and Gozzi, Levine, and
Schmukler (2008).

                                                    1
        Focusing on mutual funds offers important advantages. First, mutual funds, unlike
other types of institutional investors, such as hedge funds, pension funds, and individual
international investors, face regular reporting requirements. Thus, asset-level portfolios
for mutual funds can be constructed and traced over time since their inception. Second,
the structure of mutual fund families allows us to make within-family comparisons of the
behavior of “specialized funds,” which can invest only in certain countries or regions,
and “global funds,” which can invest anywhere in the world and thus have access to a
larger set of instruments (more firms from more countries). Knowing that a fund within a
mutual fund family holds certain stocks is an indication that the transaction costs to hold
them are not exceedingly large and that those stocks are indeed desirable (at least to other
fund managers within the same family). Moreover, information about those stocks has
already been collected at the family level and, in principle, might be available to all
managers in that family. Therefore, the relevance of information sharing, transaction
costs, and industrial organization aspects discussed in the literature can be analyzed by
comparing portfolios across funds within the same mutual fund family and across
families. In addition, the returns of specialized funds can be compared to those of global
funds, shedding light on the payoffs of different investment strategies.
        We collect portfolio holding and return data for the universe of actively managed
open-ended U.S. mutual funds established to purchase assets around the world. The data
on holdings contain asset-level annual portfolios between 1991 and 2005. We work with
a total of 499 fund families and 1,904 funds. The total number of fund-year observations
is 8,420 and the total number of asset-level holdings for all funds in all years is
1,359,750. The portfolio holdings have been matched to identify the country to which
each stock belongs, tracking holdings over time. We use daily returns at the fund level
between September 1989 and June 2006 for 36 fund families that have a variety of
mutual funds for which useful comparisons can be made. 3 We work with a total of
722,885 daily observations, comprising returns for all funds from these families.
        Three stylized facts about mutual fund international investments emerge from our
analysis. First, global funds have grown much more than specialized funds. For example,

3
 For the return data, we focus on the largest mutual fund families in terms of assets under management
and/or number of individual mutual funds. We are constrained by the need to concentrate on families with
both global and specialized funds to make useful comparisons.

                                                   2
in 1992, assets under management by global funds were about three times as large as
those managed by specialized funds; by 2004, global funds had grown to be six times as
large (US$530 billion) as specialized funds (US$89 billion). Second, both specialized and
global mutual funds hold a similar number of stocks (the average number of stocks is 150
and the median 95). In other words, the number of asset holdings in mutual fund
portfolios does not tend to be higher for global funds compared to specialized funds
within the same mutual fund family, even though the pool of investable assets is
significantly larger for global funds. For example, global funds belonging to
Oppenheimer Funds held on average 100 stocks in 2004 while its emerging market fund
invested in 125 stocks. Similarly, in 2004, AIM Family of Funds’ global funds held 105
stocks on average, whereas its specialized funds held 102 stocks on average. Third,
within each region of exposure, global funds hold fewer assets from fewer countries
when compared to specialized funds within the same mutual fund family. For instance, in
the case of Latin American holdings, the median specialized fund holds 41 stocks,
whereas global funds hold only around three stocks (94% fewer stocks than specialized
funds within their mutual fund families). Furthermore, global funds also invest in 75%
fewer countries in Latin America than specialized funds (about two countries compared
to six). The restrictive pattern of investment by global funds is relevant as global funds
are investing an increasing amount of funds in stocks from a limited set of companies and
countries. The natural question is then, what can rationalize this investment pattern.
       We argue, first, that instrument availability and transaction costs do not appear to
explain the stylized facts mentioned above. To start, mutual funds could increase the
number of stocks they hold since there are many stocks available for investment that are
not included in mutual fund portfolios. For example, in the case of Vanguard funds, even
though they tend to invest in many more stocks than funds from other families, the
number of stocks they hold still seems relatively small. In 2004, Vanguard funds held 482
stocks on average while the number of listed stocks worldwide was more than 39,000.
While high transaction costs could be an impediment to expand the number of stocks in
the portfolios (not all listed stocks could be bought at a low cost), they do not seem to be
driving the results either. The cross-fund comparison is revealing regarding transaction
costs. More specifically, the fact that one particular fund holds a certain stock is an


                                             3
indication that there are no clear investment restrictions related to that company.
Furthermore, mutual funds hold, on average, a very small fraction of market
capitalization. Global fund and specialized fund investments account (separately) for just
0.12% of firms’ market capitalization. This suggests that mutual funds are not large
relative to the stocks they hold and thus might be able to increase their exposures without
incurring major costs. In the case of global funds, they could also expand the range of
assets they hold by investing in the same stocks that specialized funds hold (to the extent
that specialized funds are not heavily exposed to the average company).
       Second, we find that lack of information at the mutual fund family level alone
does not seem to explain the apparent lack of international diversification. If global and
specialized funds within families shared information and made similar decisions, one
should observe that they hold similar portfolios (or that global funds follow specialized
funds to the extent that the latter know better each particular country or region).
However, we do not find evidence consistent with managers using, to a large extent,
information already gathered and/or processed by other managers within the same mutual
fund family. For example, global and specialized funds share only 16% of their holdings
(or, on average, 36% of net asset value of investments). Moreover, portfolios become
more similar when global and specialized funds are managed by some of the same
managers; and the similarity increases with the number of common managers. Thus, to
the extent that it is costly to gather and process information and managers compete with
each other within families, one would observe portfolio choices consistent with the ones
documented in this paper. In sum, industrial organizational aspects of the mutual fund
industry could partly explain the restrictive international investment practices.
       Third, we show that mutual fund family effects appear to be a strong driving
factor of the portfolio choices of individual funds. For example, funds in the Templeton
Group held on average 129 stocks in 2005, significantly fewer than the 517 stocks held
on average by funds in the Vanguard Group. In fact, family effects explain almost 50% of
the cross-sectional and time-series variation in the number of stock holdings and the
portfolio loadings on the top ten holdings, vastly exceeding the explanatory power of
commonly used measures that capture the ability of funds and managers to gather and
process information and make portfolio choices. These family effects point to the


                                              4
importance of organizational norms at the company level that determine how different
funds pick stocks, and go beyond restrictions and organizational practices at the fund
level that affect how each individual fund allocates its portfolio. Family effects are not
fully captured by the observables we have included in the estimations and may
encompass, among others, norms about investment policies, top management preferences
and practices, and internal optimization algorithms.
         The fact that global funds do not tend to hold more stocks than specialized funds
does not necessarily imply a diversification loss. If assets within and across countries
were perfectly correlated, global funds could obtain the same degree of diversification
benefits as specialized funds do by simply holding fewer stocks, possibly in fewer
countries. Thus, return correlations could account for the patterns observed in the data,
implying no return losses or excessive variance for investors. To explore this issue, we
use first a mean-variance optimization framework to estimate the performance of
simulated global funds (constructed as a portfolio of specialized funds from the same
global fund family) and compare it to the performance of actual global funds. 4 By
definition, this is a very restrictive exercise, since simulated global funds cannot choose
among all the stocks available to specialized funds, but rather they must invest in a
portfolio already held by another fund within their fund family. This guarantees that the
stocks are available for investment (i.e., that we are considering a feasible set), that they
are attractive to at least one other manager in the same family, and that information about
the stocks was already collected and analyzed by someone relatively close to the global
fund manager. Our results suggest that there are potential gains from further international
diversification. Global funds could obtain better risk-adjusted returns if they invested in
portfolios that include holdings similar to those of specialized funds, even within the
same mutual fund family. In other words, by not increasing the number of stocks as funds
expand their investment scope, global funds forgo the benefits that broader international
diversification entails. For example, we find that the average return of global funds could
increase between 2.6% and 5.5% per year if they maximized daily or weekly returns


4
  Each simulated global fund also includes a non-negative weigh on the global fund itself. The nature of
this exercise is different from the one performed by Evans and Archer (1968), which studies how the
variation of returns for randomly selected portfolios changes as a function of the number of securities in the
portfolio.

                                                      5
following a mean-variance approach. The results are robust to many types of estimations
that take into account expected returns, variances, and benchmark effects.
        We also use the simulated global funds to look beyond a mean-variance
framework and explore the possibility that there is an insurance premium in the returns of
global funds. Because global funds, unlike specialized funds, can secure gains by moving
away from troubled countries during crisis times, investors might be willing to pay for
this benefit by accepting lower expected returns. Our results indicate that global funds do
not seem to better shield investors from tail risk. We find that the skewness and kurtosis
of global fund returns are similar to those of the simulated global funds. Higher moments
of the distribution of returns are important if global funds were to minimize losses during
bad times instead of following standard mean-variance models. Moreover, conditional on
large negative returns on either specialized funds or the MSCI Emerging Market Index,
we find that returns of the simulated global funds are broadly similar to those of global
funds. In sum, the lack of diversification does not seem to be explained by a better
performance of global funds during turbulent times. It is nevertheless possible that global
funds provide some other unobservable benefits that are not captured by the mean-
variance and other analyses performed in this paper.
        Our findings contribute to several strands of the literature. First, our paper relates
to a large literature on the extent of investor international diversification. Most of this
research has concentrated on aggregate measures to explain the determinants of
international investments and on country portfolios to study the degree to which countries
hold assets abroad.5 More recently, researchers have begun to exploit asset-level data
based on institutional investor portfolios, although the evidence remains scarce. 6 Our
findings on mutual funds with global reach reinforce the existing evidence of growing but
still limited international diversification. Furthermore, our results provide evidence that
some of the usual explanations for these international investment patterns, such as the
relevance of transaction costs and the lack of available information, are not sufficient to

5
  A large part of the literature has focused on the home bias puzzle, starting with the seminal work of
French and Poterba (1991). See Tesar and Werner (1995), Brennan and Cao (1997), Kraay, Loayza,
Serven, and Ventura (2005), Portes and Rey (2005), Aviat and Coeurdacier (2007), Lane and Milesi-
Ferretti (2008), among many others.
6
  See, for example, Strong and Xu (2003), Cai and Warnock (2006), Eun, Huang, and Lai (2008), and Hau
and Rey (2008).

                                                  6
fully address the findings in this paper.7 Limited information does not seem to be a driver
of limited international diversification in the sense that information is available at the
mutual fund family level. The problem arises on how information is shared across funds
within a family. Moreover, the lack of diversification is not driven by the inability of
global funds to purchase more securities or at least the same securities that specialized
funds hold, since each individual fund invests in relatively few stocks, the fund
allocations are small compared to the size of the market, and specialized funds tend to
hold more securities in each country and region. In other words, the results do not seem
to be driven by instrument availability or transaction costs. Instead, our findings suggest
that organizational factors within the finance industry, overlooked by the international
literature, explain at least in part the limited degree of international diversification.
        Second, we contribute to the literature on how financial markets work by studying
portfolios within and across mutual fund families, which sheds light on the drivers of
international portfolio allocations. The industrial organization literature, broadly
understood, emphasizes the role of management practices in affecting corporate
behavior. 8 Furthermore, this literature highlights the relevance of idiosyncratic firm
effects (beyond the usual factors related to the production function, plant effects, demand
factors, or even managerial effects) in explaining corporate behavior, diversification
strategies (across products), productivity, and performance. 9 Our findings on mutual
funds are consistent with those in the organizational economics literature, in the sense
that routines and internal practices (instead of pure financial diversification
considerations) appear to affect global asset allocation. For instance, the existence of
within-family competition among managers seems to be behind our finding of low
commonality in portfolio holdings across mutual funds within a given family; namely,
mutual fund families seem to be organized in a way that makes their own managers


7
  See, for example, Kang and Stulz (1997), Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001), Grinblatt and Keloharju
(2001), and Daude and Fratzscher (2008).
8
  See Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997), Black and Lynch (2001), Bertrand and Schoar (2003),
Lafontaine and Shaw (2005), and Bloom and van Reenen (2007), among many others. In particular,
Gibbons and Henderson (2010) argue that differences in performance across firms arise because of
different management practices, which depend on relational contracts that are not easy to imitate.
9
  See, for example, Griliches and Mairesse (1983), Griliches (1986), Montgomery and Wernerfelt (1988),
Baily, Hulten, Campbell, Bresnahan, and Caves (1992), Cohen and Bacdayan (1994), Henderson and
Cockburn (1996), Bartelsman and Doms (2000), and Nelson and Winter (2002), among many others.

                                                  7
compete and not talk to each other.10 Moreover, our evidence that the number of stocks
held across mutual funds and the portfolio loadings on the top ten holdings are
significantly explained by family effects, with a limited role for investment mandates,
suggests that the organization of each company in particular and the financial industry in
general might be an important factor in determining how financial intermediaries allocate
their portfolios across countries.11,12
        A related but separate strand of the literature discusses the role of incentives in
affecting manager behavior. In particular, the finance literature highlights a misalignment
between the incentives of managers of financial intermediaries (e.g. banks, hedge funds,
and mutual funds) and those of the underlying investors, which may lead to long-lasting
mispricings and cause managers to hold suboptimal portfolios from the investors’
perspective.13 Our paper finds evidence consistent with the view that fund managers do
not hold optimal international portfolios from the investors’ point of view if a mean-
variance framework is considered, to the extent that the underlying investors hold their
global allocation through global funds.
        Lastly, we contribute to the literature on the investment patterns of institutional
investors and mutual funds specifically. Part of this literature has focused on U.S. mutual
                                    14
fund domestic investments.               Another strand has studied investment patterns of
institutional investors in emerging markets.15 By analyzing mutual funds with different
investment scopes as well as their portfolio choices over relatively long time series, we

10
   See, for example, Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2005) and Kempf and Ruenzi (2008). In separate work,
Csaszar (2009) explores how organizational structures affect mutual funds stock-picking behavior.
11
   In related work, Pollet and Wilson (2008) analyze U.S. domestic mutual funds and find that funds
respond to asset growth by increasing the investments in their current holdings rather than the number of
holdings in their portfolios (implying higher diversification). Moreover, funds with many siblings diversify
less rapidly as they grow, suggesting that the fund family may influence a fund’s portfolio strategy.
12
   Though part of the literature has addressed issues related to mutual fund families, it has, however,
focused on the decisions of the top management of a family and the existence of cross-fund subsidization to
promote “high value” funds. See, for example, Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004) and Gaspar, Massa, and
Matos (2006).
13
   Some papers argue that perverse incentives might lead to excessive manager risk taking and sub-optimal
decisions, whereas others suggest the opposite effect. See Shleifer and Vishny (1990), Bebchuk and Stole
(1993), Brown, Harlow, and Starks (1996), Chevalier and Ellison (1997, 1999), Dow and Gorton (1997),
Bolton, Freixas, and Shapiro (2004), Stein (2005), and Rajan (2006), among others.
14
   See, for example, Grinblatt and Titman (1992), Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), Grinblatt, Titman, and
Wermers (1995), Carhart (1997), Wermers (1999).
15
   See Kang and Stulz (1997), Choe, Kho, and Stulz (1999), Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001), Kim and
Wei (2002), Edison and Warnock (2004), Kaminsky, Lyons, and Schmukler (2004), Chan, Covrig, and Ng
(2005), Gelos and Wei (2005), Broner, Gelos, and Reinhart (2006), among many others.

                                                     8
present new evidence on how mutual funds behave and explore how the organization of
financial intermediaries can affect the investment decisions they make across countries
and regions.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section
3 studies how U.S. mutual funds allocate their portfolios internationally. Section 4
analyzes the factors behind the degree of international diversification. Section 5 studies
whether there are potential costs and gains to the international diversification strategies of
global funds. Section 6 concludes.

2. Data

To conduct the analysis, we use data on U.S. equity mutual funds established to purchase
assets around the world.16 The U.S. mutual fund industry is very large (in 2005 there
were 8,044 mutual funds with a market capitalization of US$ 8 trillion, or 69% of U.S.
GDP), has a strong international presence (according to some estimates, U.S. mutual
funds represent more than 70% of the assets held worldwide by all mutual funds),
channels a significant share of retirement savings (mutual funds captured 24% of
retirement savings in the U.S. in 2004), and is a relatively mature and sophisticated
industry. We use two types of data: mutual fund holdings and mutual fund returns.
        Mutual fund holdings are available from Morningstar, a company that collects
mutual fund data. We analyze reports from March 1992 (when they became available)
until June 2006. While some mutual funds provide monthly reports, most do so quarterly
or semiannually (depending on the reporting SEC rules at the time). Given this
heterogeneity in the release of new information, we construct our database with the last
reported portfolio information for each fund in any given year. For example, our sample
of mutual fund holdings for 2005 contains portfolio data for the Fidelity Worldwide Fund
as of October 2005 and portfolio data for the Scudder Global Fund as of December 2005.
In sum, we collect end-of-year detailed information on portfolio holdings between 1991




16
  Funds that focus on both debt and equity are excluded from the analysis, even though they do invest a
significant share of their portfolios in foreign stocks.

                                                  9
and 2005. We collect stock names, amount invested in each stock by each fund, and
country of origin of these stocks.17
        One difficulty in constructing the holdings database is that mutual funds report
their asset allocation separately over time, that is, their holdings are not linked and do not
tend to have identifiers across reports. Therefore, each security needs to be identified at
each point in time. This is not a simple task as stock identifiers are rarely available and,
when they are, they are not always unique. We match these holdings across mutual funds
over time based on the country of origin (when available) and the stock name for each
security holding. We can then determine whether the same stocks appear in different
mutual fund portfolios across and within fund families.
        Table 1 describes the data. We collect data on 8,420 fund-year portfolio holdings
over the period 1991 to 2005, covering 499 mutual fund families (companies) and a total
of 1,904 funds. Each mutual fund family has on average four different mutual funds.
Some families sell the same portfolio to investors under different names depending on
their fee structure and minimum investment requirements. In this paper, we consider
these different funds (with identical portfolios) only once; i.e., we do not treat them as
separate funds as Morningstar does.18 The total number of asset-level observations in our
dataset is 1,359,750, counting each stock-level allocation across all funds over time.
        The U.S. mutual fund industry is organized by splitting funds according to their
investment scope (Figure 1). In particular, funds are classified into five categories: world
funds, foreign funds, emerging market funds, regional funds, and country funds. Regional
funds are divided into: Asia (and Pacific) funds, Europe funds, and Latin America (and
the Caribbean) funds.19 World funds invest all over the world including the U.S., while
foreign funds invest around the world excluding the U.S. Emerging market funds invest
only in emerging market assets.20 Regional and country funds invest only in a particular

17
   We classify holdings according to the country of origin of the company issuing the stock, independent of
whether these assets are traded in domestic or international markets.
18
   For example, Fidelity Advisors Funds contain the following Latin America funds with the same
portfolio: Fidelity Advisors Latin America A, Fidelity Advisors Latin America B, and Fidelity Latin
America T.
19
   Asia funds can actually invest in countries located in both the Asian and the Pacific regions. Latin
America funds can also invest in countries in the Caribbean. Some Europe funds also tend to invest in
countries in Africa, such as South Africa.
20
   Emerging markets are typically middle-income countries. However, these funds might also invest a small
proportion of their portfolios in low-income countries.

                                                   10
region or country, respectively. For ease of exposition, we group funds into two
categories: “global funds” and “specialized funds.” Global funds encompass world funds
and foreign funds. All other fund types are called specialized funds, investing in a subset
of the assets available to global funds. Naturally, funds with a wider investment scope
(global funds) are always able to invest in the stocks held by specialized funds, but not
vice versa.
        We also collect data on the time series of return/price data on mutual funds. Since
these are open-ended funds, the value of each fund each day reflects the value of their
underlying holdings or the net asset value (NAV). To be able to compare returns across
funds within families, we restrict our focus to large families with several types of funds.
We thus use daily returns at the fund level between September 1989 and June 2006 for 36
mutual fund families, as reported in Table 1. We work with a total of 722,885 daily
observations, encompassing all returns for all funds in our sample. We include all funds
within a given family of funds. On average, each family has ten different mutual funds.21

3. How Do Mutual Funds Allocate Their Portfolios Globally?

The U.S. mutual fund industry’s activity in international capital markets has expanded
sharply since the early 1990s. For example, in 1991 there were fewer than 170 mutual
funds established to invest in international equity, while in 2005 there were almost 700
funds. While the number of global funds increased steadily until the early 2000s, that of
specialized funds increased until 1998 and declined since then (Figure 2). This was likely
driven by the Asian and Russian crises that seem to have generated a desire to hold funds
that can invest more freely around the world. At the end of 2005, there were 490 global
funds and 186 specialized funds. In terms of assets under management, the differences
are even starker. Global (specialized) funds managed US$29 ($7) billion in 1991 and
US$781 ($160) billion in 2005. This pattern holds across more specific fund types.
Foreign funds had the most noticeable increase, with assets under management increasing
from US$10.3 billion to US$540 billion between 1991 and 2005. In sum, the data show a




21
  See Appendix Table 1 for a detailed description of the sample coverage of the price data for each mutual
fund family.

                                                   11
clear trend in the U.S. equity mutual fund industry toward funds with a wider investment
scope over funds that invest in specific regions or countries.
        Given the increasing importance of global funds, it is natural to ask to what extent
their portfolios differ from those held by specialized funds and how widespread their
investments are. We thus explore to what degree mutual fund holdings vary across
different fund types within mutual fund families. In principle, as the investment scope
increases, funds should be able to hold more assets across more countries and likely gain
opportunities to diversify risk better.
        Table 2 presents the average, median, and standard deviation in the number of
holdings across mutual fund types over the entire 1991-2005 period, pooling all the data.
The table shows that both global and specialized mutual funds hold a similar number of
stocks. The median number of holdings for world funds is 106 stocks (76 when excluding
U.S. assets). The median number of holdings for foreign funds is 105 stocks, while the
median for emerging market funds is 121 stocks. The medians for Europe and Asia funds
are 71 and 65 stocks, respectively, while Latin America and country funds hold 56 and 63
stocks, respectively. These median values are lower for more specialized funds. Overall,
the number of asset holdings in mutual fund portfolios does not tend to be higher for
global funds compared to specialized funds, even though the pool of investable assets is
significantly larger for global funds. In addition, Figure 3 shows the median number of
holdings for different mutual fund types. The top panel of Figure 3 reports these medians
for world funds (with and without U.S. holdings), foreign funds, emerging market funds,
and regional funds. The bottom panel displays the number of stocks held by Asia funds,
Europe funds, Latin America funds, and country funds. The median number of holdings
is surprisingly stable over the 15-year period and similar across fund types.22 Across fund
categories there is no clear time pattern. In sum, the data suggest that mutual fund
managers tend to invest in a limited number of stocks that does not increase significantly
as the investment scope widens.23


22
   Although not shown, the average number of holdings is also stable over time and similar across fund
types.
23
   This pattern does not seem to be unique to mutual funds investing internationally. When repeating this
exercise for U.S. mutual funds dedicated to domestic investments and for a popular and broad ETF family
(iShares), similar patterns arise.

                                                   12
       Do global funds hold fewer assets than specialized funds within each region of
exposure, given that the number of stocks held by global funds does not increase
significantly relative to specialized funds? The data presented in Table 3 confirm that this
is indeed the case. For example, the Latin America funds’ median number of assets is 41.
However, emerging market funds (with a greater investment scope) hold on average 34%
fewer assets in this region than the Latin America fund within its mutual fund family. The
difference in the number of holdings is even more striking for global funds, which hold
93% and 94% less assets in Latin America, respectively for foreign and world funds.
Furthermore, foreign and world funds also invest, respectively, in 72% and 75% fewer
countries in Latin America than their specialized counterparts. For Asia, the numbers
suggest a similar pattern. While the median number of holdings for specialized funds is
60, the median number of holdings for foreign and world funds is 35 and 19 assets,
respectively, implying a drop of 42% and 69% relative to the specialized Asian fund
within the same mutual fund company. If the number of countries is considered, global
funds also hold assets from significantly fewer countries than Asia funds in the same
mutual fund family. Lastly, a similar trend is observed when holdings in developed
Europe are considered: global funds hold fewer assets from fewer countries within
Europe than specialized funds.
       In sum, as their investment scope becomes broader, mutual funds invest larger
amounts in fewer stocks and fewer countries within each region of exposure. If asset
returns were perfectly correlated this behavior would not be surprising, as there would be
no further diversification gains from holding more assets. Several other reasons could
also help explain this pattern. These reasons are studied in the rest of the paper.

4. What Factors Might Explain the Global Portfolio Allocations?

To understand the factors behind mutual fund investment practices, we first examine the
extent to which assets are available for investment and whether mutual funds exhaust
those investment opportunities. We also analyze whether transaction costs might hinder
further participation in the markets. We then study the degree of stock commonality
across funds within families and explore the importance of fund and family effects to
illustrate how organizational aspects might affect the way in which mutual funds invest.


                                             13
A.       Asset Availability and Transaction Costs
A first step to understanding the extent of international diversification by mutual funds is
to analyze the universe of assets in which they can invest. Table 4 reports the size of the
universe of stocks in 1997 and 2004.24 It shows the total number of listed stocks across
different regions for both developed and developing countries.25 There were more than
30,000 listed stocks in 1997 and over 39,000 in 2004.
         Table 4 also reports the actual number of mutual fund holdings and the percent of
holdings relative to the number of locally listed companies for all funds in our dataset
(including global funds), and for global funds separately. In 1997, mutual funds invested
in about 9,000 different firms from around the world. In developed countries, they held
on average 52% of the listed assets. In developing countries, however, they held only
13% of the listed stocks. A more pronounced pattern emerges when considering only
global funds, which have become very large over the sample period. In 1997, global
funds held 38% (8%) of the number of stocks in developed (developing) economies.
         Table 4 also shows that, although the universe of listed companies has increased
between 1997 and 2004, there has been a considerable decline in the number of mutual
fund holdings during this period. This decline has not been concentrated in any particular
region, but has been more accentuated in developing countries, where a fall of 52% in
asset holdings across all funds is observed. In developed countries, the number of
holdings declined 24%. When only global funds are considered, a similar investment
pattern emerges. By 2004, their holdings had decreased to 26% of the listed assets in
developed countries. In developing countries, the number of holdings fell approximately
46% between 1997 and 2004, from 8% to only 3% of the number of listed stocks.
         Although the number of mutual fund holdings fell between 1997 and 2004, the
amount invested in these stocks grew significantly, in both developed and developing
countries. Investments in developed countries rose from US$204 billion in 1997 to
US$446 billion in 2004, a 119% increase. In developing countries, investments also more
than doubled, increasing from US$30 billion to US$62 billion between 1997 and 2004.

24
   Assets from the U.S. are excluded from this table because our focus is on the international holdings of
mutual funds. Offshore financial centers are also excluded, because while firms typically issue securities in
these centers, their main operations are located elsewhere.
25
   Developed countries are high-income countries and developing countries (including emerging
economies) are non-high-income countries, according to the World Bank classification of countries.

                                                    14
Thus, a growing amount of funds is being invested in fewer firms, more significantly so
in developing countries.
       To complement the evidence that mutual fund investments are concentrated in
few companies, Figure 4 illustrates how mutual funds invest across countries. The figure
plots the ratio of the number of companies held in mutual fund portfolios to the total
number of listed companies. These ratios are computed on a yearly basis and reported
according to their averages over the 1997-2004 period. Countries are sorted by the extent
of mutual fund investment and divided in quintiles. Reinforcing the previous evidence,
this figure shows that mutual fund holdings are not spread evenly across countries. For
around half of the countries in the sample, mutual funds invest in at most 20% of the
listed companies. In no country do mutual funds exhaust the number of listed stocks.
Moreover, only developed countries appear in the highest quintile. Among developing
countries, Mexico has the highest ratio (44%), and among developed countries, the
Netherlands has the highest ratio (77%). In the bottom two quintiles, there are 24
developing countries but only four developed countries.
       Another possible explanation for the restricted number of holdings of mutual
funds is transaction costs. First, transaction costs could be an impediment to expand the
number stocks in mutual fund portfolios since not all listed stocks could be bought at a
low cost. However, cross-fund comparisons suggest that transaction costs do not present
a strong binding constraint. In particular, the fact that one fund holds a certain stock is an
indication that there are no clear investment restrictions related to that company. The
evidence presented in Table 3 suggests that, for example, global funds could indeed
expand the range of their investments by simply investing in the same stocks that
specialized funds hold. Second, mutual funds could be relatively large. For instance, if
specialized funds held a large fraction of the available shares, global funds would find it
difficult to invest in those stocks without affecting prices.
       To investigate whether there are restrictions coming from the supply side of
investments, Table 5 reports the size of individual mutual fund holdings relative to firms’
market capitalization. The table shows that, on average, mutual funds hold a very small
fraction of market capitalization: both global funds and specialized funds account each




                                              15
for 0.12% of firms’ market capitalization.26 Consequently, if funds wanted to increase the
exposure to their current holdings, they could probably do so without generating a
significant price impact. Furthermore, the patterns observed regarding mutual fund
holdings do not seem to be driven by the inability of global funds to hold more stocks
across countries either. For example, if specialized funds were to increase in size by $900
million (the average global fund size), their investments on average would only account
for 0.53% of firms’ market capitalization. In sum, neither the lack of available assets nor
transaction costs seem to present strong binding constraints to the portfolio choices of
mutual funds to the extent that mutual funds could increase their current exposures and
expand the range of assets they hold without incurring in high costs.

B.      Stock Commonality
        Next, we analyze the degree to which funds within families invest in similar
stocks to shed light on whether information is shared. To the extent that information is
costly to obtain and process and the managers of specialized funds have already decided
on an asset allocation and have specific information about their particular countries or
regions, global fund managers within the same mutual fund family could benefit from
this information and choose among the stocks selected by their peers. In other words, if
global and specialized funds within mutual fund families shared information and made
similar decisions, one should observe similar portfolios across them. From the evidence
presented above on the number of holdings across fund types, we already know that
global funds are not holding the same portfolios than specialized funds (they hold fewer
stocks within each region), but we do not know whether the stocks picked are actually the
same, i.e. a subset of those held by specialized funds. It is also possible that portfolio
holdings are not similar across funds within families, which would be the case if
managers competed with each other, with each manager gathering its own information.
        To assess the portfolio similarity, and hence information sharing across funds
within mutual fund families, we ask: what is the likelihood that, within a fund family, a
stock held by a specialized fund is also held by a global fund? The within-family
comparison is important given the large heterogeneity in holdings across mutual fund

26
  The number for global funds and specialized funds is similar because, although global funds are larger
than specialized funds, they tend to invest in larger firms in terms of market capitalization.

                                                  16
families (documented in the next sub-section) and the hypothesis of interest, that is,
whether fund managers in the same company make similar decisions as a sign of
information sharing.
        We first compute frequency counts to study the degree of commonality. We
consider global and specialized funds within a mutual fund family and count the number
of observations for which a stock is held by either one of these two fund types, with each
of the almost 400,000 observations being a family-year-stock observation. Then we
compute the fraction of the observations in which a stock is held (a) by one fund type but
not the other, (b) by both fund types, and (c) by the global fund when there is no
specialized fund within the same family that could hold that stock. 27 We make these
comparisons on a yearly basis; for example, we compare a stock held by a specialized
fund at time t with the stocks held by the corresponding global fund also at time t. By
construction, no observation falls into the case in which there is no global fund that could
not hold a stock held by a specialized fund; that is, for every specialized fund there is
always a global fund within the mutual fund family.28 Also by construction there are no
observations for which a stock is held by neither the global fund nor the specialized fund.
We repeat this exercise considering only holdings in developing countries and breaking
global funds into world funds and foreign funds.
        The results are shown in Table 6 for all holdings in the top panel and for holdings
in developing countries only in the bottom panel. Each cell represents the relative
frequency of the observations, that is, the joint probability that global and specialized
funds hold/do not hold a particular stock. Conditional probabilities can be obtained by
looking at a particular row or column. The evidence from Table 6 suggests that global
funds and specialized funds do not hold many stocks in common. When considering all
holdings, only 16% of actual holdings are shared by both fund types; in developing
countries, that fraction is 13%. Importantly, only 23% of the global fund holdings are
shared by specialized funds. Moreover, 32% of the stocks are held by specialized funds
alone but not by global funds. The results from Table 6 (bottom panel) also suggest that
most of the mutual fund holdings in developing countries are explained by holdings of

27
  U.S. assets are excluded from this analysis.
28
  We exclude all family-year-stock observations for which mutual fund families do not have one of the
fund types considered in that given year.

                                                 17
specialized funds. For example, 75% of the stocks held by mutual funds are held by
specialized funds but not by global funds. In other words, a mere 25% of the stocks in
developing countries in our sample are held by global funds. Furthermore, conditional on
being held by a specialized fund, there is only a 15% probability that a stock from a
developing country is held by a global fund. In sum, relative to specialized funds, global
funds seem to be investing in a different set of firms.29
        The frequency counts shown in Table 6 and Appendix Table 2 measure to what
extent mutual funds with different investment scopes hold assets from the same
companies. However, that evidence does not take into account the size of mutual fund
investments in each stock. It might be possible that, though the range of stocks in which
mutual funds invest differs, global and specialized mutual fund portfolios contain a large
loading on common stocks. Therefore, mutual fund portfolios could actually be more
similar than they appear from the evidence above. The reverse could also be true.
        To account for the size of mutual fund investment in each stock, we study entropy
or similarity measures that analyze how alike mutual fund investments (measured by the
NAV) actually are. The entropy measure is constructed as follows:

                                           ,
                                                ∑   ,       , ,   ∑   ,          , ,
                                           ,                                           ,    1
                                                    ∑         ,   ∑          ,
                    ,
where               ,   is measured for all funds within types i and j for each family f at time
t; ,      global fund, specialized fund ; s are stocks common to the portfolio of both
funds i and j from family f at time t. The measure is calculated for every family in every
year. Moreover, this measure is constructed within families, given our focus on
commonality in portfolios across mutual funds within mutual fund companies. As above,
global funds are then split into world funds and foreign funds. For a given pair of
different fund types within the same mutual fund family, the entropy measure is the ratio
of the sum of the dollar investment in stocks common to the portfolio of these two fund
types over the total net assets of the same funds. This entropy measure can be regarded as

29
  Appendix Table 2 splits global funds into world funds and foreign funds and compares them with
specialized funds. The results suggest that there is no significant difference in portfolio holdings across
global funds: specialized funds invest in a wider set of assets than both world funds and foreign funds.
World funds and specialized funds share only 10% of their holdings. This percentage increases to 15%
when foreign funds are considered.

                                                    18
an upper bound of commonality since it compares global funds to aggregates of all
specialized funds within families. If global funds were to be compared separately to each
specialized fund, the entropy measure for each of these comparisons would cover only a
fraction of the portfolio holdings of global funds and, thus, would tend to be lower than
the one used here.
       The entropy measure indicates that mutual funds do indeed hold a more similar
portfolio than what the frequency counts suggest. However, mutual funds still invest in
quite different portfolios. For example, when comparing global and specialized funds, the
entropy measure shows that, on average, 36% of the value of their holdings is in common
assets. In contrast, according to Table 6, only 16% of the number of their holdings is in
the same stocks. The entropy measure is slightly higher in the case of developing
countries, reaching on average 42%, compared to the 13% obtained for the frequency
count in Table 6. As shown in Figure 5, the entropy measure is stable over the sample
period, and, if anything, it decreases since 2001 (and since 1999 for the case of
developing countries), suggesting that there is no rise in commonality over time. Similar
patterns are obtained (in unreported results) when splitting global funds by type. Over the
entire sample period, the median entropy measure is 26% when comparing the holdings
of world funds and specialized funds and 28% when comparing those of foreign funds
and specialized funds.
       Interestingly, the commonality measures increase with the number of common
managers across funds within mutual fund families. Figure 6 shows that, as the number of
common managers increases, the entropy measures increase. For example, the median
entropy for funds with no common managers is 29%, while the median entropy for
family-years with at least one common manger across different funds is 43%, and the one
with more than three common managers is 65%. Furthermore, Table 7 shows that the
number of common managers is statistically significant in explaining the entropy
measures, independent of whether all holdings or only holdings in developing countries
are considered. As the number of common managers increases, so does the degree of
commonality.
       Overall, the evidence suggests that lack of information at the mutual fund family
level alone does not seem to explain the apparent lack of international diversification.


                                            19
The evidence that mutual funds do not tend to hold portfolios that are very similar
suggests that managers do not use the information already gathered and processed by
other managers within the same mutual fund family, even though the family itself has
already incurred the cost of acquiring the information. In other words, similar portfolios
would provide evidence consistent with information sharing, which we do not find.
Moreover, we find that when managers participate in the portfolio allocation decision of
more than one fund in the same family, the portfolios of those funds tend to be more
similar. This evidence suggests that managers within families might be actually
competing with each other, gathering costly information and picking stocks
independently.30 Namely, industrial organizational aspects of the mutual fund industry
that make managers compete could at least partly explain the restrictive investment
patterns we find in the data. Competition among managers might also explain the
evidence documented above on the limited number of assets in mutual fund portfolios,
independent of their investment scope. To the extent that managers within families gather
and process information independently and have similar capacity, they would tend to
handle a similar number of stocks. These factors, however, do not explain the variability
across families, which we explore next.

C.      Family Effects
Next, we analyze the role of family effects, beyond fundamentals, in explaining portfolio
choices. We do so following the organizational literature, which emphasizes the
importance of firm effects (as opposed to plant effects within firms) to understand
corporate behavior. Much of this research (e.g., Henderson and Cockburn, 1994 and
Klette, 1999) characterizes the existence of these firm effects (family effects in this
paper) through firm-level dummies and measures their relevance by the increase in the R-
squared of the regressions. Analogously, Bertrand and Schoar (2003) follow this
methodology to analyze the impact of managerial effects on corporate policies and
performance. We pursue a similar empirical strategy here.
        Before presenting formal empirical evidence, we discuss some simple statistics.
While, as mentioned above, the median number of holdings across all fund-year

30
  This finding is consistent with the evidence shown by Kempf and Ruenzi (2008) on the existence of a
family tournament, i.e. competition among managers within mutual fund families.

                                                 20
observation is 95 stocks, there is significant dispersion, with some funds holding many
stocks in some years. For instance, as shown in Figure 7 (top panel), while 73% of the
observations imply holdings below 150 stocks, 9% of the observations represent holdings
of more than 350 stocks. Furthermore, this dispersion in the number of stocks found in
the fund-year observations is linked to the variance in the number of stocks held across
mutual fund families. In fact, mutual fund families differ substantially in the number of
stocks they hold. For example, GAM Funds and Oppenheimer Funds hold on average
substantially fewer than 200 stocks, while others (such as Dreyfus Founders and
Vanguard Group) hold about two times more. More thoroughly, the bottom panel of
Figure 7 shows the median number of stocks per family, sorted from the lowest to the
highest number of holdings. The mean of the first quintile of the distribution is 39 stocks,
whereas the mean of the fifth quintile is 335. While there are extreme cases, with the
median fund in one family holding 1,094 stocks, most families hold a limited number of
stocks, with the mean of the fourth quintile being 122 stocks.
       We next test more formally the importance of family effects in explaining both
the number of stock holdings (a measure of how widely spread the portfolio is) and,
alternatively, the portfolio loadings on the top ten holdings (a measure of portfolio
concentration). The top panel of Table 8 reports regressions of the number of holdings
(the dependent variable) on year, fund type, and family dummies. Similarly, the bottom
panel of Table 8 reports these regressions with the percentage of net assets in the top ten
holdings as our dependent variable. The dummy coefficients are not reported, although
they are usually significant at the standard confidence levels. Seven different
specifications are reported. In the first specification, only year dummies are included. In
this case, less than 1% of the variance in mutual fund holdings or top ten holdings can be
explained. Column 2 reports a regression with fund type dummies alone. Again, a small
percentage (only 2%) of the variance of the number of mutual fund holdings is explained
by these dummies. Fund type dummies explain a slightly higher, albeit still small,
percentage (11%) of the variation in the top ten holdings across fund-year observations.
The specification in column 3 includes family dummies. In this case, 46% of the variance
in the number of holdings and 36% of the variance of top ten holdings across funds and
over time are explained by these dummies, much greater percentages than those


                                            21
explained by fund type and year effects alone. The following three reported regressions
include a combination of these three types of dummies: family dummies, fund type
dummies, and year dummies. In all these cases, the R-squared is relatively high only
when family dummies are included. Lastly, we report a specification with all dummies
together (column 7). We observe only a slight increase in the R-squared in comparison to
the other regressions with family dummies. Therefore, family effects indeed seem
relevant to explain the portfolio decisions of mutual funds, affecting not only the number
of stock holdings but also the allocation in the top holdings.
         The importance of family effects raises the immediate question of what factors
might be behind the observed patterns. To shed light on these family effects and in line
with the organizational literature, we estimate similar regressions controlling for other
variables believed to “fundamentally” affect the portfolio choices of mutual funds. In
particular, we explore the relevance of family-level and fund-level variables. We relate
the number of stock holdings and loadings on the top ten stocks to (i) the ability of funds
to gather and process information within families (proxied by the number of managers,
family expenses, and family size), (ii) variables related to the characteristics of funds and
their managers that could also affect portfolio decisions (fund age, manager tenure, and
fund type fixed effects), and (iii) family effects themselves, which capture any remaining
attribute or practice at the family level. The first set of variables directly captures the
extent to which costly information is a binding factor in driving portfolio decisions. The
second set of variables is motivated by our findings in the previous sub-section on the
relation of the commonality of portfolios and managers. As highlighted by Bertrand and
Schoar (2003), managers themselves (through their investment “styles” for example) can
play an important role in explaining corporate behavior.
         The results are shown in Table 9, columns 1 to 5 for the number of stock holdings
as the dependent variable and columns 6-10 for the percentage of net assets in the top ten
holdings.31 Column 1 shows that the number of stocks is positively associated with the
number of managers; however, the marginal effect is low. For example, funds with one
manager hold on average 133 stocks, while funds with two managers hold 135 stocks,

31
  Appendix Table 3 reports regressions with fund-level variables, instead of family-level ones, to capture
funds’ ability to gather and process information. The results are qualitatively similar to the ones presented
here.

                                                    22
and funds with six managers hold 197 stocks. The number of managers has similar
effects on the loadings on the top ten holdings, as shown in column 6. That is, there is a
significant negative correlation (less portfolio concentration) but small marginal effects to
additional managers. In all other specifications, the number of managers enters as a single
count variable. In columns 2 and 3, the regressions do not include family dummies but
incorporate fund-level variables (the count variable on the number of managers, manager
tenure, fund age, and fund type dummies) and family-level ones (family expenses and
family size). The number of managers and family size are positively associated with the
number of holdings, while expenses at the family level show a negative correlation.
Although statistically significant, they explain only a small proportion of the variance of
the number of stocks held by mutual funds, between 2% and 7% versus 46% explained
by family dummies alone (as reported in the top panel of Table 8, column 3). Regarding
the top ten holdings, reported in columns 7 and 8, fund-level characteristics are
statistically significant: the count variable on the number of managers and fund age show
a negative correlation with the percentage of net assets in the top ten holdings. However,
similar to the findings on the number of portfolio holdings, these variables only explain
about one third of what family dummies alone do (bottom panel of Table 8, column 3). In
other words, although variables that capture the capacity of funds to gather and process
information within families and variables related to the characteristics of funds and their
managers that could affect portfolio decision are related to the portfolio choices of mutual
funds, they only explain a fraction of what family dummies do. In fact, when family
dummies are included in these regressions (last two specifications reported in Table 9),
not only the R-squared increases significantly, but many of these fund-level and other
family-level variables become statistically insignificant.
       In sum, the results presented in Section 4 suggest that the apparent lack of
international diversification in mutual fund portfolios cannot be explained by the lack of
available instruments or information at the family level or by transaction costs. Instead,
organizational factors seem important in explaining mutual fund international
investments. In particular, funds do not appear to share information within families,
especially if they have different managers. In fact, the evidence is consistent with
managers within families competing with each other, which might partly explain the


                                             23
limited number of stocks across funds and the similarity in the number of holdings across
funds with different investment scopes. Family effects are also an important driver of
mutual fund portfolio choices, even after controlling for fund-specific and family-specific
characteristics related to the ability to gather and process information and select
portfolios. These family effects are likely to capture practices or norms by different
mutual fund companies, which affect the incentives faced by the managers of each
individual fund and eventually the portfolios they choose.

5. Returns to Diversification

We now analyze mutual fund returns to shed light on whether they can explain why
global funds do not have a substantially larger number of holdings relative to specialized
funds. The fact that global funds tend to hold fewer stocks in fewer countries within
regions of exposure (compared to specialized funds in the same mutual fund family)
might be explained by the lack of extra diversification gains (due to correlated returns)
and/or by the desire of investors to minimize tail risk. We thus study if there are potential
gains from further international diversification by global funds. We also test whether
benchmark effects can justify the portfolio choice of global funds, since managers are
generally evaluated on their performance relative to benchmark indexes. Finally, we
investigate the existence of an insurance premium in the returns of global funds.

A.     Standard Portfolio Model: Mean-Variance Analysis
To evaluate the potential cost of the apparent lack of diversification by global funds, we
compare the returns of global funds to those of “simulated global funds.” We construct
one simulated global fund for each actual global fund, consisting of a portfolio of
specialized funds (that belong to the same mutual fund family as the global fund) and the
global fund itself. This is analogous to letting a global fund invest in a portfolio that
replicates specialized fund holdings at any point in time. The portfolio weights on the
specialized funds and the global fund itself, which define the simulated global fund, are
obtained through mean-variance optimizations. The returns of the simulated global funds
are compared to the returns of the actual global funds over the same period. This is a
conservative exercise to evaluate the gains from international diversification since it does
not use all stocks in the investment universe of global funds to construct alternative


                                             24
portfolios (which might include assets that are hard to reach, but could apparently yield
substantially higher risk-adjusted returns); it only uses the stocks already chosen by
specialized funds within the same family.
           There is an important advantage in constructing these simulated global funds at
the family level. The fact that at least one specialized fund is already holding an asset is
an indication that they are within the subset of investable assets. That is, there are no
clear restrictions to investing in those assets, so transaction costs should not be very high.
Moreover, the fact that a specialized fund within the mutual fund family is investing in a
stock is an indication that the mutual fund company has already paid for the potential
costs of collecting and processing information related to that stock.
           To perform the mean-variance analysis, consider that there is a global fund with
an observed return history G, and there are also several specialized funds within the
mutual fund family of the global fund with observed returns S i . The global fund can
invest anywhere in the world, including the assets held by specialized funds (with the
exception of the U.S., if the global fund is a foreign fund), whereas specialized funds
invest in specific regions.32 The simulated global fund is constructed as a portfolio P that
assigns non-negative weights to all specialized funds and to the global fund itself. This
within mutual fund family exercise is isomorphic to allowing a global fund to invest in
specialized funds within its mutual fund family. This portfolio P is constructed such that
it optimally maximizes risk-adjusted returns by either (i) minimizing its own variance and
achieving at least the same expected return as the global fund itself or (ii) maximizing its
expected returns conditional on not increasing return volatility (relative to the actual
global fund).
           In other words, we impose the following restrictions to construct the simulated
global funds: (i) portfolios are constructed for each global fund using a combination of
the fund itself and specialized funds within the same mutual fund family; (ii) only buy
and hold strategies are considered (funds cannot be shorted); (iii) the performance
evaluation is always conducted out-of-sample; (iv) the portfolio is optimized on a daily or
weekly basis; and (v) a mean-variance framework is used.


32
     In the families analyzed here, there are no specialized funds with holdings exclusively in the U.S.

                                                        25
       The first optimization problem is set to minimize the variance of the returns of the
simulated global fund, keeping the returns of the simulated global fund at least as large as
those of the actual global fund. The exercise can be described as follows:
                                    var              ∑ ,                         2

such that
                                                          ,
                                       0             1,
                                          ∑         1,
                                              and
                                   1    ∑       ·         ∑       ·   ,
where xi is the portfolio weight on the specialized fund i within the mutual fund family of
the global fund and ∑ in (2) is the covariance matrix of all mutual fund returns within the
same family. Since the simulated global fund P is evaluated out-of-sample, the portfolio
shares are computed at time t using all available information up to that time, and held for
the next period, when the return of P is computed. We are then able to compare the return
of the simulated global fund P with the return of the global fund G over the same time
period. Portfolio weights are actively re-optimized every period.
       As an alternative exercise, we maximize expected returns, keeping the variance of
the simulated global fund at most as large as that of the global fund itself. This strategy
can be described as follows:
                                                    E         ,                   3

such that
                                    var            var        ,
                                       0             1,
                                          ∑         1,
                                              and
                                   1    ∑       ·         ∑       ·   .
       We perform these two exercises for several types of global funds: world funds,
foreign funds, or pools of world or foreign funds. Pools of world (or foreign) funds exist
when more than one fund in a mutual fund family is classified as a world (or foreign)



                                              26
fund and these funds have different objectives such as value, growth, or blend strategies.
An important benefit of the exercises performed here is that they do not need to identify
the exact stocks held by different mutual funds within a mutual fund family at every point
in time. The only information needed is mutual fund returns over time and the investment
scope. This allows us to extend the time horizon of the data to start in the late 1980s.
         The summary statistics of the simulated and actual global funds are shown in two
tables. Table 10 reports the results for simulated global funds constructed with the largest
number of available specialized funds (the largest cross-section), called the “largest
number of funds” simulation. This simulation includes all possible specialized funds for
each family and adjusts the time series accordingly to use the sample available for all
funds included in the simulation; however, it does not necessarily entail a very long time
span due to data availability on mutual fund returns. Table 11 reports results that use
instead only specialized funds that allow for estimations of simulated global funds with
relatively long time series, called the “longest available sample” simulation. In particular,
specialized funds are excluded from the simulations if they reduce the sample size by at
least six months. Naturally, this longer time series come at the cost of having fewer
specialized funds in the comparisons. On average, three specialized funds are excluded
from these simulations if compared to the largest number of funds simulations, which
leads to an increase on average of 44 months in the time span of the simulations.
         Tables 10 and 11 present the following statistics based on daily and weekly data:
the average annualized returns of the actual global funds and the simulated global funds,
the average annualized difference in accumulated returns between each simulated global
fund and the corresponding global fund, the standard deviation of returns, and the number
of comparisons.33 Annualized differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the
entire sample for each simulation. Averages across simulations are then computed.34 The
tables report separately statistics for world funds, foreign funds, and a pool of world or
foreign funds. Results are presented using daily and weekly (Wednesday) returns.

33
   We also compute these tables at the family level to show the heterogeneity across mutual fund families.
The results are reported in Appendix Tables 4A and 4B for the largest number of funds simulations, and in
Appendix Tables 5A and 5B for the longest available sample simulations.
34
   Though not reported, for robustness purposes we also calculated these return differences at every point in
time and then computed the averages within and across simulations. The results are qualitatively similar to
those reported here.

                                                    27
       The top panels of Tables 10 and 11 report results based on minimizing variances
using equation (2). Table 10 shows that simulated global funds yield on average
annualized excess returns of 485 basis points per year relative to world funds, 403 basis
points relative to foreign funds, and 455 basis points relative to the pool of world or
foreign funds. Moreover, the daily standard deviations of the returns of the simulated
global funds are also smaller than those of the global funds. For example, Table 10 shows
that the standard deviation falls by eight basis points for world and foreign funds and
seven basis points for the pool of world or foreign funds. The numbers might seem small,
but they are reductions in the daily standard deviation of returns. The results hold when
using weekly returns. For example, Table 10 shows that the simulated global funds yield
on average 436 basis points more per year than actual global funds when considering all
types of global funds. These increases in risk-adjusted expected returns suggest that there
are potential gains from further international diversification for global funds, even if
investing only in stocks held by other funds within the same mutual fund family.
       Table 11 shows that the results are similar when using the simulations with the
longest time span. For example, the average improvement in returns is 295 basis points
per year and the improvement in the daily standard deviation of returns is seven basis
points. The differences are smaller than the ones reported in Table 10 because fewer
specialized funds are available when the longest available sample simulations are
considered. In other words, there is less scope for improvement than in the previous case.
Similar patterns arise for simulations based on weekly returns.
       The bottom panels of Tables 10 and 11 report summary statistics of portfolios
constructed based on maximizing expected returns while holding the variance constant,
using equation (3). When considering the simulations with the greater number of
specialized funds (Table 10), the improvement in annualized daily returns is 434 basis
points for all types of global funds, whereas the daily standard deviation falls by five
basis points. If the longest available sample simulations are considered, Table 11 shows
that the improvement in daily returns is 302 basis points and the improvement in the daily
standard deviation of returns is six basis points. When using weekly returns, larger
differences are obtained; the improvement in returns are 552 and 355 basis points for the
largest number of funds and the longest available sample simulations, respectively.


                                            28
        In sum, the results from these simulations suggest that one can reject the
hypothesis that there are no gains from further international diversification by holding
more stocks within and across countries. In other words, the investment practices
documented in the first part of the paper seem indeed to be restrictive. Although there is
some heterogeneity in the results depending on the strategy used, the simulated global
funds consistently yield higher returns and no greater volatility than the actual global
funds, even when comparing funds within the same families.35,36

B.      Benchmarking through a Tracking-Error Model
Next we consider a different optimization strategy since the objective of most mutual
funds is not necessarily to minimize the variance given some expected return, or to
maximize returns given some variance. In particular, the performance of mutual funds
might actually be evaluated in comparison to benchmark indexes. Moreover, managers
might be compensated according to this relative performance. Thus, portfolio decisions
should incorporate these managerial incentives. Furthermore, different mutual funds
might follow different investment goals. It is possible that some mutual funds follow
more passively benchmark indexes while others are more active in seeking returns.
Therefore, the difference in returns between the actual global funds and the simulated
global funds could, in principle, be explained by different investment practices across
global and specialized funds. We address these two related issues in this sub-section.
        We first test whether benchmark effects are important in explaining the gains
from further international diversification found in the previous exercise. For the case of
the variance minimization, we modify the objective function to take into consideration a
benchmark index.37 The benchmark is the appropriate MSCI index (B), specific for each
global fund as described in the Morningstar database or in the fund’s website. Instead of
minimizing the variance of the portfolio, we minimize the variance of the difference


35
   For robustness, we also perform these simulations with a more restricted sample. We use rolling
windows of 240 business days. The results are robust to this change and are reported in Appendix Tables
6A and 6B.
36
   These results are not driven by significant changes in the weights of the simulated global funds over
time. The time series of the portfolio weights change smoothly and the simulated portfolios do not require
large shifts in holdings, which could entail large transaction costs.
37
   This is analogous to what others in the literature do. See, for example, Roll (1992) and Chan, Karceski,
and Lakonishok (1999).

                                                    29
between the portfolio and the benchmark index. Thus, while the constraints for the
minimization problem (2) remain the same, the following equation is now used:
                                         var              .                        4

       For the maximization of expected returns, we replace the restriction on the
variance of the simulated global fund. We impose that the variance of the difference
between the simulated global fund and the benchmark index has to be at most the same as
the variance of the difference between the global fund and the benchmark index. Thus,
                                   var              var       .                    5
       The results of these new simulations based on daily data are reported in Table 12
for the largest number of funds simulations, and in Table 13 for the longest sample
available simulations. For simulations that minimize the variance of the portfolio, the
results are similar to the ones reported in the previous section. For the largest number of
funds simulations reported in the top panel of Table 12, the simulated global funds
generate excess annualized returns of 343, 379, and 420 basis points when compared to
world funds, foreign funds, and the pool of world or foreign funds, respectively.
Improvements in the standard deviation are also observed. On average, the daily standard
deviation falls five basis points. When the longest available sample simulations are
considered, as reported in the top panel of Table 13, the results hold. Simulated global
funds yield, on average, an excess annualized expected return of 282 basis points across
the different simulations, and a daily standard deviation five basis points lower than
global funds. When maximizing expected returns, the results are even stronger. Table 12
shows an improvement on average of 402 basis points in annualized daily returns across
mutual fund families and of seven basis points in daily standard deviations. In Table 13,
where fewer specialized funds are included in the portfolio simulations, the improvement
in returns is 322 basis points, but reaches 494 basis points for the pool of world or foreign
funds. The improvement in daily standard deviations is also large: eight basis points on
average across mutual fund families. In sum, our results suggest that benchmark effects
cannot explain the empirical evidence described above regarding the investment patterns
of mutual funds. We find that, even within the same mutual fund family and accounting
for benchmarking, global funds could obtain improvements in both risk and returns by
further international diversification.


                                               30
        To study whether global and specialized funds follow different types of
investment strategies and are thus differently active, we compute entropy measures over
time. That is, we calculate the similarity of mutual fund portfolios between any two
consecutive years of mutual fund holdings. Importantly, we compute separate measures
for each individual fund and then obtain medians for world funds, foreign funds, and
specialized funds. The median entropy over time is 0.63, 0.65, and 0.66 for world funds,
foreign funds, and specialized funds, respectively. Figure 8 shows that these measures are
very stable over time and are not statistically different from each other, suggesting that
stock turnover is not different across funds with different investment scopes. Similar
results are obtained when considering only holdings in developing economies, as shown
in the bottom panel of Figure 8. These results suggest that different types of funds do not
have significantly different trading strategies since their portfolios behave similarly over
time.

C.      Insurance Premium in the Global Fund Returns
Another possible explanation for our results is the existence of an insurance premium in
the returns of global funds, not explicitly captured in our mean-variance analysis. Global
funds have the ability to shift their stock holdings across countries and regions, which is
not an option for specialized funds. Thus, investors might be willing to pay for this extra
flexibility by requiring lower risk-adjusted returns from global funds, since they might
yield gains during turbulent times. In other words, global funds might be better suited
than specialized funds to avoid large losses due to their ability to move away from
troubled countries. We therefore evaluate whether global funds have indeed a better
ability to minimize losses relative to specialized funds by comparing the returns of global
funds and simulated global funds (composed of both global funds themselves and
specialized funds).
        We first analyze higher moments of the distribution of returns, which would be
important if global funds were to minimize losses during bad times instead of following a
standard mean-variance approach. In particular, we compare the skewness and kurtosis of
global fund returns to those of simulated global fund returns obtained from the mean-
variance exercise. The results based on daily data are reported in Table 14 for the largest
number of funds simulations and Table 15 for the longest available sample simulations.

                                            31
We find that skewness and kurtosis of returns are similar between global and simulated
global funds. For example, according to the largest number of funds (longest time series)
simulations, the skewness of global fund returns is -0.69 (-0.81) whereas that of the
simulated global funds is -0.84 (-0.94) or -0.70 (-0.74), depending on whether the
variance is minimized or expected returns are maximized. The kurtosis of global funds is
10.69 for the largest number of funds simulation and 12.85 for the longest available
sample simulation. The kurtosis of the simulated global funds is 10.04 (11.96) when the
variance is minimized and 7.74 (8.60) when expected returns are maximized, using the
largest number of funds (longest available sample) simulations. Overall, the evidence
suggests that, despite the differences in the mean and variances reported above, higher
moments of the distribution of returns are not considerably different across global funds
and simulated global funds. If anything, the kurtosis estimates are lower for the simulated
global funds than for global funds, indicating that global funds do not appear to be robust
portfolios as their distribution of returns has fatter tails.
         We now consider the ability of global funds to move away from turbulence-hit
countries or regions, and thus actually avoid realized risks. Given the limited information
on portfolio holdings at a high frequency, we focus the analysis on the incidence of
negative returns during turbulent times. For instance, conditional on large negative
returns on the MSCI Emerging Market Index (our proxy for turmoil periods), we
compare the realized returns of both actual global funds and simulated global funds. 38
The results reported in Table 16 show that their performances are typically not
statistically different from each other. For example, the average return of global funds is
-3.42% per week (p.w.) when the MSCI Emerging Market Index falls more than 10% in
one week, while the average return of the simulated global funds is -3.45% (-3.70%) p.w.
when minimizing the variance (maximizing expected returns) for the largest number of
funds. Therefore, global funds do not seem to avoid large losses if compared to
specialized funds.39


38
   The evidence reported here considers only weekly returns. The results are similar if monthly returns are
analyzed. Results are available upon request.
39
   A shift of the simulated global funds towards actual global funds and away from specialized funds does
not seem to be driving these results. Portfolio weights on actual global funds are generally stable in periods
in which the MSCI Emerging Market Index falls significantly. Moreover, this stability in portfolio weights

                                                     32
        As an alternative, Table 17 shows the return differentials conditional on periods in
which the simulated global funds perform poorly. In these situations, global funds yield
slightly higher weekly returns, with differentials between 0.14% and 0.95% p.w.,
although these return differentials are not always statistically different from zero. Table
18 reports the results of a similar exercise that focuses on periods when global funds do
not perform well. In this case, the simulated global funds perform significantly better
than global funds. For example, when the return of global funds is less than 10% in one
week, the simulated global funds yield an extra 2.65% p.w. when maximizing the
expected return with the largest number of funds. If the longest available sample for
variance minimization is considered, the difference in returns is 1.88% p.w.

6. Conclusions

Using a novel micro dataset of portfolio holdings of U.S. mutual funds, this paper studies
how institutional investors diversify their portfolios across countries. This dataset allows
us to analyze important aspects of international asset allocation, documenting new
stylized facts and shedding new light on existing explanations of international portfolio
allocation. In particular, we take advantage of the fact that mutual funds belong to
families, each having several funds with different scopes for international investment. As
the investment scope broadens, one would expect funds to hold more securities and to be
better diversified internationally, to the extent that asset returns are not perfectly
correlated. This feature of the mutual fund industry enables us to study to what extent
organizational aspects and other factors are important for international asset allocation
and whether the investment practices exploit the potential gains from international
diversification.
        We find that global funds have expanded substantially, giving investors more
options to diversify risk internationally. However, regardless of their investment scope,
mutual funds tend to invest in a relatively small number of countries and firms, in about
100 stocks. In fact, as their investment possibilities widen, mutual funds invest in fewer
stocks and fewer countries within each region of exposure. Consistently, the number of


also suggests that such a portfolio shift is not behind the evidence related to the higher moments of the
return distribution.

                                                   33
stock holdings is similar across funds within mutual fund families. However, there is
significant variability in the number of holdings across families.
       Several conclusions can be drawn from the results in this paper. First, the results
suggest that the restrictive investment practices of mutual funds are not driven by
instrument availability or transaction costs, broadly understood as barriers to purchase
securities. Mutual funds purchase only a very small fraction of the instruments available
for investment. Moreover, specialized funds have already invested in a set of assets,
which are also available to global funds, indicating that there are no clear restrictions to
purchase them. Furthermore, neither specialized nor global fund holdings are very large
relative to market capitalization. Therefore, the pattern of investment in few firms does
not seem to be driven by fund size and funds might be able to expand their exposures,
probably without incurring major trading costs.
       Second, the evidence in this paper highlights the importance of organizational
aspects to explain the investment choices of institutional investors and does not seem
consistent with the idea that asset allocation is driven by lack of information at the family
level. These organizational aspects seem to induce competition among managers within
the same family and affect portfolio choices across funds. In particular, since we compare
the potential diversification gains of investing in assets already held within the mutual
fund family, one can argue that the cost of gathering and processing information has
already been paid by someone in the family and that other mutual fund managers within
the family could in principle access that information. However, the portfolios of mutual
funds within families investing in the same region do not appear to be very similar, even
though their similarity increases when funds share asset managers. Furthermore, there are
strong family effects behind mutual fund investment practices; that is, the number of
stocks held across fund types and the portfolio loadings are similar within mutual fund
companies but different across them. These family effects are much more important than
other factors (such as the number of managers working in the fund, fund age, manager
tenure, expenses at the fund and family level, and fund or family size) considered to
affect both the ease of gathering and processing information and portfolio allocations
themselves.




                                             34
       Third, the investment practices documented in this paper entail a cost in the sense
that, according to a mean-variance framework, there are large potential gains from further
international diversification. Global funds could gain substantially from further
international diversification in risk-adjusted terms simply by replicating portfolios
already held by other funds within the same company. Furthermore, it is not the case that
global funds yield lower returns in exchange for lower tail risk, or that there is an
insurance premium embedded in the returns of global funds. Namely, global funds do not
appear to be better suited to avoid large losses given their ability to shift their stock
holdings across countries and regions. In fact, the skewness and kurtosis of global funds
are similar to those of portfolios of specialized funds.
       The evidence presented in this paper points to significant challenges in the
prospects for broad international diversification. To the extent that global funds continue
to be large relative to specialized funds, the findings in this paper suggest that the forgone
diversification gains can be significant. At the same time, many countries and firms
might not be able to benefit from tapping international investors and might thus face
higher financing costs. These implications suggest that recent findings in the literature,
such as an increase in the extent of international diversification (or a decline in home
bias), might still require more analysis.
       Several other puzzling aspects remain for future research, in particular in light of
the seemingly important effects of organizational aspects on international diversification.
Given the potential gains from investing across countries, why are global funds not more
internationally diversified? Perhaps there are limits to the number of stocks that each
manager can follow, determined by their own capacity to manage many more than 100
stocks and the investment practices and tools that each mutual fund family adopts. It also
seems difficult for global fund managers to expand their holdings by relying on
specialized fund managers. Moreover, it is possible that the remuneration schemes give
no incentives for the information gathered by specialized funds to be freely shared within
each mutual fund company, with each fund manager collecting her own information and
competing with other managers. However, why do mutual fund families not establish
funds of funds, mainly constructing portfolios based on specialized funds? Mutual fund
families might have few incentives to do so because it could undermine the growth of


                                             35
their global funds, which are the ones that have expanded substantially over the years and
generated large revenues. Alternatively, given the differences in the performance of
specialized funds relative to global funds, why do investors not arbitrage these
differences and favor specialized funds over global ones? What are the limits to
arbitrage? Also, why are family effects so important? Organizational aspects of mutual
fund companies seem to be behind these effects. But what specific factors make funds
within families hold a similar number of stocks? Furthermore, what are the costs of the
organizational practices? Our findings on the unexploited gains from international
diversification might provide a rough, first lower-bound estimate of the welfare costs
implied by mutual fund organizational norms. Finally, do global funds provide
diversification benefits not captured by the mean-variance and other analyses performed
in this paper?




                                           36
References

Aviat, A. and N. Coeurdacier, 2007. The Geography of Trade in Goods and Asset
        Holdings, Journal of International Economics 71 (1), 22-51.
Baily, M., C. Hulten, D. Campbell, T. Bresnahan, and R. Caves, 1992. Productivity
        Dynamics in Manufacturing Plants, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 187-
        267.
Bartelsman, E. and M. Doms, 2000. Understanding Productivity: Lessons from
        Longitudinal Microdata, Journal of Economic Literature 38 (3), 569-594.
Bebchuk, L. and L. Stole, 1993. Do Short-Term Objectives Lead to Under- or
        Overinvestment in Long-Term Projects? Journal of Finance 48 (2), 719-729.
Bekaert, G. and C. Harvey, 2000. Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets,
        Journal of Finance 55 (2), 565-613.
Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar, 2003. Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm
        Policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1169-1208.
Black, S., and L. Lynch, 2001. How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices and
        Information Technology on Productivity, Review of Economics and Statistics, 83
        (3), 434-445.
Bloom, N., and J. Van Reenen, 2007. Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
        across Firms and Countries, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (4), 1351-1408.
Bolton, P., X. Freixas, and J. Shapiro, 2004. Conflicts of Interest, Information Provision
        and Competition in the Financial Services Industry, Journal of Financial
        Economics 85 (2), 297-330.
Brennan, M. and H. Cao, 1997. International Portfolio Investment Flows, Journal of
        Finance 52 (5), 1851-1880.
Broner, F., R. G. Gelos, and C. Reinhart, 2006. When in Peril, Retrench – Testing the
        Portfolio Channel of Contagion, Journal of International Economics 69 (1), 203-
        230.
Brown, K., W. Harlow, and L. Starks, 1996. Of Tournaments and Temptations: An
        Analysis of Managerial Incentives in the Mutual Fund Industry, Journal of
        Finance 51 (1), 85-110.
Cai, F. and F. Warnock, 2006. International Diversification at Home and Abroad, NBER
        Working Paper 12220.
Carhart, M., 1997. On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance, Journal of Finance 52
        (1), 57-82.
Chan, K., V. Covrig, and L. Ng, 2005. What Determines the Domestic Bias and Foreign
        Bias? Evidence from Mutual Fund Equity Allocations Worldwide, Journal of
        Finance 60 (3), 1495-1534.
Chan, L., J. Karceski, and J. Lakonishok, 1999. On Portfolio Optimization: Forecasting
        Covariances and Choosing the Risk Model, Review of Financial Studies 12 (5),
        937-974.
Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison, 1997. Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
        Incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105 (6), 1167-1200.
Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison, 1999. Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers, Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 114 (2), 389-432.



                                           37
Choe, H., B. C. Kho, and R. Stulz, 1999. Do Foreign Investors Destabilize Stock
       Markets? The Korean Experience in 1997, Journal of Financial Economics 54
       (2), 227-264.
Cohen, M. and P. Bacdayan, 1994. Organizational Routines Are Stored as Procedural
       Memory: Evidence from a Laboratory Study, Organization Science, 5 (4), 554-
       568.
Csaszar, F., 2009. Organizational Structure as a Determinant of Performance: Evidence
       from Mutual Funds, mimeo, INSEAD.
Dahlquist, M. and G. Robertsson, 2001. Direct Foreign Ownership, Institutional
       Investors, and Firm Characteristics, Journal of Financial Economics 59 (3), 413-
       440.
Daude, C. and M. Fratzscher, 2008. The Pecking Order of Cross-Border Investment,
       Journal of International Economics 74 (1), 94-119.
De Roon, F., T. Nijman, and B. Werker, 2001. Testing for Mean-Variance Spanning with
       Short Sales Constraints and Transaction Costs: the Case of Emerging Markets,
       Journal of Finance 56 (2), 721-742.
De Santis, G. and B. Gerard, 1997. International Asset Pricing and Portfolio
       Diversification with Time-Varying Risk, Journal of Finance 52 (5), 1881-1912.
Dow, J. and G. Gorton, 1997. Noise Trading, Delegated Portfolio Management, and
       Economic Welfare, Journal of Political Economy 105 (5), 1024-1050.
Driessen, J. and L. Laeven, 2007. International Portfolio Diversification Benefits: Cross-
       Country Evidence from a Local Perspective, Journal of Banking and Finance 31
       (6), 1693-1712.
Edison, H. and F. Warnock, 2004. U.S. Investors’ Emerging Market Equity Portfolios: A
       Security-Level Analysis, Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (3), 691-704.
Errunza, V., K. Hogan, and M. Hung, 1999. Can the Gains from International
       Diversification Be Achieved without Trading Abroad? Journal of Finance 54 (6),
       2075-2107.
Eun, C., W. Huang, and S. Lai, 2008. International Diversification with Large- and
       Small-Cap Stocks, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43 (2), 489-
       524.
Evans, J. and S. Archer, 1968. Diversification and the Reduction of Dispersion: An
       Empirical Analysis, Journal of Finance 23 (5), 761-767.
French, K., and J. Poterba, 1991. International Diversification and International Equity
       Markets, American Economic Review 81 (2), 222-226.
Gaspar, J. M., M. Massa, and P. Matos, 2006. Favoritism in Mutual-Fund Families?
       Evidence on Strategic Cross-Fund Subsidization, Journal of Finance 61 (1), 73-
       104.
Gelos, R. G. and S. J. Wei, 2005. Transparency and International Portfolio Holdings,
       Journal of Finance 60 (6), 2987-3020.
Gibbons, R. and R. Henderson, 2010. Relational Contracts and the Origins of
       Organizational Capabilities, in Handbook of Organizational Economics, R.
       Gibbons and J. Roberts (eds.), Princeton University Press, forthcoming.
Goetzmann, W., L. Li, and K. G. Rouwenhorst, 2005. Long-Term Global Market
       Correlations, Journal of Business 78 (1), 1-38.



                                           38
Gozzi, J.C., R. Levine, and S. Schmukler, 2008. Internationalization and the Evolution of
        Corporate Valuation, Journal of Financial Economics, 88 (3), 607-632.
Griliches, Z., 1986. Productivity, R and D, and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the
        1970’s, American Economic Review 76 (1), 141-154.
Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse, 1983. Comparing Productivity Growth: An Exploration of
        French and U.S. Industrial and Firm Data, European Economic Review 21 (1-2),
        89-119.
Grinblatt, M. and M. Keloharju, 2001. How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
        Stockholdings and Trades, Journal of Finance 56 (3), 1053-1073.
Grinblatt, M. and S. Titman, 1992. The Persistence of Mutual Fund Performance, Journal
        of Finance 47 (5), 1977-1984.
Grinblatt, M., S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1995. Momentum Investment Strategies,
        Portfolio Performance and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior, American
        Economic Review 85 (5), 1088-1105.
Grubel, H., 1968. Internationally Diversified Portfolios: Welfare Gains and Capital
        Flows, American Economic Review 58 (5), 1299-1314.
Harvey, C., 1995. Predictable Risk and Returns in Emerging Markets, Review of
        Financial Studies 8 (3), 773-816.
Hau, H. and H. Rey, 2008. Home Bias at the Fund Level, American Economic Review 98
        (2), 333-338.
Henderson, R. and I. Cockburn, 1994. Measuring Competence? Exploring Firm Effects in
        Pharmaceutical Research, Strategic Management Journal 15, Winter, 63-84.
Henderson, R. and I. Cockburn, 1996. Scale, Scope, and Spillovers: The Determinants of
        Research Productivity in Drug Discovery, Rand Journal of Economics 27 (1), 32-
        59.
Hong, H., J. Kubik, and J. Stein, 2005. Thy Neighbor's Portfolio: Word-of-Mouth Effects
        in the Holdings and Trades of Money Managers, Journal of Finance 60 (6), 2801-
        2824.
Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw, and G. Prennushi, 1997. The Effects of Human Resource
        Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,
        American Economic Review 87 (3), 291-313.
Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman, 1993. Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
        Implications for Stock Market Efficiency, Journal of Finance 48 (1), 65-91.
Kaminsky, G., R. Lyons, and S. Schmukler, 2004. Managers, Investors, and Crises:
        Mutual Fund Strategies in Emerging Markets, Journal of International Economics
        64 (1), 113-134.
Kang, J. K. and R. Stulz, 1997. Why Is There a Home Bias? An Analysis of Foreign
        Portfolio Equity Ownership in Japan, Journal of Financial Economics 46 (1), 3-
        28.
Kempf, A. and S. Ruenzi, 2008. Tournaments in Mutual-Fund Families, Review of
        Financial Studies 21 (2), 1013-1036.
Kim, W. and S. J. Wei, 2002. Foreign Portfolio Investors Before and During a Crisis,
        Journal of International Economics 56 (1), 77-96.
Klette, T., 1999. Market Power, Scale Economies and Productivity: Estimates from a
        Panel of Establishment Data, Journal of Industrial Economics 47 (4), 451-476.



                                           39
Kose, M. A., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, and S. J. Wei, 2009. Financial Globalization: A
        Reappraisal, IMF Staff Papers 56 (1), 8-62.
Kraay, A., N. Loayza, L. Serven, and J. Ventura, 2005. Country Portfolios, Journal of the
        European Economic Association 3 (4), 914-945.
Lafontaine, F. and K. Shaw, 2005. Targeting Managerial Control: Evidence from
        Franchising, Rand Journal of Economics 36 (1), 131-150.
Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti, 2008. International Investment Patterns, Review of
        Economics and Statistics 90 (3), 538-549.
Montgomery, C., and B. Wernerfelt, 1988. Diversification, Ricardian Rents, and Tobin's
        Q, Rand Journal of Economics 19 (4), 623-632.
Nanda, V., Z. Wang, and L. Zheng, 2004. Family Values and the Star Phenomenon:
        Strategies of Mutual-Fund Families, Review of Financial Studies 17 (3), 667-698.
Nelson, R. and S. Winter, 2002. Evolutionary Theorizing in Economics, Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 16 (2), 23-46.
Obstfeld, M. and A. Taylor, 2004. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and
        Growth, Cambridge University Press.
Pollet, J. and M. Wilson, 2008. How Does Size Affect Mutual Fund Behavior? Journal of
        Finance 63 (6), 2941-2969.
Portes, R. and H. Rey, 2005. The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows, Journal of
        International Economics 65 (2), 269-296.
Rajan, R., 2006. Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? European
        Financial Management 12 (4), 499-533.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales, 1998. Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic
        Review 88 (3), 559-586.
Roll, R., 1992. A Mean/Variance Analysis of Tracking Error, Journal of Portfolio
        Management, 18 (4), 13-22.
Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1990. Equilibrium Short Horizons of Investors and Firms,
        American Economic Review 80 (2), 148-153.
Stein, J., 2005. Why Are Most Funds Open-End? Competition and the Limits of
        Arbitrage, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (1), 247-272.
Strong, N. and X. Xu, 2003. Understanding the Equity Home Bias: Evidence from
        Survey Data, Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2), 307-312.
Stulz, R., 1999. Globalization, Corporate Finance, and the Cost of Capital, Journal of
        Applied Corporate Finance 12 (3), 8-25.
Stulz, R., 2005. The Limits of Financial Globalization, Journal of Finance 60 (4), 1595-
        1638.
Tesar, L. and I. Werner, 1995. Home Bias and High Turnover, Journal of International
        Money and Finance 14 (4), 467-492.
Van Wincoop, E., 1999. How Big Are Potential Welfare Gains from International
        Risksharing? Journal of International Economics 47 (1), 109-135.
Wermers, R., 1999. Mutual Fund Herding and the Impact on Stock Prices, Journal of
        Finance 54 (2), 581-622.




                                           40
                                                                                Figure 1. Stylized Structure of U.S. Mutual Fund Families

                                                                 Global
                                                                 Funds
                                                                                                       World Funds




                                                                                 Foreign Funds                                            U.S. Funds




                            Specialized
                                Funds                                                                             Emerging Market Funds




                                                 Regional Fund                    Regional Fund              Regional Fund               Regional Fund              Regional Fund                       Regional Fund
                                                      Asia                           Europe                  Emerging Asia               Eastern Europe             Latin America
                                                                                                                                                                                          + …            Middle East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           + …



                     Country Fund         Country Fund           Country Fund
                        China                Japan                 S. Korea
                                                                                + …




This figure characterizes the organization of U.S. mutual fund families that invest in foreign assets. The figure also shows our classification of global and specialized funds. Global funds include both world and foreign funds.
Specialized funds include: emerging market funds, regional funds, and country funds. The names used to characterize the specialized funds are just examples.
                     Figure 2. Total Number of Funds and Total Assets under Management by Fund Type

                                                                 Global Funds
               600                                                                                              900
                              Number of Funds
                              Assets under Management (RHS)                                                     800
               500            Assets under Management - Excluding U.S. Assets (RHS)
                                                                                                                700
               400                                                                                              600
No. of Funds




                                                                                                                      US$ Billion
                                                                                                                500
               300
                                                                                                                400
               200                                                                                              300
                                                                                                                200
               100
                                                                                                                100
                 0                                                                          0
                  1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005


                                                              Specialized Funds
               600                                                                                              900
                                 Number of Funds
                                 Assets under Management (RHS)                                                  800
               500
                                                                                                                700
               400                                                                                              600
No. of Funds




                                                                                                                       US$ Billion
                                                                                                                500
               300
                                                                                                                400
               200                                                                                              300
                                                                                                                200
               100
                                                                                                                100
                 0                                                                          0
                  1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005


This figure shows the total number of mutual funds in our holdings database and their total assets under management by
fund type from 1991 to 2005. For global funds, the value of assets under management invested in non-U.S. assets is also
shown (starting in 1997 due to data availability). Data on assets under management are in billions of U.S. dollars. Global
funds include both world funds and foreign funds. Specialized funds include: emerging market funds, regional funds, and
country funds.
                                   Figure 3. Median Number of Holdings by Fund Type

                                                        All Funds
                  160
                  140
                  120
  No. of Stocks




                  100
                   80
                   60
                   40
                   20
                    0
                        1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

                               World Funds                              World Funds - Excluding U.S. Holdings
                               Foreign Funds                            Emerging Market Funds
                               Regional Funds


                                                   Specialized Funds
                  160
                  140
                  120
No. of Stocks




                  100
                  80
                  60
                  40
                  20
                   0
                    1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005


                                 Asia Funds     Europe Funds        Latin America Funds         Country Funds


This figure shows the median number of stock holdings by mutual fund type from 1991 to 2005. The top panel
includes world funds, foreign funds, emerging market funds, and regional funds. The median number of non-
U.S. holdings for world funds is also shown (starting in 1997 due to data availability). The bottom panel
includes the following specialized funds: Asia funds, Europe funds, Latin America funds, and country funds.
                                            Figure 4. Mutual Fund Holdings as a Proportion of the Total Number of Listed Stocks by Country

  100%

                     First Quintile                         Second Quintile                          Third Quintile                        Fourth Quintile                            Fifth Quintile
   90%
                     Average: 1.1%                          Average: 7.7%                            Average: 21%                           Average: 34.8%                           Average: 57.8%
   80%                Max: 2.4%                              Max: 13.8%                               Max: 27.6%                             Max: 43.6%                               Max: 77.3%

   70%

   60%

   50%

   40%

   30%

   20%

   10%

    0%
                    Tunisia




                    Turkey
                    Nigeria




                    Estonia




                    Canada

                     Russia




                Singapore
                  Pakistan



                  Uruguay



                        Peru




                      Spain




                     Poland



               All China*




                  Thailand




                   Mexico




                      Japan
                        Italy
                  Portugal



                  Hungary



          United Kingdom
                      Israel




                 Mauritius




                   Norway
          Slovak Republic




           Czech Republic
                  Romania
                 Lithuania
                     Latvia




                       India
                    Croatia




                 Colombia


                Zimbabwe
                      Chile




                 Indonesia




                    Greece


                     Ghana
                   Ecuador




                   Panama



                 Botswana




                    Austria
                    Cyprus




                  Lebanon
                      Oman
                     Jordan




               Kazakhstan




                  Morocco




               Philippines




                  Germany




                   Finland
              Switzerland
                   Sweden
                      Egypt




                      Brazil




                  Belgium




              Netherlands
             Saudi Arabia




                  Bulgaria




                  Slovenia

                 Sri Lanka




                Venezuela




                  Australia
                     Kenya

             South Africa




                  Malaysia




                Argentina




                     France
              South Korea
               Bangladesh


                    Iceland




                 Denmark

             New Zealand




                    Ireland
This figure shows the total number of stock holdings for all mutual funds in our sample as a percentage of the total number of listed stocks by country. Countries are sorted according to their average ratio in the
1997-2004 period. Countries are divided into five groups (quintiles) and the average and maximum values for each quintile are reported. The U.S. is excluded from the figure. The data for the total number of listed
stocks come from the Global Financial Database. * "All China" includes the following economies: Mainland China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan.
                                   Figure 5. Evolution of Entropy Measure
                                    Total Holdings - Excluding U.S. Holdings

 1.00
 0.90
 0.80
 0.70
 0.60
 0.50
 0.40
 0.30
 0.20
 0.10
 0.00
     1997           1998         1999          2000          2001          2002          2003          2004         2005


                                     Holdings in Developing Countries Only
 1.00
 0.90
 0.80
 0.70
 0.60
 0.50
 0.40
 0.30
 0.20
 0.10
 0.00
     1997           1998         1999          2000          2001          2002          2003          2004          2005


This figure shows the evolution of the entropy measure from 1997 to 2005. The entropy measure captures the commonality
of stock holdings in the portfolios of global funds and specialized funds. The top panel includes stock holdings in all
countries except the U.S. The bottom panel includes stock holdings in developing countries only. The thick line represents
the median value across families in a given year. The dotted grey lines represent +/- one standard deviation from the median.
Global funds include both world funds and foreign funds. Specialized funds include: emerging market funds, regional funds,
and country funds.
                    Figure 6. Evolution of Entropy Measure by Number of Common Managers

                                         Total Holdings - Excluding U.S. Holdings
  1.00
  0.90

  0.80
  0.70

  0.60
  0.50

  0.40
  0.30

  0.20
  0.10

  0.00
      1997           1998           1999            2000           2001           2002           2003           2004            2005


                                           Holdings in Developing Countries Only
  1.00

  0.90

  0.80

  0.70

  0.60

  0.50

  0.40

  0.30

  0.20

  0.10

  0.00
      1997           1998           1999            2000           2001           2002           2003           2004           2005
                 Entropy                                                      Entropy: No Common Manager

                 Entropy: At Least One Common Manager                         Entropy: More than Three Common Managers

This figure shows the evolution of the entropy measure according to the number of common managers shared by global funds and
specialized funds within mutual fund families from 1997 to 2005. The entropy measure captures the commonality of stock holdings in
the portfolios of global funds and specialized funds. The entropy measure is reported for family-year observations in which funds share
no managers, at least one common manager, and more than three common managers. The figure also reports the entropy measure by
itself (black-dotted line), as reported in Figure 5. The figure reports the median value across families in a given year. The top panel
includes stock holdings in all countries except the U.S. The bottom panel includes stock holdings in developing countries only. Global
funds include both world funds and foreign funds. Specialized funds include: emerging market funds, regional funds, and country funds.
                            Figure 7. Number of Holdings: Dispersion and Family Effects

                                           Histogram of the Number of Mutual Fund Holdings
                    700
                                                                                                                  Summary Statistics:

                    600                                                                                           Average: 149 Stocks
                                                                                                                  Median: 95 Stocks
                    500                                                                                           Std. Dev.: 186 Stocks

                                                                                                                  73% of Obs. below 150 Holdings
   Frequency




                    400                                                                                           86% of Obs. below 250 Holdings
                                                                                                                  91% of Obs. below 350 Holdings
                    300

                    200

                    100

                      0
                           10
                                30
                                     50
                                          70
                                               90
                                                    110
                                                          130
                                                                 150
                                                                       170
                                                                             190
                                                                                   210
                                                                                         230
                                                                                                250
                                                                                                      270
                                                                                                            290
                                                                                                                  310
                                                                                                                        330
                                                                                                                               350
                                                                                                                                     370
                                                                                                                                           390
                                                                                                                                                 410
                                                                                                                                                       430
                                                                                                                                                              450
                                                                                                                                                                    470
                                                                                                                                                                          490
                                                                                     No. of Holdings


                                               Median Number of Holdings by Mutual Fund Family

                   1,200
                   1,100          First                         Second                          Third                         Fourth                          Fifth
                                 Quintile                       Quintile                       Quintile                       Quintile                       Quintile
                   1,000
                                Average: 39               Average: 67                    Average: 89                    Average: 122                   Average: 335
                    900
                                 Max: 56                   Max: 77                        Max: 102                       Max: 153                       Max: 1,094
                    800
 No. of Holdings




                    700
                    600
                    500
                    400
                    300
                    200
                    100
                      0
                                                                                               Families

This figure shows the dispersion in the number of stock holdings by mutual funds and mutual fund
families during the 1991-2005 period. The top panel shows a histogram with the distribution of the
number of stock holdings for all mutual funds in our sample. The bottom panel reports the median
number of stock holdings by mutual fund family. All funds in any given family are considered.
Families are sorted according to their median number of stock holdings during the 1991-2005 period.
Families are then divided into five groups (quintiles). The average and maximum values for each
quintile are reported.
                             Figure 8. Evolution of Within-Fund Entropy Measure

                                    Total Holdings - Excluding U.S. Holdings
 1.00
 0.90
 0.80
 0.70
 0.60
 0.50
 0.40
 0.30
 0.20
 0.10
 0.00
     1998             1999            2000            2001            2002            2003            2004            2005


                                     Holdings in Developing Countries Only

  1.00
  0.90
  0.80
  0.70
  0.60
  0.50
  0.40
  0.30
  0.20
  0.10
  0.00
      1998            1999            2000            2001            2002            2003            2004            2005

                             World Funds                 Foreign Funds                  Specialized Funds

This figure shows the evolution of the within-fund entropy measure by fund type from 1997 to 2005. The within-fund
entropy measure captures the commonality of stock holdings in two consecutive years for each individual mutual fund. The
figure reports the median value across families in a given year. The top panel includes stock holdings in all countries except
the U.S. The bottom panel includes stock holdings in developing countries only. Specialized funds include: emerging market
funds, regional funds, and country funds.
                             Table 1. Data Coverage
                                   Holdings Data
Sample                                                        1991-2005
Frequency                                                      Annual
Number of Families                                               499
Total Number of Funds                                           1,904
Total Number of Fund-Year Observations                          8,420
Total Number of Asset-Level Holdings                          1,359,750

                                     Price Data
Sample                                               September 1989 - June 2006
Frequency                                                      Daily
Number
N b off F Families
              ili                                               36
Total Number of Funds                                           371
Total Number of Observations                                 722,885

This table describes the two datasets analyzed in this paper. The source of the data on
mutual fund stock holdings is Morningstar International Equity Mutual Funds. The source
of the mutual fund price data is Bloomberg.
            Table 2. Number of Mutual Fund Holdings
                                 Average          Median         Std. Dev.
Fund Type
Global Funds                        155              96             196
 World Funds                        136             106             132
    Excluding U.S. Holdings         101              76             100
 Foreign Funds                      175             105             219

Specialized Funds                   117             79              136
 Emerging Market Funds              161             121             138
 Asia Funds                          89              65             110
 Europe Funds                       111             71              158
 Latin America Funds                 58             56               24
 Country Funds                      126             63              178

All Funds                           150              95             186

This table shows the average, median, and standard deviation of the number of
stock holdings by mutual fund type over the 1991-2005 period.
               Table 3. Differences in Holdings within Regions by Fund Type

                                                                Number of Holdings
Fund Type                                        Asia            Developed Europe          Latin America
Regional Funds
 Median Number of Holdings                        60                      62                     41
                                                  Drop in Holdings in Each Region by Fund Type
                                                     (In Percent, Relative to Regional Funds)
   Emerging Market Funds                         -33%                     -                  -34%
   Foreign Funds                                 -42%                   -5%                  -93%
   World Funds                                   -69%                  -49%                  -94%

                                                                Number of Countries
Fund Type                                        Asia            Developed Europe          Latin America
Regional Funds
 Median Number of Countries                        8                      12                      6
                                                  Drop in Countries in Each Region by Fund Type
                                                     (In Percent
                                                         Percent, Relative to Regional Funds)
   Emerging Market Funds                         -10%                    -                   -17%
   Foreign Funds                                 -30%                   0%                   -72%
   World Funds                                   -36%                  -14%                  -75%

This table reports differences across fund types in regional stock and country holdings over the 1997-2005
period. The top panel shows the differences in the number of stock holdings across fund types. The bottom
panel shows the differences in the number of countries receiving investments from different fund types. The
first row in each panel reports the median number of stock or country holdings in a given region for the
corresponding regional funds. Differences are then calculated as the percentage change of this median number
of stock holdings of a fund relative to those of the corresponding regional fund. Comparisons are made within
mutual fund families. Families without the corresponding regional funds are excluded from the analysis.
                                                 Table 4. Mutual Fund Holdings
                              Number of                  All Fund Holdings                            Global Fund Holdings
                                Listed            Number of     As a Percentage of               Number of     As a Percentage of
                              Companies            Holdings      All Listed Stocks                Holdings      All Listed Stocks
                                                                                 1997
Total                            30,319              9,086                    30%                    6,267                   21%

Developed Countries              12,987              6,815                    52%                    4,953                   38%
  Asia                            5,760              3,249                    56%                    2,246                   39%
  Europe                          6,392              3,459                    54%                    2,635                   41%
  Middle East                      802                 87                     11%                     54                      7%

Developing Countries             17,332              2,271                    13%                    1,314                    8%
  Asia                           10,089              1,304                    13%                     693                     7%
  Europe                          2,697               319                     12%                     167                     6%
  Latin America                   2,196               399                     18%                     297                    14%
  Middle East & Africa            2,350               249                     11%                     157                     7%

                                                                                 2004
Total                            39,061              6,289                    16%                    5,510                   14%

Developed Countries              18,282              5,204                    28%                    4,799                   26%
  Asia                            7,758              2,748                    35%                    2,429                   31%
  Europe
  E                               9,817
                                  9 817              2,392
                                                     2 392                    24%                    2,315
                                                                                                     2 315                   24%
  Middle East                      686                 45                      7%                      37                     5%

Developing Countries             20,779              1,085                     5%                     711                     3%
  Asia                           10,444               566                      5%                     394                     4%
  Europe                          6,279               184                      3%                     114                     2%
  Latin America                   1,525               195                     13%                     141                     9%
  Middle East & Africa            2,531               140                      6%                     62                      2%

This table shows the number of listed stocks and the number of stock holdings for mutual funds in developed and developing countries
across selected regions. The top panel shows data for 1997; the bottom panel shows data for 2004. The first column shows the total
number of listed stocks across the countries' main stock exchanges within each region. The second and third columns show the number
of stock holdings for all U.S. equity mutual funds in these regions, in absolute terms and as a percentage of the universe of listed stocks.
The fourth and fifth columns report the same numbers for global funds only. The data on stock listings come from the Global Financial
Database. Stock holdings in the U.S. and offshore financial centers are excluded from the table.
                        Table 5. Size of Mutual Fund Holdings
                                           Total Holdings over
                                                                              Average Mutual
                                       Stock Market Capitalization
                                                                                 Fund Size
                                     Average      Median       Std. Dev.       (US$ Million)
Fund Type
Global Funds                          0.12%        0.01%        0.75%                899
 World Funds                          0.18%        0.01%        0.86%               1,320
 Foreign Funds                        0.11%        0.01%        0.72%                758

Specialized Funds                     0.12%        0.02%        0.59%                277
 Emerging Market Funds                 0.15%        0.02%        0.70%               369
 Asia Funds                           0.12%        0.01%        0.53%                132
 Europe Funds                         0.08%        0.01%        0.35%                346
    i America
 Latin A     i Funds
                  d                   00.10%
                                         10%       00.02%
                                                      02%       00.47%
                                                                   4 %               144

This table shows the average, median, and standard deviation of the total amount of mutual fund
foreign holdings as a percentage of stock market capitalization over the 1997-2005 period by fund
type. The average size of mutual funds, in millions of U.S. dollars, is also reported. The data on
stock market capitalization at the firm level come from Worldscope.
                        Table 6. Probabilities of Being Held by a Mutual Fund
                                     Total Holdings - Excluding U.S. Holdings

                                                                    Global Funds
                                                                    Probability of:
                                                                                                         Total
                                                        Not Being Held           Being Held
    Specialized Funds
                                    Not Being Held            0%                      25%                 25%
    Probability of:

                                        Being Held            32%                     16%                 48%

    No Specialized Fund
                                                              0%                      27%                 27%

    Total                                                                                                100%
                                                              32%                     68%
    [No. of Observations]                                                                              [396,388]


                                      Holdings in Developing Countries Only

                                                                    Global Funds
                                                                    Probability of:
                                                                                                         Total
                                                        Not Being Held           Being Held
    Specialized Funds
                                    Not Being Held            0%                      10%                 10%
    Probability of:

                                        Being Held            75%                     13%                 89%

    No Specialized Fund
                                                              0%                      2%                  2%

    Total                                                                                                100%
                                                              75%                     25%
    [No. of Observations]                                                                               [92,175]


This table shows frequency counts for mutual fund stock holdings from 1997 to 2005. The reported numbers
correspond to the probability of being held (or not) by certain types of mutual funds, given that a mutual fund family
has both fund types. The top panel includes stock holdings in all countries except the U.S., whereas the bottom panel
includes stock holdings in developing countries only. Each observation is a family-year-stock observation. The total
number of observations is reported in brackets in the "Total" row of each table. When a global fund in a given family-
year holds a stock in a country not covered by the specialized funds within that family in that year, this observation is
counted in the "No Specialized Fund" row. Global funds include both world funds and foreign funds. Specialized
funds include: emerging market funds, regional funds, and country funds.
                                                                  Table 7. Commonality in Holdings across Fund Types
                                                                                                             Dependent Variable: Entropy Measure
                                                                                  All Holdings                                                 Holdings in Developing Countries Only
                                                         (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)              (5)                (6)                (7)                (8)
Independent Variables
Number of Common Managers                             0.061 ***          0.059 ***                                                 0.054 ***         0.053 ***
                                                    [0.006]            [0.006]                                                   [0.008]           [0.008]
No Common Manager (NCM0)                                                                     0.292     ***        0.207   ***                                           0.363    ***       0.409    ***
                                                                                           [0.018]              [0.042]                                               [0.019]            [0.043]
One Common Manager (NCM1)                                                                    0.362     ***        0.284   ***                                           0.353    ***       0.396    ***
                                                                                           [0.034]              [0.052]                                               [0.033]            [0.051]
Two Common Managers (NCM2)                                                                   0.421     ***        0.329   ***                                           0.553    ***       0.583    ***
                                                                                           [0.031]              [0.049]                                               [0.037]            [0.054]
At Least Three Common Managers (NCM3)                                                        0.543     ***        0.456   ***                                           0.589    ***       0.633    ***
                                                                                           [0.035]              [0.052]                                               [0.032]            [0.053]

Year Dummies                                             No                Yes                   No                 Yes              No                Yes                 No                Yes

No. of Observations                                     370                370                   370                370             319                319                319                319
R-squared                                               0.15               0.18                  0.69               0.70            0.12               0.16               0.76               0.77

T-tests:
NCM0 = NCM1                                                                                 3.390 *               4.060 **                                              0.070              0.120
NCM0 = NCM2                                                                                13.190 ***            11.050 ***                                            20.670 ***         17.830 ***
NCM0 = NCM3                                                                                40.800 ***            42.230 ***                                            36.840 ***         36.510 ***

This table reports regressions of the entropy measure on the number of common managers and, alternatively, on dummy variables indicating whether funds within a family-year share no common manager or
one, two, or three common managers. The entropy measure captures the commonality of stock holdings in the portfolios of global funds and specialized funds. The sample period is 1997-2005. T-tests of
equality of the estimated coefficients on the dummy variables capturing the number of common managers are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the family level. Standard deviations are shown in
brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at one, five, and ten percent, respectively.
                                 Table 8. Portfolio Choice of Mutual Funds: Importance of Year, Fund Type, and Family Effects
                                                                                 Dependent Variable: Number of Stock Holdings
                                    (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)                    (5)                    (6)                    (7)
R-squared                          0.01                   0.02                   0.46                   0.03                  0.46                   0.47                   0.48

Independent Variables

Year Dummies                        Yes                   No                     No                     Yes                    Yes                   No                     Yes
Fund Type Dummies                   No                    Yes                    No                     Yes                    No                    Yes                    Yes
Family Dummies                      No                    No                     Yes                    No                     Yes                   Yes                    Yes

No. of Observations                6,394                 6,394                  6,394                  6,394                  6,394                  6,394                 6,394

                                                                       Dependent Variable: Percentage of Net Assets in Top Ten Holdings
                                    (1)                    (2)                   (3)                    (4)                    (5)                    (6)                    (7)

R-squared                          0.01                   0.11                   0.36                   0.12                  0.38                   0.43                   0.44

Independent
    p       Variables

Year Dummies                        Yes                   No                     No                     Yes                    Yes                   No                     Yes
Fund Type Dummies                   No                    Yes                    No                     Yes                    No                    Yes                    Yes
Family Dummies                      No                    No                     Yes                    No                     Yes                   Yes                    Yes

No. of Observations                6,379                 6,379                  6,379                  6,379                  6,379                  6,379                 6,379


In the top panel, the table reports regressions of the number of stock holdings on year dummies, fund type dummies, and/or family dummies. In the bottom panel, the table reports
regressions of the percentage of net assets in the top ten stock holdings on year dummies, fund type dummies, and/or family dummies. The R-squared of these regressions is reported. The
sample period is 1997-2005. Standard errors are clustered at the family level.
                                                                 Table 9. Portfolio Choice of Mutual Funds: Importance of Family Effects
                                                       Dependent Variable: Number of Stock Holdings                                         Dependent Variable: Percentage of Net Assets in Top Ten Holdings
                                          (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)                 (7)              (8)                (9)              (10)

Independent Variables

Number of Managers                                     16.180 ***        14.762 ***          4.693              4.601                                -0.554 ***        -0.529 ***        -0.186             -0.179
                                                       [4.655]           [4.569]           [3.702]            [3.703]                                [0.175]          [0.178]           [0.188]            [0.187]
Dummy: 1 Manager                     132.60 ***                                                                                    29.07 ***
                                   [10.800]                                                                                      [0.545]
Dummy: 2 Managers                    135.20 ***                                                                                    27.58 ***
                                    [8.694]                                                                                      [0.664]
Dummy: 3 Managers                    153.60 ***                                                                                    25.59 ***
                                   [19.300]                                                                                      [1.012]
Dummy: 4 Managers                    166.20 ***                                                                                    24.66 ***
                                   [20.100]                                                                                      [2.284]
Dummy: 5 Managers                    152.20 ***                                                                                    24.30 ***
                                   [16.560]                                                                                      [1.100]
Dummy: 6 Managers                    196.90 ***                                                                                    22.75 ***
                                   [31.310]                                                                                      [2.323]
Dummy: 7 or More Managers            221.70 ***                                                                                    26.80 ***
                                   [28.130]                                                                                      [0.971]
Manager Tenure                                          2.964              1.468             2.260 *            2.243 *                              -0.067            -0.033            -0.133             -0.129
                                                       [2.488]           [2.255]           [1.208]            [1.203]                                [0.118]          [0.115]           [0.084]            [0.084]
Fund Age                                                0.211              0.316            -1.027             -1.013                                -0.129 **         -0.106 **         -0.126 **          -0.128 ***
                                                       [0 775]
                                                       [0.775]           [0 845]
                                                                         [0.845]           [0 863]
                                                                                           [0.863]            [0 863]
                                                                                                              [0.863]                                [0 053]
                                                                                                                                                     [0.053]          [0 052]
                                                                                                                                                                      [0.052]           [0 049]
                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.049]            [0 049]
                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.049]
Family Expenses                                                           -0.650 **                            -0.014                                                  -0.001                               -0.010
                                                                         [0.252]                              [0.160]                                                 [0.011]                              [0.009]
Family Size                                                                7.535 ***                            0.575                                                  -0.062                               0.053
                                                                         [2.786]                              [1.543]                                                 [0.110]                              [0.088]

Year Dummies                             No                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                No                 Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
Fund Type Dummies                        No                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                No                 Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
Family Dummies                           No                 No                No                Yes                Yes                No                  No               No                Yes                Yes

No. of Observations                     6,321             6,093              6,093             6,093              6,093              6,308              6,080             6,080             6,080              6,080
R-squared                                0.02              0.05               0.07              0.49              0.49                0.02               0.13             0.13               0.45              0.45


This table reports regressions of the number of stock holdings and the percentage of net assets in the top ten stock holdings on the number of managers, manager tenure, fund age, mutual fund family expenses, and
mutual fund family size. Depending on the specification, year, fund type, and/or family dummies are included. Family expenses are in millions of U.S. dollars and family size is in billions of U.S. dollars. Fund age is
expressed in years. The sample period is 1997-2005. Standard errors are clustered at the family level. Standard deviations are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at one, five, and ten percent,
respectively.
                                     Table 10. Simulations Using the Largest Number of Funds

                                                                              Minimizing the Variance
                                             Average Returns                 Average              Standard Deviation of
                                               (Per Year)                  Difference in                Returns
                                        Global        Simulated            Accumulated           Global        Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Funds                    Funds        Global Funds            Returns             Funds        Global Funds         Comparisons
Daily Data
 World Funds                             6.22%           11.01%                4.85%             0.87%            0.78%                  63
 Foreign Funds                           6.03%            9.95%                4.03%             0.97%            0.89%                  77
 Pools of World or Foreign Funds        10.53%           15.23%                4.55%             0.86%            0.80%                  25
Total                                    6.78%           11.14%                4.42%             0.92%            0.84%                 165

Weekly Data
 World Funds                             6.28%           11.33%                5.08%             2.05%            1.92%                  63
 Foreign Funds                           6.04%            9.70%                3.74%             2.25%            2.13%                  77
 Pools of World or Foreign Funds        10.54%           15.16%                4.44%             1.99%            1.90%                  25
Total                                    6.80%           11.13%                4.36%             2.14%            2.01%                 165


                                                                           Maximizing Expected Returns
                                             Average Returns                 Average              Standard Deviation of
                                               (Per Year)                  Difference in                Returns
                                        Global        Simulated            Accumulated           Global        Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Funds                    Funds        Global Funds            Returns             Funds        Global Funds         Comparisons
Daily Data
 World Funds                             6.22%           10.68%                4.46%             0.87%            0.83%                  63
 Foreign Funds                           6.03%           10.49%                4.49%             0.97%            0.92%                  77
 Pools of World or Foreign Funds        10.53%           14.21%                3.59%             0.86%            0.83%                  25
Total                                    6.78%           11.12%                4.34%             0.92%            0.87%                 165

Weekly Data
 World Funds                             6.28%           12.48%                6.09%             2.05%            2.13%                  63
 Foreign Funds                           6.04%           11.14%                4.98%             2.25%            2.30%                  77
 Pools of World or Foreign Funds        10.54%           16.67%                5.74%             1.99%            2.10%                  25
Total                                    6.80%           12.47%                5.52%             2.14%            2.20%                 165

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds. Simulated global
funds are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different procedures. The top panel
shows the results of minimizing the variance of returns subject to a restriction on expected returns. The bottom panel shows the results of
maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of returns. The simulations use portfolios that include the largest number of
available specialized funds for each global fund in each family. Global funds are world funds, foreign funds, and a pool of world or foreign funds.
The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family but with different scopes,
e.g. world (foreign) value funds and world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily or weekly depending on the data frequency
considered. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are calculated out-of-sample, as described in the main text. Annualized differences in
accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each simulation performed. Averages across simulations are then computed and
reported.
                                         Table 11. Simulations Using the Longest Available Sample

                                                                                     Minimizing the Variance
                                                  Average Returns                   Average                Standard Deviation of
                                                    (Per Year)                    Difference in                  Returns
                                            Global       Simulated Global         Accumulated           Global          Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Funds                        Funds             Funds                 Returns             Funds          Global Funds         Comparisons
Daily Data
 World Funds                                6.81%             9.50%                   2.79%              0.91%             0.84%                  63
 Foreign Funds                              5.09%             7.69%                   2.75%              0.97%             0.90%                  77
 Pools of World or Foreign Funds            7.67%             11.62%                  4.00%              0.92%             0.85%                  25
Total                                       6.13%              8.97%                  2.95%              0.94%             0.87%                  165

Weekly Data
 World Funds                                8.07%             9.78%                   2.44%              2.66%             2.16%                  63
 Foreign Funds                              5.11%             7.33%                   2.33%              2.25%             2.16%                  77
 Pools of World or Foreign Funds            7.87%             11.93%                  4.08%              2.17%             2.03%                  25
Total                                       6.65%              8.95%                  2.64%              2.40%             2.14%                  165


                                                                                 Maximizing Expected Returns
                                                  Average Returns                   Average                Standard Deviation of
                                                    (Per Year)                    Difference in                  Returns
                                            Global       Simulated Global         Accumulated           Global          Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Funds                        Funds             Funds                 Returns             Fund           Global Funds         Comparisons
Daily Data
 World Funds                                6.81%             9.60%                   2.86%              0.91%             0.85%                  63
 Foreign Funds                              5.09%             7.98%                   2.98%              0.97%             0.92%                  77
 Pools of World or Foreign Funds            7.67%             11.22%                  3.59%              0.92%             0.88%                  25
Total                                       6.13%              9.08%                  3.02%              0.94%             0.88%                  165

Weekly Data
 World Funds                                8.07%             10.87%                  3.20%              2.66%             2.37%                  63
 Foreign Funds                              5.11%             8.35%                   3.20%              2.25%             2.26%                  77
 Pools of World or Foreign Funds            7.87%             13.55%                  5.51%              2.17%             2.22%                  25
Total                                       6.65%             10.08%                  3.55%              2.40%             2.30%                  165

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds. Simulated global funds
are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different procedures. The top panel shows the
results of minimizing the variance of returns subject to a restriction on expected returns. The bottom panel shows the results of maximizing expected
returns subject to a restriction on the variance of returns. The simulations use portfolios that include the longest time series for each global fund in each
family. Global funds are world funds, foreign funds, and a pool of world or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that
include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family but with different scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and world (foreign) growth
funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily or weekly depending on the data frequency considered. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are
calculated out-of-sample, as described in the main text. Annualized differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each
simulation performed. Averages across simulations are then computed and reported.
                           Table 12. Benchmarking: Simulations Using the Largest Number of Funds

                                                                              Minimizing the Variance
                                           Average Returns                 Average            Standard Deviation of Daily
                                             (Per Year)                  Difference in                 Returns
                                       Global        Simulated           Accumulated           Global         Simulated             Number of
Type of Global Funds                   Funds        Global Funds         Daily Returns         Funds         Global Funds          Comparisons
World Funds                            8.71%           12.10%                 3.43%             0.88%            0.82%                   56
Foreign Funds                          5.99%            9.68%                 3.79%             0.97%            0.91%                   77
Pools of World or Foreign Funds       10.60%           14.88%                 4.20%             0.86%            0.85%                   24

Total                                  7.65%           11.32%                 3.72%             0.92%            0.87%                  157


                                                                           Maximizing Expected Returns
                                           Average Returns                 Average            Standard Deviation of Daily
                                             (Per Year)                  Difference in                 Returns
                                       Global        Simulated           Accumulated           Global         Simulated             Number of
Type of Global Funds                   Funds        Global Funds         Daily Returns         Funds         Global Funds          Comparisons
World Funds                            8.71%           11.96%                 3.36%             0.88%            0.78%                   56
Foreign Funds                          5.99%           10.41%                 4.51%             0.97%            0.90%                   77
Pools of World or Foreign Funds       10.60%           14.69%                 4.00%             0.86%            0.83%                   24

Total                                  7.65%           11.61%                 4.02%             0.92%            0.85%                  157

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds. Simulated global
funds are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different procedures. The top panel
shows the results of minimizing the variance of returns relative to a benchmark index subject to a restriction on expected returns. The bottom panel
shows the results of maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of returns relative to a benchmark index. The simulations
use portfolios that include the largest number of available specialized funds for each global fund in each family. An appropriate benchmark index is
used for each simulation. Global funds are world funds, foreign funds, and a pool of world or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are
simulations that include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family but with different scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and
world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are calculated out-of-sample, as
described in the main text. Annualized differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each simulation performed.
Averages across simulations are then computed and reported.
                          Table 13. Benchmarking: Simulations Using the Longest Available Sample

                                                                            Minimizing the Variance
                                           Average Returns                 Average            Standard Deviation of Daily
                                             (Per Year)                  Difference in                 Returns
                                      Global         Simulated           Accumulated           Global        Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Funds                  Funds         Global Funds         Daily Returns         Funds        Global Funds         Comparisons
World Funds                            7.83%           10.28%                2.56%             0.91%            0.85%                  63
Foreign Funds                          5.06%           7.53%                 2.58%             0.97%            0.91%                  77
Pools of World or Foreign Funds        7.49%           11.66%                4.24%             0.93%            0.89%                  24

Total                                  6.47%            9.18%                2.82%             0.94%            0.89%                 164


                                                                         Maximizing Expected Returns
                                           Average Returns                 Average            Standard Deviation of Daily
                                             (Per Year)                  Difference in                 Returns
                                      Global         Simulated           Accumulated           Global        Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Funds                  Funds         Global Funds         Daily Returns         Funds        Global Funds         Comparisons
World Funds                            7.83%           10.13%                2.48%             0.91%            0.82%                  63
Foreign Funds                          5.06%           8.19%                 3.28%             0.97%            0.90%                  77
Pools of World or Foreign Funds        7.49%           12.44%                4.94%             0.93%            0.87%                  24

Total                                  6.47%            9.55%                3.22%             0.94%            0.86%                 164

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds. Simulated global
funds are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different procedures. The top panel
shows the results of minimizing the variance of returns relative to a benchmark index subject to a restriction on expected returns. The bottom
panel shows the results of maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of returns relative to a benchmark index. The
simulations use portfolios that include the longest time series for each global fund in each family. An appropriate benchmark index is used for
each simulation. Global funds are world funds, foreign funds, and a pool of world or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are
simulations that include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family but with different scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and
world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are calculated out-of-sample, as
described in the main text. Annualized differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each simulation performed.
Averages across simulations are then computed and reported.
          Table 14. Skewness and Kurtosis Based on Simulations Using the Largest Number of Funds

                                                                        Minimizing the Variance
                                                                                 Daily Returns on Simulated
                                       Daily Returns on Global Funds                    Global Funds                     Number of
                                        Skewness          Kurtosis               Skewness          Kurtosis             Comparisons
Type of Global Funds
World Funds                                 -0.63              10.15                -0.70               8.78                  63
                                           [0.99]             [14.56]              [0.93]              [16.21]
Foreign Funds                               -0.83              12.47                -0.97               11.13                 77
                                           [1.21]             [19.55]              [0.87]              [11.13]
Pools of World or Foreign Funds             -0.42               6.57                -0.79               9.85                  25
                                           [0.49]              [5.64]              [0.90]              [11.91]
Total                                       -0.69              10.69                -0.84               10.04                165
                                           [1.05]             [16.31]              [0.90]              [13.37]

                                                                     Maximizing Expected Returns
                                                                                 Daily Returns on Simulated
                                       Daily Returns on Global Funds                    Global Funds                     Number of
                                        Skewness          Kurtosis               Skewness          Kurtosis             Comparisons
Type of Global Funds
World Funds                                 -0.63              10.15                -0.57                6.12                 63
                                           [0.99]             [14.56]              [0.40]               [4.71]
Foreign Funds                                0.83
                                            -0.83              12.47                 0.86
                                                                                    -0.86               9.28                  77
                                           [1.21]             [19.55]              [0.65]              [6.55]
Pools of World or Foreign Funds            -0.42                6.57                -0.57               7.03                  25
                                           [0.49]              [5.64]              [0.55]              [3.95]
Total                                      -0.69               10.69                -0.70               7.74                 165
                                           [1.05]             [16.31]              [0.57]              [5.73]
This table shows the average skewness and kurtosis of returns of global funds and simulated global funds. Simulated global funds are
constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different procedures. The top
panel shows the results of minimizing the variance of returns subject to a restriction on the expected return. The bottom panel shows
the results of maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of returns. The simulations use portfolios that
include the largest number of available specialized funds for each global fund in each family. Global funds are world funds, foreign
funds, and a pool of world or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that include several world (or foreign)
funds within the same family but with different scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio
weights are updated daily. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are calculated out-of-sample, as described in the main text.
Standard deviations of both skewness and kurtosis are reported in brackets.
          Table 15. Skewness and Kurtosis Based on Simulations Using the Longest Available Sample

                                                                        Minimizing the Variance
                                                                                 Daily Returns on Simulated
                                       Daily Returns on Global Funds                    Global Funds                    Number of
                                        Skewness          Kurtosis               Skewness          Kurtosis            Comparisons
Type of Global Funds
World Funds                                 -0.82              13.70                -0.82              11.19                 63
                                           [1.10]             [16.07]              [0.84]             [12.48]
Foreign Funds                               -0.92              14.18                -1.06              13.21                 77
                                           [1.23]             [20.34]              [0.90]             [12.37]
Pools of World or Foreign Funds             -0.44               6.61                -0.83              10.07                 25
                                           [0.43]              [4.48]              [0.88]             [11.86]
Total                                       -0.81              12.85                -0.94              11.96                 165
                                           [1.10]             [17.30]              [0.88]             [12.33]

                                                                     Maximizing Expected Returns
                                                                                 Daily Returns on Simulated
                                       Daily Returns on Global Funds                    Global Funds                    Number of
                                        Skewness          Kurtosis               Skewness          Kurtosis            Comparisons
Type of Global Funds
World Funds                                 -0.82              13.70                -0.63               7.98                 63
                                           [1.10]             [16.07]              [0.51]              [7.52]
     g Funds
Foreign                                     -0.92              14.18                -0.87               9.55                 77
                                           [1.23]             [20.34]              [0.61]              [6.09]
Pools of World or Foreign Funds             -0.44               6.61                -0.60               7.22                 25
                                           [0.43]              [4.48]              [0.50]              [3.69]
Total                                       -0.81              12.85                -0.74               8.60                 165
                                           [1.10]             [17.30]              [0.57]              [6.44]
This table shows the average skewness and kurtosis of returns of global funds and simulated global funds. Simulated global funds are
constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different procedures. The top
panel shows the results of minimizing the variance of returns subject to a restriction on the expected return. The bottom panel shows
the results of maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of returns. The simulations use portfolios that
include the longest time series for each global fund in each family. Global funds are world funds, foreign funds, and a pool of world or
foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family
but with different scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily.
Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are calculated out-of-sample, as described in the main text. Standard deviations of both
skewness and kurtosis are reported in brackets.
                 Table 16. Average Returns Conditional on MSCI Emerging Market Index Returns

                                                       Average Returns (Per Week)
                                                                        Simulated
                                                    Global Funds      Global Funds                        T-test:              Number of
                                                        (G)                (P)                           (P) = (G)            Observations
Minimizing the Variance
Largest Number of Funds Simulations
MSCI Returns between 0% and -1%                         -0.37%                 -0.27%                    3.27 ***                 4,878
MSCI Returns between -1% and -5%                        -1.53%                 -1.49%                    1.71 *                   10,193
MSCI Returns between -5% and -10%                       -4.00%                 -4.35%                   -2.24 **                   950
MSCI Returns less than -10%                             -3.42%                 -3.45%                   -0.12                      191
Longest Available Sample Simulations
MSCI Returns between 0% and -1%                         -0.30%                 -0.25%                    2.24 **                  7,292
MSCI Returns between -1% and -5%                        -1.50%                 -1.48%                    0.81                     14,342
MSCI Returns between -5% and -10%                       -4.06%                 -4.35%                   -2.11 **                  1,297
MSCI Returns less than -10%                             -3.65%                 -3.74%                   -0.40                      287

Maximizing Expected Returns
Largest Number of Funds Simulations
MSCI Returns between 0% and -1%                         -0.37%                 -0.29%                    2.63 ***                 4,878
MSCI Returns between -1% and -5%                        -1.53%                 -1.61%                   -3.27 ***                 10,193
MSCI Returns between -5% and -10%                       -4.00%                 -4.65%                   -4.22 ***                  950
MSCI Returns less than -10%                             -3.42%                 -3.70%                   -0.96                      191
Longest Available Sample Simulations
MSCI Returns between 0% and -1%                         -0.30%                 -0.27%                    1.39                     7,292
MSCI Returns between -1% and -5%                        -1.50%                 -1.59%                   -4.10 ***                 14,342
MSCI Returns between -5% and -10%                       -4.06%                 -4.65%                   -4.38 ***                 1,297
MSCI Returns less than -10%                             -3.65%                 -4.11%                   -1.88 *                    287

This table shows the average returns of both global funds and simulated global funds conditional on negative returns on the MSCI
Emerging Market Index. Simulated global funds are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund
family using two different procedures. The top part shows the results of minimizing the variance of returns subject to a restriction on the
expected return. The bottom part shows the results of maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of returns.
Simulations are performed on daily returns. Aggregate weekly (Wednesday) returns are reported. Simulations using portfolios that
include the largest number of available specialized funds for each global fund in each family and using portfolios that include the longest
time series for each global fund in each family are displayed. T-statistics for the test of equality of means are shown. A positive t-statistic
means that returns of the simulated global fund are larger than those of global funds.
                            Table 17. Average Returns Conditional on Simulated Global Fund Returns

                                                                  Average Returns (Per Week)
                                                                                   Simulated
                                                               Global Funds      Global Funds                     T-test:              Number of
                                                                   (G)                (P)                        (P) = (G)            Observations
Minimizing the Variance
Largest Number of Funds Simulations
Simulated Global Fund Returns between 0% and -1%                   -0.52%                -0.48%                   4.03 ***                 6,380
Simulated Global Fund Returns between -1% and -5%                  -2.21%                -2.18%                   2.08 **                  8,946
Simulated Global Fund Returns between -5% and -10%                 -6.06%                -6.36%                  -2.63 ***                  582
Simulated Global Fund Returns less than -10%                      -11.71%               -12.51%                  -1.57                      99
Longest Available Sample Simulations
Simulated Global Fund Returns between 0% and -1%                   -0.49%                -0.47%                   2.93   ***               9,340
Simulated Global Fund Returns between -1% and -5%                  -2.22%                -2.19%                   1.89   *                12,529
Simulated Global Fund Returns between -5% and -10%                 -6.23%                -6.37%                  -1.69   *                  907
Simulated Global Fund Returns less than -10%                      -11.89%               -12.74%                  -2.08   **                 156

Maximizing Expected Returns
Largest Number of Funds Simulations
Simulated Global Fund Returns between 0% and -1%                   -0.49%                -0.47%                   1.32                     6,183
Simulated Global Fund Returns between -1% and -5%                  -2.14%                -2.22%                  -4.43 ***                 9,265
Simulated Global Fund Returns between -5% and -10%                 -5.69%                -6.23%                  -4.84 ***                  631
Simulated Global Fund Returns less than -10%                      -11.52%               -12.47%                  -2.14 **                   100
Longest Available Sample Simulations
Simulated Global Fund Returns between 0% and -1%                   -0.47%                -0.47%                   0.02                     9,079
Simulated Global Fund Returns between -1% and -5%                  -2.16%                -2.21%                  -3.76 ***                12,854
Simulated Global Fund Returns between -5% and -10%                 -6.01%                -6.27%                  -2.96 ***                  963
Simulated Global Fund Returns less than -10%                      -12.04%               -12.41%                  -1.01                      146

This table shows the average returns for both global funds and simulated global funds conditional on negative returns on the simulated global fund.
Simulated global funds are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different
procedures. The top part shows the results of minimizing the variance of returns subject to a restriction on the expected return. The bottom part
shows the results of maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of returns. Simulations are performed on daily returns.
Aggregate weekly (Wednesday) returns are reported. Simulations using portfolios that include the largest number of available specialized funds for
each global fund in each family and using portfolios that include the longest time series for each global fund in each family are displayed. T-
statistics for the test of equality of means are shown. A positive t-statistic means that returns of the simulated global fund are larger than those of
global funds.
                               Table 18. Average Returns Conditional on Global Fund Returns

                                                           Average Returns (Per Week)
                                                                            Simulated
                                                        Global Funds      Global Funds                       T-test:              Number of
                                                            (G)                (P)                          (P) = (G)            Observations
Minimizing the Variance
Largest Number of Funds Simulations
Global Fund Returns between 0% and -1%                      -0.47%                 -0.34%                 11.74   ***                6,371
Global Fund Returns between -1% and -5%                     -2.23%                 -1.91%                 19.92   ***                9,273
Global Fund Returns between -5% and -10%                    -6.36%                 -5.25%                 13.83   ***                 784
Global Fund Returns less than -10%                         -13.02%                -10.84%                  4.57   ***                 113
Longest Available Sample Simulations
Global Fund Returns between 0% and -1%                      -0.47%                 -0.37%                 11.94   ***               9,297
Global Fund Returns between -1% and -5%                     -2.23%                 -1.99%                 17.56   ***               12,840
Global Fund Returns between -5% and -10%                    -6.46%                 -5.55%                 13.60   ***               1,140
Global Fund Returns less than -10%                         -13.24%                -11.36%                  4.89   ***                163

Maximizing Expected Returns
Largest Number of Funds Simulations
Global Fund Returns between 0% and -1%                      -0.47%                 -0.36%                  8.68   ***                6,371
Global Fund Returns between -1% and -5%                     -2.23%                 -1.98%                 15.00   ***                9,273
Global Fund Returns between -5% and -10%                    -6.36%                 -5.22%                 13.61   ***                 784
Global Fund Returns less than -10%
                               10%                          13 02%
                                                           -13.02%                 10 37%
                                                                                  -10.37%                  5 89
                                                                                                           5.89   ***                 113
Longest Available Sample Simulations
Global Fund Returns between 0% and -1%                      -0.47%                 -0.40%                  8.14   ***                9,297
Global Fund Returns between -1% and -5%                     -2.23%                 -2.02%                 15.01   ***               12,840
Global Fund Returns between -5% and -10%                    -6.46%                 -5.43%                 15.29   ***               1,140
Global Fund Returns less than -10%                         -13.24%                -10.84%                  6.80   ***                 163

This table shows the average returns for both global funds and simulated global funds conditional on negative returns on the global funds.
Simulated global funds are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different
procedures. The top part shows the results of minimizing the variance of returns subject to a restriction on the expected return. The bottom
part shows the results of maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of returns. Simulations are performed on daily
returns. Aggregate weekly (Wednesday) returns are reported. Simulations using portfolios that include the largest number of available
specialized funds for each global fund in each family and using portfolios that include the longest time series for each global fund in each
family are displayed. T-statistics for the test of equality of means are shown. A positive t-statistic means that returns of the simulated global
fund are larger than those of global funds.
                        Appendix Table 1. Price Data on Mutual Funds
                                                        Number of                  Sample
       Mutual Fund Family                                Funds            Beginning           End

   1   AIM Family of Funds                                  17             Apr. 92           Jul. 05
   2   Alliance Bernstein                                   10             Dec. 99           Jun. 06
   3   Allianz Funds                                         4             Dec. 04           Jul. 05
   4   American Funds Group                                  7             Mar. 02           Jun. 06
   5   Columbia Funds                                        8             Oct. 00           Jun. 06
   6   Credit Suisse                                         8             Dec. 01           Jun. 06
   7   DFA Investment Dimensions Group                       9             Mar. 93           Jul. 05
   8   Dreyfus Founders                                     11             Jul. 96           Jun. 06
   9   Eaton Vance Group                                     7             Sep. 99           Jul. 05
  10   Evergreen Funds                                       5             Sep. 94           Jun. 06
  11   Excelsior Funds                                       4             Sep. 93           Jul. 05
  12   Fidelity Advisors Funds                              14             Dec. 00           Jun. 06
  13   Fidelity Group                                       18             Sep. 89           Jul. 05
  14   GAM Funds                                             7             Jan. 90           Jul. 05
  15   Gartmore                                              5             Jul. 04           Jun. 06
  16   GMO LLC                                              17             Jan. 99           Jul. 05
  17   Goldman Sachs Asset Management Group                 11             Oct. 98           Jul. 05
  18   Hartford Mutual Funds                                10             May 01            Jun. 06
  19   ING Funds Trust                                      12             Nov. 94           Jul. 05
  20   Ivy Mackenzie Management                              9             May 99            Jul. 05
  21   J.P. Morgan Funds                                    10             Jul. 02           Jun. 06
  22   Janus                                                12             Oct. 98           Jun. 06
  23   Merrill Lynch Group                                  15             Nov. 94           Jul. 05
  24   MFS Family of Funds                                  11             Jun. 96           Jun. 06
  25   Morgan Stanley Funds                                 26             Oct. 94           Jul. 05
  26   Oppenheimer Funds                                     9             Sep. 04           Jun. 06
  27   Putnam Funds                                          6             Nov. 91           Jul. 05
  28   RiverSource (former AXP)                              9             Jul. 90           Jul. 05
  29   Scudder Funds                                        18             Jun. 98           Jul. 05
  30   Seligman Group                                        4             Jun. 03           Jun. 06
  31   Smith Barney Group                                    6             Mar. 98           Jun. 06
  32   T. Rowe Price Funds                                  14             Jun. 92           Jul. 05
  33   Templeton Group                                      20             Nov. 92           Jul. 05
  34   UBS Funds                                             6             Mar. 01           Jun. 06
  35   Vanguard Group                                       11             Jul. 00           Jun. 06
  36   Wells Fargo Advantage                                 5             Oct. 97           Jul. 05

This table describes the number of funds and the beginning and the end of the price data sample for each
mutual fund family. The data source is Bloomberg.
                                   Appendix Table 2. Probabilities of Being Held by a Mutual Fund (World Funds and Foreign Funds)
                                                                                            Total Holdings


                                                      World Funds                                                                                           Foreign Funds
                                                      Probability of:                                                                                       Probability of:
                                                                                      Total                                                                                                  Total
                                          Not Being Held         Being Held                                                                      Not Being Held        Being Held
Specialized Funds            Not Being                                                                Specialized Funds             Not Being
                                                0%                      12%            12%                                                             0%                     23%            23%
Probability of:                   Held                                                                Probability of:                    Held
                                 Being                                                                                                  Being
                                                52%                     10%            62%                                                            34%                     15%            49%
                                   Held                                                                                                  Held
No Specialized Fund                                                                                   No Specialized Fund
                                                15%                     11%            26%                                                             2%                     26%            28%

Total                                                                                 100%            Total                                                                                  100%
                                                67%                     33%                                                                           36%                     64%
[No. of Observations]                                                               [180,744]         [No. of Observations]                                                                [379,913]


                                                                              Holdings in Developing Countries Only


                                                      World Funds                                                                                           Foreign Funds
                                                      Probability of:                                                                                       Probability of:
                                                                                      Total                                                                                                  Total
                                          Not Being Held         Being Held                                                                      Not Being Held        Being Held
Specialized Funds            Not Being                                                                Specialized Funds             Not Being
                                                0%                      5%             5%                                                              0%                     8%              8%
Probability of:                   Held                                                                Probability of:                    Held
                                 Being                                                                                                  Being
                                                83%                     9%             92%                                                            79%                     12%            90%
                                   Held                                                                                                  Held
No Specialized Fund                                                                                   No Specialized Fund
                                                1%                      1%             3%                                                              0%                     1%              2%

Total                                                                                 100%            Total                                                                                  100%
                                                85%                     15%                                                                           79%                     21%
[No. of Observations]                                                                [45,458]         [No. of Observations]                                                                [89,272]


This table shows frequency counts for mutual fund stock holdings from 1997 to 2005. The reported numbers correspond to the probability of being held (or not) by certain types of mutual funds, given
that a mutual fund family has both fund types. The top panel includes stock holdings in all countries except the U.S., whereas the bottom panel includes stock holdings in developing countries only.
Each observation is a family-year-stock observation. The total number of observations is reported in brackets in the "Total" row of each table. When a world fund or a foreign fund in a given family-
year holds a stock in a country not covered by the specialized funds within that family in that year, this observation is counted in the "No Specialized Fund" row. Specialized funds include: emerging
market funds, regional funds, and country funds.
                                                   Appendix Table 3. Portfolio Choice of Mutual Funds: Importance of Family Effects
                                                    Dependent Variable: Number of Holdings                                       Dependent Variable: Percentage of Net Assets in Top Ten Holdings

                                            (1)                          (2)                           (3)                            (4)                           (5)                          (6)

Independent Variables

Number of Managers                    17.020 ***                   16.440 ***                     4.773                         -0.625 ***                    -0.626 ***                    -0.288 *
                                      [4.946]                      [4.859]                      [3.775]                         [0.155]                      [0.157]                       [0.150]
Manager Tenure                         2.145                         1.268                        2.338 *                       -0.018                        -0.020                        -0.172 **
                                      [2.480]                      [2.250]                      [1.282]                         [0.123]                      [0.122]                       [0.085]
Fund Age                               -0.212                        0.173                       -1.276                         -0.100 **                     -0.099 **                     -0.104 **
                                      [0.831]                      [0.849]                      [0.850]                         [0.048]                      [0.048]                       [0.049]
Fund Expenses                          0.432 ***                    -2.211 *                      0.278                         -0.029 ***                    -0.035                        -0.076 **
                                      [0.116]                      [1.269]                      [0.461]                         [0.007]                      [0.049]                       [0.036]
Fund Size                                                            0.026 **                     0.001                                                        0.000                         0.001 **
                                                                   [0.013]                      [0.005]                                                      [0.000]                       [0.000]

Year Dummies                                Yes                          Yes                          Yes                            Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Fund Type Dummies                           Yes                          Yes                          Yes                            Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Family Dummies                              No                           No                           Yes                             No                            No                           Yes

No. of Observations                        5,662                        5,662                        5,662                           5,649                        5,649                         5,649
R-squared                                  0.06                          0.07                         0.52                           0.15                          0.15                          0.47


This table reports regressions of the number of stock holdings and the percentage of net assets in the top ten stock holdings on the number of managers, manager tenure, fund age, fund expenses, and fund size.
Depending on the specification, year and/or fund type dummies are included. The sample period is 1997-2005. Fund expenses and fund size are in millions of U.S. dollars. Fund age is expressed in years.
Standard errors are clustered at the family level. Standard deviations are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at one, five, and ten percent, respectively.
                                       Appendix Table 4A. Family Simulations Using the Largest Number of Funds
                                                                                                  Minimizing the Variance
                                                           Average Returns                      Average                  Standard Deviation
                                                             (Per Year)                       Difference in                of Daily Returns
                                                     Global      Simulated Global             Accumulated            Global       Simulated Global            Number of
       Mutual Fund Family                            Funds            Funds                   Daily Returns          Funds             Funds                 Comparisons
  1    Allianz Funds                                 0.95%               -3.05%                   -3.91%             0.66%               0.65%                     2
  2    Alliance Bernstein                            11.01%              12.90%                    1.77%             0.81%               0.79%                      8
  3    American Funds Group                          10.57%              13.93%                    3.33%             0.87%               0.74%                     4
  4    AIM Family of Funds                           9.53%               22.55%                   12.37%             0.90%               0.76%                     10
  5    Columbia Funds                                17.58%              21.08%                    3.28%             0.85%               0.77%                      3
  6    Credit Suisse                                  8.46%              12.15%                    3.63%             0.95%               0.85%                      2
  7    DFA Investment Dimensions Group                2.97%               1.13%                   -1.64%             0.91%               0.85%                      4
  8    Dreyfus Founders                              8.94%               15.90%                    6.66%             0.87%               0.80%                     6
  9    Evergreen Funds                               3.25%                1.69%                   -1.21%             1.12%               1.02%                     2
 10    Eaton Vance Group                             5.63%               22.13%                   16.40%             1.01%               0.71%                      2
 11    Excelsior Funds                                3.95%               7.15%                    3.13%             0.89%               0.87%                     2
 12    Fidelity Group                                 5.80%               9.46%                    3.78%             1.03%               0.94%                      6
 13    Fidelity Advisors Funds                        7.76%              11.71%                    3.96%             0.87%               0.76%                     6
 14    GAM Funds                                     -7.63%              -3.88%                    4.40%             1.08%               0.96%                     2
 15    Gartmore                                      22.30%              18.99%                   -2.62%             0.81%               0.78%                     3
 16    GMO LLC                                       6.65%                8.05%                    1.36%             0.76%               0.77%                     8
 17    Goldman Sachs Asset Management Group           1.63%               7.18%                    5.84%             1.03%               0.91%                     6
 18    Hartford Mutual Funds                         10.41%              13.49%                    3.11%             0.98%               0.84%                     2
 19    ING Funds Trust                               -5.75%              -1.34%                    5.33%             1.12%               1.01%                     6
 20    Ivy Mackenzie Management                      1.35%                4.81%                    3.77%             0.89%               0.76%                     4
 21    Janus                                         -7.01%               0.08%                    7.60%             0.67%               0.70%                     5
 22    J.P. Morgan Funds                             22.11%              24.06%                    1.68%             0.90%               0.87%                     4
 23    MFS Family of Funds                           20.70%              39.09%                   15.93%             0.88%               0.81%                     3
 24    Merrill Lynch Group                           10.31%              12.78%                    2.49%             1.01%               0.93%                     9
 25    Morgan Stanley Funds                          1.23%                4.47%                    3.61%             1.01%               0.88%                     11
 26    Oppenheimer Funds                             9.04%                9.06%                   -0.03%             0.80%               0.84%                     4
 27    Putnam Funds                                  4.86%                5.53%                    0.74%             1.08%               1.05%                     5
 28    RiverSource (former AXP)                      13.45%              22.06%                    7.87%             0.84%               0.73%                     2
 29    Scudder Funds                                 8.56%               14.60%                    5.85%             0.97%               0.86%                     9
 30    Smith Barney Group                             8.79%               9.81%                    0.90%             0.72%               0.74%                      1
 31    Seligman Group                                14.45%              15.89%                    1.26%             0.82%               0.82%                      2
 32    Templeton Group                               -3.58%              -0.94%                    3.04%             0.89%               0.77%                      9
 33    T. Rowe Price Funds                           24.48%              38.61%                   11.47%             0.82%               0.80%                      6
 34    UBS Funds                                     4.41%                7.30%                    2.88%             0.89%               0.84%                     1
 35    Vanguard Group                                7.77%               10.39%                    2.54%             0.96%               0.92%                      4
 36    Wells Fargo Advantage                          5.22%              11.69%                    6.65%             0.98%               0.78%                      2

       Total                                          6.78%              11.14%                   4.42%              0.92%               0.84%                     165

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds by mutual fund family. Simulated global funds
are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family by minimizing the variance of returns subject to a restriction on expected
returns. The simulations use portfolios that include the largest number of available specialized funds for each global fund in each family. Global funds are world funds,
foreign funds, and a pool of world or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family
but with different scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios
are calculated out-of-sample, as described in the main text. Annualized differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each simulation
performed. Averages across simulations are then computed and reported.
                                        Appendix Table 4B. Family Simulations Using the Largest Number of Funds
                                                                                                Maximizing Expected Returns
                                                            Average Returns                     Average                   Standard Deviation
                                                              (Per Year)                      Difference in                 of Daily Returns
                                                      Global      Simulated Global          Accumulated Daily         Global       Simulated Global             Number of
       Mutual Fund Family                             Funds            Funds                    Returns               Funds             Funds                  Comparisons
  1    Allianz Funds                                 0.95%                -3.95%                  -4.79%               0.66%               0.65%                     2
  2    Alliance Bernstein                            11.01%               13.53%                   2.32%               0.81%               0.79%                      8
  3    American Funds Group                          10.57%               11.76%                   1.22%               0.87%               0.81%                     4
  4    AIM Family of Funds                           9.53%                18.65%                   8.69%               0.90%               0.79%                     10
  5    Columbia Funds                                17.58%               20.34%                   2.53%               0.85%               0.78%                      3
  6    Credit Suisse                                  8.46%               10.91%                   2.40%               0.95%               0.89%                      2
  7    DFA Investment Dimensions Group                2.97%                1.52%                  -1.13%               0.91%               0.78%                      4
  8    Dreyfus Founders                              8.94%                15.23%                   5.96%               0.87%               0.83%                     6
  9    Evergreen Funds                               3.25%                5.20%                    2.53%               1.12%               0.91%                     2
 10    Eaton Vance Group                             5.63%                20.00%                  14.34%               1.01%               0.73%                     2
 11    Excelsior Funds                               3.95%                11.10%                   6.92%               0.89%               0.87%                     2
 12    Fidelity Group                                 5.80%                9.65%                   3.69%               1.03%               1.03%                     6
 13    Fidelity Advisors Funds                        7.76%               11.79%                   3.86%               0.87%               0.83%                     6
 14    GAM Funds                                     -7.63%               -2.36%                   6.01%               1.08%               0.97%                     2
 15    Gartmore                                      22.30%               18.99%                  -2.66%               0.81%               0.80%                     3
 16    GMO LLC                                       6.65%                9.26%                    2.41%               0.76%               0.80%                     8
 17    Goldman Sachs Asset Management Group           1.63%                4.30%                   2.83%               1.03%               0.97%                     6
 18    Hartford Mutual Funds                         10.41%               13.92%                   3.44%               0.98%               0.87%                     2
 19    ING Funds Trust                               -5.75%               6.60%                   14.46%               1.12%               1.06%                     6
 20    Ivy Mackenzie Management                      1.35%                5.22%                    4.14%               0.89%               0.81%                     4
 21    Janus                                         -7.01%               3.76%                   11.31%               0.67%               0.82%                     5
 22    J.P. Morgan Funds                             22.11%               23.09%                   0.88%               0.90%               0.87%                     4
 23    MFS Family of Funds                           20.70%               25.94%                   4.49%               0.88%               0.83%                     3
 24    Merrill Lynch Group                           10.31%               14.14%                   3.76%               1.01%               0.92%                     9
 25    Morgan Stanley Funds                          1.23%                6.50%                    5.52%               1.01%               0.95%                     11
 26    Oppenheimer Funds                             9.04%                5.03%                   -3.87%               0.80%               0.91%                     4
 27    Putnam Funds                                  4.86%                5.03%                    0.26%               1.08%               1.05%                     5
 28    RiverSource (former AXP)                      13.45%               19.31%                   5.39%               0.84%               0.76%                     2
 29    Scudder Funds                                 8.56%                15.98%                   6.98%               0.97%               0.92%                     9
 30    Smith Barney Group                            8.79%                11.87%                   2.74%               0.72%               0.77%                      1
 31    Seligman Group                                14.45%               16.85%                   2.07%               0.82%               0.84%                     2
 32    Templeton Group                               -3.58%               -2.40%                   1.43%               0.89%               0.81%                      9
 33    T. Rowe Price Funds                           24.48%               35.82%                   9.19%               0.82%               0.81%                      6
 34    UBS Funds                                     4.41%                6.71%                    2.27%               0.89%               0.85%                     1
 35    Vanguard Group                                7.77%                8.77%                    1.00%               0.96%               0.94%                      4
 36    Wells Fargo Advantage                         5.22%                15.35%                  10.03%               0.98%               0.83%                     2

       Total                                          6.78%               11.12%                   4.34%               0.92%               0.87%                    165

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds by mutual fund family. Simulated global funds
are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family by maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of
returns. The simulations use portfolios that include the largest number of available specialized funds for each global fund in each family. Global funds are world funds, foreign
funds, and a pool of world or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family but with
different scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are
calculated out-of-sample, as described in the main text. Annualized differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each simulation performed.
Averages across simulations are then computed and reported.
                                       Appendix Table 5A. Family Simulations Using the Longest Available Sample
                                                                                                  Minimizing the Variance
                                                           Average Returns                                                Standard Deviation
                                                             (Per Year)                     Average Difference              of Daily Returns
                                                      Global    Simulated Global             in Accumulated           Global      Simulated Global             Number of
       Mutual Fund Family                             Funds           Funds                   Daily Returns           Funds             Funds                 Comparisons
   1   Allianz Funds                                   0.95%              -3.05%                  -3.91%              0.66%              0.65%                     2
   2   Alliance Bernstein                              9.36%              13.06%                   3.48%              0.89%              0.86%                     8
   3   American Funds Group                           10.57%              13.93%                   3.33%              0.87%              0.74%                     4
   4   AIM Family of Funds                             7.34%              18.76%                  11.17%              1.03%              0.89%                     10
   5   Columbia Funds                                 14.17%              17.04%                   2.99%              0.92%              0.76%                      3
   6   Credit Suisse                                   8.46%              12.15%                   3.63%              0.95%              0.85%                      2
   7   DFA Investment Dimensions Group                 3.15%               1.22%                  -1.70%              0.91%              0.84%                      4
   8   Dreyfus Founders                                4.71%              7.83%                    3.33%              1.02%              0.92%                     6
   9   Evergreen Funds                                 5.76%              5.56%                   -0.21%              1.07%              1.08%                     2
  10   Eaton Vance Group                              -4.98%              8.94%                   15.46%              1.13%              0.87%                     2
  11   Excelsior Funds                                 1.58%               1.67%                   0.10%              0.99%              0.99%                     2
  12   Fidelity Group                                  7.08%               7.83%                   0.91%              0.92%              0.83%                     6
  13   Fidelity Advisors Funds                         7.40%               9.99%                   2.72%              0.93%              0.82%                      6
  14   GAM Funds                                       2.60%              1.54%                   -0.39%              1.03%              1.00%                     2
  15   Gartmore                                       22.30%              18.99%                  -2.62%              0.81%              0.78%                     3
  16   GMO LLC                                         6.65%              8.05%                    1.36%              0.76%              0.77%                     8
  17   Goldman Sachs Asset Management Group            1.63%              7.18%                    5.84%              1.03%              0.91%                     6
  18   Hartford Mutual Funds                           6.10%              8.06%                    2.17%              1.04%              0.91%                     2
  19   ING Funds Trust                                 0.96%              4.03%                    3.53%              1.04%              0.93%                     6
  20   Ivy Mackenzie Management                        2.45%              5.57%                    3.42%              0.92%              0.79%                     4
  21   Janus                                           4.97%              7.82%                    2.75%              0.88%              0.87%                     5
  22   J.P. Morgan Funds                              22.11%              24.06%                   1.68%              0.90%              0.87%                     4
  23   MFS Family of Funds                            12.47%              16.07%                   3.19%              0.80%              0.82%                     3
  24   Merrill Lynch Group                             5.09%              6.49%                    1.57%              1.03%              0.96%                     9
  25   Morgan Stanley Funds                            2.47%              6.23%                   4.00%               0.97%              0.87%                     11
  26   Oppenheimer Funds                              12.15%              11.35%                  -0.77%              0.77%              0.80%                     4
  27   Putnam Funds                                    4.86%              5.53%                    0.74%              1.08%              1.05%                     5
  28   RiverSource (former AXP)                        3.46%              3.15%                   -0.28%              1.14%              1.13%                     2
  29   Scudder Funds                                   5.44%              10.47%                   4.99%              0.99%              0.91%                     9
  30   Smith Barney Group                              2.03%              2.35%                    0.30%              0.94%              0.94%                     1
  31   Seligman Group                                 14.45%              15.89%                   1.26%              0.82%              0.82%                     2
  32   Templeton Group                                 3.15%              3.41%                    0.41%              0.80%              0.73%                     9
  33   T. Rowe Price Funds                             5.04%              10.10%                   5.07%              0.98%              0.92%                     6
  34   UBS Funds                                       4.41%              7.30%                    2.88%              0.89%              0.84%                     1
  35   Vanguard Group                                  5.40%              7.05%                   1.68%               0.99%              0.95%                     4
  36   Wells Fargo Advantage                           6.44%              8.39%                    2.18%              1.01%              0.88%                     2

       Total                                           6.13%              8.97%                    2.95%              0.94%              0.87%                     165

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds by mutual fund family. Simulated global
funds are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the mutual fund same family by minimizing the variance of returns subject to a restriction on
expected returns. The simulations use portfolios that include the longest time series for each global fund in each family. Global funds are world funds, foreign funds, and a
pool of world or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family but with different
scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are calculated out-
of-sample, as described in the main text. Annualized differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each simulation performed. Averages across
simulations are then computed and reported.
                                        Appendix Table 5B. Family Simulations Using the Longest Available Sample
                                                                                                Maximizing Expected Returns
                                                           Average Returns                                                  Standard Deviation
                                                             (Per Year)                     Average Difference               of Daily Returns
                                                      Global     Simulated Global            in Accumulated             Global      Simulated Global             Number of
       Mutual Fund Family                             Funds           Funds                   Daily Returns             Funds             Funds                 Comparisons
  1    Allianz Funds                                  0.95%               -3.95%                   -4.79%               0.66%               0.65%                     2
  2    Alliance Bernstein                              9.36%              12.64%                   3.08%                0.89%               0.86%                     8
  3    American Funds Group                           10.57%              11.76%                   1.22%                0.87%               0.81%                     4
  4    AIM Family of Funds                            7.34%               15.96%                   8.42%                1.03%               0.91%                     10
  5    Columbia Funds                                 14.17%              17.15%                   2.94%                0.92%               0.80%                      3
  6    Credit Suisse                                   8.46%              10.91%                    2.40%               0.95%               0.89%                      2
  7    DFA Investment Dimensions Group                 3.15%               1.31%                   -1.53%               0.91%               0.78%                      4
  8    Dreyfus Founders                               4.71%               6.54%                    2.09%                1.02%               0.91%                     6
  9    Evergreen Funds                                5.76%               7.06%                    1.54%                1.07%               0.98%                     2
 10    Eaton Vance Group                              -4.98%              5.23%                    11.44%               1.13%               0.92%                     2
 11    Excelsior Funds                                1.58%               1.69%                    0.20%                0.99%               0.96%                     2
 12    Fidelity Group                                  7.08%               8.26%                   1.27%                0.92%               0.85%                     6
 13    Fidelity Advisors Funds                         7.40%              10.33%                   2.84%                0.93%               0.89%                     6
 14    GAM Funds                                      2.60%               2.45%                    0.02%                1.03%               0.98%                     2
 15    Gartmore                                       22.30%              18.99%                   -2.66%               0.81%               0.80%                     3
 16    GMO LLC                                        6.65%               9.26%                    2.41%                0.76%               0.80%                     8
 17    Goldman Sachs Asset Management Group            1.63%               4.30%                   2.83%                1.03%               0.97%                     6
 18    Hartford Mutual Funds                          6.10%               8.78%                    2.80%                1.04%               0.93%                     2
 19    ING Funds Trust                                0.96%               5.35%                    5.32%                1.04%               0.91%                     6
 20    Ivy Mackenzie Management                       2.45%               6.80%                    4.56%                0.92%               0.84%                     4
 21    Janus                                          4.97%               10.57%                   5.33%                0.88%               0.89%                     5
 22    J.P. Morgan Funds                              22.11%              23.09%                   0.88%                0.90%               0.87%                     4
 23    MFS Family of Funds                            12.47%              14.85%                   2.09%                0.80%               0.82%                     3
 24    Merrill Lynch Group                            5.09%                8.85%                   3.87%                1.03%               0.94%                     9
 25    Morgan Stanley Funds                           2.47%               7.53%                    5.22%                0.97%               0.93%                     11
 26    Oppenheimer Funds                              12.15%              13.54%                   1.28%                0.77%               0.77%                     4
 27    Putnam Funds                                   4.86%               5.03%                    0.26%                1.08%               1.05%                     5
 28    RiverSource (former AXP)                       3.46%               2.53%                    -0.46%               1.14%               0.99%                     2
 29    Scudder Funds                                  5.44%               11.08%                   5.49%                0.99%               0.95%                     9
 30    Smith Barney Group                             2.03%                2.41%                   0.38%                0.94%               0.93%                      1
 31    Seligman Group                                 14.45%              16.85%                   2.07%                0.82%               0.84%                      2
 32    Templeton Group                                3.15%                4.13%                   1.13%                0.80%               0.72%                      9
 33    T. Rowe Price Funds                            5.04%                9.40%                   4.37%                0.98%               0.92%                      6
 34    UBS Funds                                      4.41%               6.71%                    2.27%                0.89%               0.85%                     1
 35    Vanguard Group                                 5.40%               5.17%                    -0.15%               0.99%               0.98%                      4
 36    Wells Fargo Advantage                          6.44%               13.25%                   6.77%                1.01%               0.87%                     2

       Total                                          6.13%               9.08%                    3.02%                0.94%               0.88%                    165

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds by mutual fund family. Simulated global funds
are constructed from actual global funds and specialized funds in the same mutual fund family by maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on the variance of
returns. The simulations use portfolios that include the longest time series for each global fund in each family. Global funds are world funds, foreign funds, and a pool of world
or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family but with different scopes, e.g. world
(foreign) value funds and world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are calculated out-of-sample, as
described in the main text. Annualized differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each simulation performed. Averages across simulations
are then computed and reported.
                   Appendix Table 6A. Rolling Window Simulations Using the Largest Number of Funds

                                                                             Minimizing the Variance
                                           Average Returns                  Average            Standard Deviation of Daily
                                             (Per Year)                   Difference in                 Returns
                                       Global        Simulated            Accumulated           Global         Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Fund                    Funds        Global Funds          Daily Returns         Funds         Global Funds         Comparisons
World Stock                            9.10%           13.80%                 4.52%             0.87%             0.77%                  55
Foreign Stock                          6.22%           10.19%                 4.11%             0.97%             0.87%                  75
Pools of World or Foreign Funds       11.81%           13.78%                 1.64%             0.81%             0.75%                  22

Total                                  8.05%           12.00%                 3.90%             0.91%             0.82%                 152


                                                                          Maximizing Expected Returns
                                           Average Returns                  Average            Standard Deviation of Daily
                                             (Per Year)                   Difference in                 Returns
                                       Global        Simulated            Accumulated           Global         Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Fund                    Funds        Global Funds          Daily Returns         Funds         Global Funds         Comparisons
World Stock                            9.10%           14.01%                 4.59%             0.87%             0.83%                  55
Foreign Stock                          6.22%           10.93%                 4.76%             0.97%             0.93%                  75
Pools of World or Foreign Funds       11.81%           14.28%                 1.89%             0.81%             0.78%                  22

Total                                  8.05%           12.52%                 4.28%             0.91%             0.87%                 152

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds. Simulations only
use information on the previous 240 business days at each point in time. Simulated global funds are constructed from actual global funds and
specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different procedures. The top panel shows the results of minimizing the variance of
returns subject to a restriction on expected returns. The bottom panel shows the results of maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on
the variance of returns. The simulations use portfolios that include the largest number of available specialized funds for each global fund in each
family. Global funds are world funds, foreign funds, and a pool of world or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that
include several world (or foreign) funds within the same family but with different scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and world (foreign)
growth funds. Portfolio weights are updated daily. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are calculated out-of-sample, as described in the
main text. Annualized differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each simulation performed. Averages across
simulations are then computed and reported.
                   Appendix Table 6B. Rolling Window Simulations Using the Longest Available Sample

                                                                             Minimizing the Variance
                                           Average Returns                                     Standard Deviation of Daily
                                             (Per Year)                Average Difference               Returns
                                      Global        Simulated           in Accumulated           Global        Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Fund                   Funds        Global Funds          Daily Returns           Funds        Global Funds         Comparisons
World Stock                           8.03%            10.46%                 2.53%              0.90%            0.82%                  62
Foreign Stock                         5.35%            8.17%                  2.99%              0.98%            0.89%                  75
Pools of World or Foreign Funds       10.45%           12.94%                 2.44%              0.88%            0.79%                  23

Total                                 7.10%            9.73%                  2.73%              0.93%            0.85%                 160


                                                                          Maximizing Expected Returns
                                           Average Returns                                     Standard Deviation of Daily
                                             (Per Year)                Average Difference               Returns
                                      Global        Simulated           in Accumulated           Global        Simulated            Number of
Type of Global Fund                   Funds        Global Funds          Daily Returns           Funds        Global Funds         Comparisons
World Stock                           8.03%            10.85%                 2.82%              0.90%            0.84%                  62
Foreign Stock                         5.35%            8.16%                  2.90%              0.98%            0.93%                  75
Pools of World or Foreign Funds       10.45%           12.89%                 2.22%              0.88%            0.84%                  23

Total                                 7.10%            9.87%                  2.77%              0.93%            0.88%                 160

This table shows differences in the average and standard deviation of returns between global funds and simulated global funds. Simulations only
use information on the previous 240 business days at each point in time. Simulated global funds are constructed from actual global funds and
specialized funds in the same mutual fund family using two different procedures. The top panel shows the results of minimizing the variance of
returns subject to a restriction on expected returns. The bottom panel shows the results of maximizing expected returns subject to a restriction on
the variance of returns. The simulations use portfolios that include the longest time series for each global fund in each family. Global funds are
world funds, foreign funds, and a pool of world or foreign funds. The pools of world or foreign funds are simulations that include several world
(or foreign) funds within the same family but with different scopes, e.g. world (foreign) value funds and world (foreign) growth funds. Portfolio
weights are updated daily. Realized returns of the simulated portfolios are calculated out-of-sample, as described in the main text. Annualized
differences in accumulated returns are calculated over the entire sample for each simulation performed. Averages across simulations are then
computed and reported.
