                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WHERE THERE'S SMOKING, THERE'S FIRE:
THE EFFECTS OF SMOKING POLICIES ON THE INCIDENCE OF FIRES IN THE UNITED STATES.

                                               Sara Markowitz

                                            Working Paper 16625
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w16625


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        December 2010




   I would like to thank Hugo Mialon, Edward Norton and seminar participants at University of Michigan
   for helpful comments and suggestions. Thanks also to Erik Nesson for excellent research assistance.
   The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
   Bureau of Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
   reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
   NBER publications.

   © 2010 by Sara Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
   may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
   the source.
Where There's Smoking, There's Fire: The Effects of Smoking Policies on the Incidence of
Fires in the United States.
Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 16625
December 2010, Revised October 2011
JEL No. I0,K0

                                              ABSTRACT

Fires and burns are among the leading causes of unintentional death in the U.S. Most of these deaths
occur in residences, and cigarettes are a primary cause. In this paper, I explore the relationship between
smoking, cigarette policies, and fires. As fewer people smoke, there are less opportunities for fires,
however, the magnitude of any reduction is in question as the people who quit may not necessarily
start fires. Using a state-level panel, I find that reductions in smoking and increases in cigarette prices
are associated with fewer fires. However, laws regulating indoor smoking are associated with increases
in fires.


Sara Markowitz
Department of Economics
Emory University
1602 Fishburne Dr.
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
sara.markowitz@emory.edu
Introduction
           Fires and burns are among the top ten leading causes of unintentional
death in the United States, with thousands of deaths occurring annually (over
2,750 in 2009). The young and the elderly are particularly vulnerable, with fires
and burns as the third leading cause for children ages 1-14 and the fifth leading
cause for those ages 65 and older (CDC 2009). Non-fatal injuries from fires are
much more common with an estimated 381,000 occurring nationwide in 2009.
The majority of these deaths and injuries result from residential fires. Residential
and commercial building fires are fairly common in the United States, with over
500,000 such fires occurring annually (Karter 2010). Cigarette smoking is one of
the more common causes of these fires, and while the proportion of all fires
caused by cigarettes is relatively small, about 2.8 percent, these fires are among
the most deadly. In fact, the U.S. Fire Administration (USFA) reports that
smoking is the first or second leading cause of fire deaths every year, occasionally
alternating places with arson. (USFA 2004).
           Fires place tremendous burdens on society through the direct costs of
damage to life and property, and through the indirect costs that include funding
for public fire departments, providing fire protection within buildings, insurance
costs and medical costs. Karter (2010) estimates the costs of damage to property
from fires was over $15.4 billion in 2008.1 Fortunately, the number of fires in the
U.S. has been trending down over time (see Figure 1). Part of this trend includes
a decline in residential fires caused by cigarettes and declines in deaths and
injuries over time. There are likely many different factors that are responsible for
these trends including the growth in the use of smoke detectors, sprinkler systems,
fires safety education programs, and stricter flammability standards for
mattresses, upholstery and fabrics.


1
    Direct plus indirect costs are estimated at $165 billion a year (USFA 2007).




                                                   1
   Concurrent with the decline in fires caused by cigarettes is a downward trend
in cigarette smoking over time. Along with broad scale public health and
educational campaigns, increases in cigarette taxes and restrictions on smoking
have contributed to the decline in smoking in the United States (Tauras 2006;
Dube et al. 2009; Debrot et al. 2010).
       This paper explores the relationship between cigarette smoking and fires
caused by cigarettes. Co-movement in the two trends is logical; as fewer people
take up smoking and more people quit, there is less opportunity for fires to start as
a result of cigarettes. However, it is not clear that the people who avoid smoking
are also the careless ones who start fires. The magnitude of the reduction in fires
resulting from decreased smoking rates is therefore an empirical question. In this
paper, I quantify the effects of reductions in smoking on rates of fires, deaths and
injuries. I also examine how much of a contribution tobacco-related control
policies have in altering the incidence of cigarette-related fires. Specifically, I
estimate the effects of increases in cigarette prices, taxes, and the implementation
of restrictions on smoking in public places on counts of cigarette fires in various
locations and resulting deaths and injuries.
       The harms from smoking are well known, and include the harmful health
effects to the smoker, the harmful health effects to those involuntarily exposed to
environmental tobacco smoke, and harm to developing fetuses. Previous research
has examined the public health benefits of reduced smoking rates in terms of
reductions in disease prevalence, increased length of life and improved birth
outcomes (USDHHS 2004). Economists focus their research questions on
whether increased cigarette prices and taxes contribute to improved health
outcomes. This paper extends this literature by examining the question of
whether reduced smoking rates and higher cigarette prices and restrictions on
smoking have reduced fires, deaths and injuries. The results show that reductions
in smoking and increases in cigarette prices are associated with fewer fires.




                                           2
However, restrictions on indoor smoking are associated with increases in some
types of fires, including those in bars and restaurants.


Mechanisms
        Karter et al. (1994) discuss the three elements that must be present for a
cigarette fire to start. First, there must be contact between the cigarette and the
fuel source. Second is the likelihood of the cigarette to ignite the fuel source.
Last is the susceptibility of the fuel source to ignite upon exposure. Efforts in
fire prevention have typically focused on reducing the ability of cigarettes to
ignite a fuel source, and on reducing the propensity of the fuel source to burn. For
example, fire safe cigarette laws have been passed in all fifty states (with the
effective date in a few states still yet to come). These cigarettes are made with
banded paper that allows the cigarette to self-extinguish. From the fuel source
side, a variety of mandatory and voluntary standards have been in place for
decades. These include flammability standards for mattresses, upholstery, and
apparel, portable heating units, and lamps. (See Frazier et al. 2000 for more
details.)
        The main element in starting a fire, contact between the cigarette and the
fuel source, comes from human carelessness (Karter et al. 1994). The degree of
carelessness or vulnerability may vary among smokers and along observable and
unobservable characteristics. For example, The National Fire Protection
Association estimates that the risk of dying in a smoking-related fire rises with
age, with 38 percent of victims ages 65 or older (Hall 2006). This is much larger
than the elderly’s share in the population of around 12 percent. Alcohol
consumption also has been cited as a contributing factor to cigarette fires (Patetta
and Cole 1990).
        There are a number of scenarios by which a cigarette can start a fire. A
common story starts with an improperly discarded cigarette, where burning




                                          3
cigarettes, ashes, embers, or butts cause ignition of a fuel source. The most
deadly smoking-related fires occur when cigarettes ignite mattresses, bedding, or
upholstered furniture. Falling asleep and alcohol or drug impairment are leading
human factors associated with these fires. Approximately 40 percent of
residential smoking fires originate in the bedroom or living/family rooms (USFA
2005).
         The primary question of this paper is whether the number of fire incidents
can be reduced through public policies that alter the demand for cigarettes. To
answer this question, I take advantage of a large number of policy changes that
have been occurred in recent years. Following the Master Settlement Agreement
of 1998, numerous states and the federal government raised excise taxes on
cigarettes and tobacco companies raised prices. A wave of new smoke-free air
laws have been enacted in states, with tremendous variation on the degree of the
restrictions and the public places to which the laws pertain. Recent studies find
negative price and tax effects on different measures of smoking (Adda and
Cornaglia, 2010; DeCicca and McLeod 2008; Stehr 2005). Several econometric
studies have also examined the effects of smoke-free air laws on adult smoking
behavior. A majority of these studies find an inverse relationship between the
implementation of these laws and smoking (Wasserman et al. 1991; Chaloupka
1992; Evans et al. 1999; Ohsfeldt et al. 1999; Czart, et al. 2001; Gallet 2004;
Tauras 2006; Yurkeli and Zhang 2000).
         Results by Adda and Cornaglia (2010) are particularly relevant. As part of
their study on the influence of cigarette policies on second hand smoke exposure,
they find that bans in bars and restaurants are associated with a reduction in the
prevalence of smoking and per capita consumption of cigarettes, while bans in
workplaces are not statistically related to these measures of smoking. Using time
use surveys, they look at how smokers change their time spent at home and in
restaurants and bars in response to smoking bans. They find that bans in bars and




                                          4
restaurants are associated with a reduction in time spent in these locations and an
increase in time spent at home by smokers. This result has implications for
changes in the likelihood of starting a residential fire if smoking moves from
public places to private residences as a result of a smoking ban.


The effects of stricter cigarette policies on smoking and fires
           While studies on the consumption effects of tobacco control policies are
informative, they provide only part of the story for cigarette-related fires.
Consider the following: Let F represent the number of fires started by improperly
discarded cigarettes. The number of fires is determined by the total number of
smokers (S), which is the sum of careful (SC) and not careful smokers (SN). Each
type of smoker has a different propensity to start a fire with probabilities α0 < α1.
Note that both probabilities are also affected by conditions unrelated to cigarettes
such as the susceptibility of the fuel source to ignite upon exposure to cigarettes:
1) F=α0SC + α1SN.
An increase in the price of cigarettes will decrease the total number of smokers,
but it is not clear how the reduction is allocated over the two types of smokers:
     డி          డௌ಴          డௌಿ
2)        ൌ ߙ଴         ൅ ߙଵ         .
     డ௉          డ௉           డ௉

If the price increase reduces smoking only among careful smokers then the
decrease in fires will be proportional to α0 and in the extreme, could be zero if α0
is zero. If the price increase reduces smoking solely among the careless smokers
then the decrease in fires will depend on α1 and will be relatively larger. In
general, the total reduction in fires will depend on the price elasticities of demand
by the different types of smokers, and the values of α0 and α1.
           By contrast, the enactment of smoke-free air laws may have very different
effects. Consider a law restricting or banning smoking in indoors public places




                                            5
(L). Such a law may not only influence the demand for cigarettes, but may alter
the probabilities of starting a fire as well:
     డி       డఈబ             డௌ಴       డఈభ             డௌಿ
3)        ൌ         ܵ஼ ൅ ߙ଴         ൅         ܵே ൅ ߙଵ         .
     డ௅       డ௅              డ௅        డ௅              డ௅

The partial derivatives of the alphas with respect to a change in the law will be
positive if the law changes smoking behaviors towards less safe disposal methods.
For example, a ban on smoking in bars or restaurants may cause people to smoke
outside where smokers may discard cigarettes in plants or mulch rather than in a
safer ash tray. Another example follows from Adda and Corneliga (2010). If
smokers move their smoking from public places to private residences, this may
change the probability of a fire occurring, and perhaps increase the probability of
a death or injury. Note that any such effect will vary depending on the type of
law enacted and any compensative fire-safety measures taken. The total effect on
fires also depends on the change in the number of smokers arising from the
change in the law. As discussed above, previous research has show that some of
the indoor smoking bans encourage people to quit smoking, leading to reductions
in SC and SN as a result. Therefore, the net effect of the laws are indeterminate,
depending on the magnitudes of the offsetting positive and negative effects of the
laws.


Data and Empirical Methods
          Data on fires in the United States come from the National Fire Incident
Reporting System (NFIRS) developed by the U.S. Fire Administration. This
system was implemented to monitor and assess the fire problem in the United
States. NFIRS began with six states in 1976 and has grown over time. The
reporting format changed in 1999, and this is the year in which I begin the
analysis. I have obtained NFIRS data through 2007. Reporting in 1999 is limited
to 40 states, but by 2007, fire departments in all 50 states plus the District of




                                                         6
Columbia report. In addition to new states, the number of reporting fire
departments also increased between 1999-2007, growing from approximately
9000 fire departments in 1999 to over 16,000 in 2007. The USFA estimates that
44 percent of all fire departments in the U.S. report to the NFIRS, providing
information on all fires to which those department respond (USFA 2008).
      The fire departments that participate in the NFIRS record information on each
individual fire. This information includes the time and place of the fire, the cause
and heat source, any resulting injuries and deaths, and rather infrequently, an
estimate of the dollar amount of property and content loss.2 From this
information, I generate three different dependent variables to measure the damage
from fires caused by cigarette smoking. The first is a simple count of the number
of fires caused by cigarettes. The second is a count of the number of deaths
resulting from cigarette fires. The third is a count of the number of deaths plus
injuries from cigarette fires. I group deaths and injuries together because factors
such as emergency medical response time or available medical technology may
determine the difference between an injury and a death. Deaths and injuries are
recorded for both firefighters and the victims.
           I explore four variations on the types of fires examined. The first is a
count of all types of fires caused by cigarettes. This includes fires in residential
and non-residential structures, fires in outside properties, fields and wild lands,
and automobile fires. Second, I limit the fires to only those occurring in
residential units since the majority of cigarette fires and deaths occur in homes.
Third, I limit the fires to those occurring in bars, restaurants and other eating and
drinking establishments. This restriction is particularly pertinent when examining
some of the more common smoke-free air laws that ban smoking in public places.
I examine restaurant fires separately from bar fires, and then I use a sum of


2
    These losses are missing for 89% of the fires reported.




                                                   7
restaurants, bars, and an additional category for “eating, drinking places, other”.
Lastly, in order to check for spurious results, I generate counts of fires caused by
cooking. These fires follow a similar trend to cigarette fires over time, yet
logically should not be related to smoking or cigarette policies. Any result here
showing that cigarette policies are related to cooking fires could indicate that
omitted variables are problematic for the other models.
          The NFIRS data are reported at the fire incident level. To generate the
dependent variables, I aggregate the incidents reported by each fire department to
the state level on a quarterly basis. I treat New York and Illinois as special cases.
Across the United States, a few localities impose local cigarette taxes in addition
to the state taxes. New York City and Chicago both have local cigarette taxes that
are much higher than the state tax, and these municipalities also passed smoke
free air laws at different times from the rest of the state.3,4 For these reasons, and
because both cities represent a large proportion of the fires in their states, I treat
New York city and Chicago as separate observations. The data therefore include
as observations New York state exclusive of New York City, Illinois exclusive of
Chicago, New York City and Chicago, all as different observations. For
simplicity, I will refer to the unit of observation as a state, with the understanding
that these two cities are separate observations treated as a state.
         Next, I generate the population covered by the reporting fire departments
in each state in each quarter. To do so, I identify the unique zip codes associated
with all fire incidents (including non-fire related calls) reported by each fire
department in each state during a quarter. Using year 2000 population

3
  New York City’s ban on indoor smoking became effective March 30, 2003, four months before
the state ban. Chicago imposed a ban on smoking in private workplaces in January 2006. The
state’s restrictions did not begin until 2008.
4
  According to Orzechowski and Walker (2009), some cities in Alabama, Alaska, Missouri, Ohio,
and Virginia also impose local cigarette taxes. These taxes tend to be low, for example, ranging
from 1 cent to 7 cents per pack in cities in Alabama and Missouri. I ignore these taxes because the
population affected by the taxes is small, and because these local taxes may be easily evaded.




                                                8
information from the U.S. Bureau of the Census, I merge populations based on zip
codes and sum the populations to the state level. One issue here is that the
covered population can be overstated if a zip code appears in the data that is not
part of the reporting fire department’s district. This can arise when a fire
department assists another and reports the fire to the NFIRS. When both
departments report, there is no problem as the zip code will only get counted
once. However, when the assisting department reports, but the primary does not,
attributing the zip code to the assisting department will understate the fire rate by
overreporting the covered population. To help minimize this problem, I restrict
the zip codes included to those that have an incident at least three times in each
quarter. I also tested models that include 1) the population from all zip codes
regardless of the number of times a code appears in the data and 2) the population
from the zip codes that include only fire-related calls. The results are generally
insensitive to the construction of the covered population, with only the levels
changing. These results are available upon request.
       One concern with the NFIRS data, particularly with small fire
departments, is whether a zero count of fires is a true zero or a missing value. If a
fire department reports any fire related call to the NFIRS during the quarter, I
consider this as a reporting fire department and zero counts are assumed to be true
zeros. If a fire department reports no fire-related calls during a particular quarter,
and although they may report in other quarters during the same year, I consider
them a non-reporter in that quarter and exclude them from the analysis.
       Each fire in the NFIRS is assigned a heat source. From this variable, I
identify all the fires caused by cigarettes which is code ‘61’ in NFIRS version 5.0.
To generate the total cigarette fire counts, I include all structural and outdoor fires
with this code, as well as any wildland fires that were determined to be started by




                                           9
cigarettes or other smoking material.5 The counts of fires exclude exposure fires,
that is, fires that spread from another fire. The counts also exclude arson,
suspected arson, and fires started by children playing.
         Cigarettes are identified as the cause of 2.6 to 4 percent of the fires in this
data, however, a large portion of fires, 43 to 60 percent depending on the year in
question, are of unknown causes. Of the cases with a cause identified, a range of
6.4 to 8.0 percent are caused by cigarettes. It is difficult to know whether the fires
that are indentified are a random sample, or if they represent either small fires
with a source that is easy to determine, or large fires that undergo intense
investigation. Tests of means reveal statistically significant but very small
differences in deaths and injuries and dollar losses based on whether or not the
cause of the fire is reported. Statistical significance is to be expected because the
number of fires over the nine year period exceeds 5 million. Across this time
period, the average reported dollar losses of property and content is $10,372.30
for cause-known sample and $12,164.10 for cause-unknown fires. Deaths and
injuries occur with mean count of 0.03 for cause-known sample and 0.02 for
cause-unknown. Thus, it is difficult to draw conclusions about the magnitudes
and destructiveness of the fires based on the reported causes.
         The determinants of cigarette fires follows the general relationship:
4) Fjy = f(Cjy, Xjy, Y, S),
Where F represents one of the three dependent variables (count of cigarette fires,
deaths from cigarette fires, death plus injuries from cigarette fires) in state (j) in a
given year (y). The variable C represents per capita cigarette sales in a state for a
given year, and the vector X represents some other characteristics of the states that



5
 Wildland fires are defined as “Any fire involving vegetative fuels, other than prescribed fire, that
occurs in the wildland. A wildland fire may expose and possibly consume structures.” (USFA
2008 p C-8).




                                                 10
may determine fire rates (described below). Lastly, Y and S are fixed effects for
each unique year and state, respectively.
         The estimation of equation 1 must be treated with some caution and
skepticism because of the potential problem of endogeneity of cigarette
consumption. This will occur if there are unobserved, time varying characteristics
of the states that are correlated with both cigarette consumption and the
probability of fires. As Karter et al. (1994) explain, the main element in cigarette
fires are human carelessness. It is possible that people with this characteristic also
are less likely to engage in other risk-reducing behaviors and may exhibit an
increased propensity to smoke. The state fixed effects will address any
unobserved characteristics of the population that are time invariant, however, time
varying factors may still remain in the error term and bias the estimates. Another
potential problem with the estimation of equation 1 is measurement error resulting
from a mismatch of the cigarette sales to the locations of the fire. The available
sales data are aggregates for the entire state, whereas the fire counts are
aggregated from reporting localities. If for example, the bulk of sales are in a
non-reporting fire district, then the match quality will be poor. Instrumental
variable models are used to address these potential biases. The cigarette price and
smoking restriction variables described below serve as instruments.
         The reduced form equation is much more relevant from a policy
perspective, and is therefore the primary focus of this paper. In this equation,
cigarette consumption is replaced by the exogenous determinants of consumption:
5) Fjyq = f(Pjy, Xjyq, YQ, S).
Here, the variables are defined as above, and P is a vector of variables
representing the full price of cigarettes. This includes price or tax, and
regulations regarding indoor smoking. Details on these variables are discussed
below. Note that the reduced form analysis is conducted on a quarterly basis




                                         11
since all variables are available quarterly. In this model, YQ represents a set of
unique indicator variables for each year and quarter.
        The distribution of the count of fires and related deaths and injuries
suggest that a count model is the appropriate estimation technique. Table 1
contains summary statistics, and it is clear from this table that cigarette fire
counts, deaths, and injuries are all relatively rare events. For cigarette fires of all
types, the mean fatality count for states during the period 1999-2007 is 0.64
deaths per quarter, with a minimum of zero (65 percent of the observations) and a
maximum of 9. The sum of deaths and injuries have a similar distribution with a
mean quarterly injury count of 4.0, a minimum of zero that occurs 33 percent of
the time and a maximum count of 59. Simple counts of cigarette fires are larger,
with values ranging up to 1,085, and only 1.5 percent of the observations are zero.
However, residential fires, restaurant fires and bar fires are much rarer, with
maximums of 295, 35 and 5 respectively. While some of these numbers may
seem too small to be believable, recall that they represent the counts in the quarter
by reporting fire departments, and in the regressions, are adjusted by the
population covered by the reporting fire departments.
        I estimate all models with a Poisson maximum likelihood estimation, but
to permit for overdispersion, standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity of
unknown form that includes a within-state cluster correlation (Cameron and
Trivedi 2009; Bertrand et al. 2004). The advantage of the Poisson estimation is
that the estimates are consistent regardless of whether the counts actually have a
Poisson distribution (Wooldridge 2002).6 Each model includes the log of the
covered population as a right hand side variable to normalize for exposure. The
coefficient on this log population is constrained to equal one.


6
 The Poisson model is preferred to the negative binomial since the negative binomial estimates
are not consistent if the variance specification is incorrect (Cameron and Trivedi 2009).
Nevertheless, negative binomial models were tested and give similar results.




                                               12
        Cigarette consumption is measured with the per capita number of packs of
cigarettes sold annually in each state. These data come from the Tax Burden on
Tobacco (Orzechowski and Walker 2009).7 Cigarette prices and taxes represent
the monetary price of cigarettes. Cigarette price and tax data also come from the
annual Tax Burden on Tobacco. The prices are weighted averages for a pack of
20 cigarettes and are inclusive of state excise taxes. Because the price published
is as of November 1 of each year, the prices are adjusted to create a state-level
average quarterly price. Quarterly taxes are determined using the effective date of
legislated tax changes. Cigarette prices and taxes are deflated by the national
Consumer Price Index published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (1982-
1984=100).
        Variables representing smoking regulations in private workplaces,
restaurants, and bars are included as additional measure of the full price of
cigarettes. These variables come from project ImpacTeen
(http://www.impacteen.org/tobaccodata.htm) and the American Nonsmokers’
Rights Foundation (http://no-smoke.org/). The laws are appended to the fire data
by state, year, and quarter, based on the effective dates of the laws. Even though
states have smoke-free area (SFA) laws regarding many different establishments,
these are the focus of this paper because private workplace and restaurant
restrictions are very common and research has shown there to be an influence of
these individual laws on smoking behaviors (Evans et al. 1999; Tauras 2004).
While research on bar bans has shown much less effectiveness, restrictions on
smoking in bars is relevant for studying fires, especially there is some evidence
that alcohol consumption is a contributing factor to residential fires started by
cigarettes (Hall 2006).
        The SFA laws for private workplaces are grouped in three categories: 1)

7
 In the Tax Burden, consumption is reported as of June 30 of each year. From this, I generate a
calendar year consumption measure by using an average of the relevant fiscal years.




                                               13
no provisions; 2) laws that restrict smoking to designated areas (some laws
specify separate ventilation) with some exemptions; and 3) smoking bans that are
present at all times. A similar grouping is used for laws pertaining to restaurants.
For bars, only the categories of ban versus no ban are used. Only three states
have some intermediate form of restrictions and two of these states do not change
this value over time. Therefore, these three states are grouped with the no ban
states. I then create dichotomous indicators for each category and site
(workplaces, restaurants and bars) to include in the regressions. The category of
no provisions serves as the omitted reference group. Because of the high degree
of collinearity between the regulations, each group of SFA laws is included
separately in the regressions according to the site. The collinearity arises because
many states pass SFA laws applicable to different facilities at the same time. If
these laws are considered as simple indexes (i.e. one variable with values 1
through 3), the simple correlations between restrictions in private workplaces and
restaurants is 0.69, between private workplaces and bars is 0.47, and between bars
and restaurants is 0.60.
           As an alternative measure of the restrictiveness of indoor smoking in a
state, I use the percent of the state population covered by 100% smoke-free air
laws for each of the three sites, as provided by the American Nonsmokers’ Rights
Foundation. These measures are advantageous since they include the local area
laws that are frequently passed prior to state-level laws. Within each state, the
percentages increase over time, and reach a maximum of 100% when the state
enacts a ban on smoking in the relevant indoor area.
           Each model includes some other state-level time varying variables to
account for additional factors which may be associated with the number of fires
over time.8 All models include the quarterly unemployment rate from the Bureau


8
    New York City and Chicago are assigned the state value for these variables.




                                                 14
of Labor Statistics and per capita income from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
From the U.S. Census Bureau, the percent of each state’s population with at least
a bachelor’s degree and the number of housing units per square mile are also
included. Next, I include a dichotomous indicator for the states which have a fire
safe cigarette law in effect. Most states have just recently passed this law. In the
time span of my data, New York is the first state (effective 6/28/2004), followed
by Vermont (effective 5/1/2006), California (effective 1/1/2007), Oregon
(effective 7/1/2007) and New Hampshire (effective 10/1/2007). Lastly all models
include state fixed effects and year/quarter fixed effects.


Results
          Figure 1 shows the trends in fires over time. There is a distinct seasonality
to fires, with more occurring in the spring and summer months. There is also a
downward trend in fires over time, with a slight increase occurring after 2003.
Figure 2 repeats Figure 1, but shows the annual trends in fires and adds the trends
in cigarette consumption per capita. Here, the general downward trend in both
series is clearly seen. The reason for the change in the trend for all fires after
2003 is not clear. Some of this may reflect reporting changes, for example, there
is an increased reporting of wildland fires over time, but these fires constitute only
about 10 percent of total cigarette fires. The change may have also arisen from
the increases in the number of smoke-free air laws over time. As I show below,
these laws tend to be positively associated with the incidence of fires.
          Turning to the multivariable analysis, Table 2 shows the basic relationship
between annual per capita cigarette sales and annual counts of cigarette fires,
adjusted for the covered population. Table 3 contains similar results for counts of
deaths and injuries. In all these models I aggregate the fire counts to the annual
level to more closely match the annual sales data. Poisson models treating
cigarette sales as exogenous are presented first, followed by models that treat




                                           15
sales as endogenous. The latter models are estimated using a two-step procedure
described by Wooldridge (2002) for count models with endogenous right hand
side variables. The first step is an OLS regression of sales on the cigarette price,
the dichotomous indicators of the smoke-free air laws in private workplaces, and
all other exogenous variables in the model.9 The residuals from the first stage
regression are then predicted and included as an additional covariate in the second
stage structural model, which is estimated by Poisson regression. Standard errors
are adjusted to be panel-robust (correlated among states), and the resulting
estimates are consistent. An F-test of the instruments is presented, and the
endogeneity of the consumption measures are tested by examining the t-statistic
on the first stage residuals in the second equation.
           In Table 2, the coefficients on the cigarette sales in the exogenous models
are statistically insignificant for all of the types of fires. However, when sales is
treated as endogenous, a few of the coefficients become positive and statistically
significant at the 10 percent level or better. The F-stat on the instruments in the
first stage is statistically significant, with a value of 8.95. T-tests on the first stage
residuals reject the null hypothesis that the cigarette sales coefficient is zero in
three of the five models. The exceptions are residential fires and bar fires. Thus,
these results provide some evidence that cigarette sales are positively related to
the incidence of fires and not a result of spurious concurrent trends.
           Table 3 shows the results of the structural model for fire deaths and
injuries. Models are shown for all fires and for residential fires only since there
are almost no deaths or injuries recorded in the NFIRS data for bars and
restaurants. The results shown here indicate a positive, but statistically
insignificant relationship between cigarette sales and deaths and injuries.
           While the structural model is suggestive of the positive relationship


9
    Models using the other SFA laws give similar results.




                                                 16
between smoking and fires, the reduced form model is much more relevant for
policy purposes. It directly shows the effects of changes in the policies on fires,
while avoiding the potential endogeneity problems of the aggregate measures of
smoking. Tables 4-6 show the reduced form estimates for all fires, residential
fires, and bar and restaurant fires. The main models use the cigarette price or tax
and the indicator variables for the different SFA laws. Alternative models are
shown in Tables 7 and 8 that use the percent of the population covered by 100
percent smoke free laws. Deaths and injuries are analyzed in Table 9.
        Table 4 considers counts of cigarette fires in all locations. The first thing
to notice is that both higher cigarette prices and excise taxes are associated with
decreases in the counts of these fires, although the tax coefficients are not
statistically significant at conventional levels, while the price coefficients are. For
continuous variables, the coefficients from the Poisson regression can be directly
interpreted as semi-elasticities, that is, the percentage change in the number of
fires resulting from a one unit change in the independent variable. To get a semi-
elasticity for the dichotomous indicators, a transformation of the coefficients
(exp(B)-1) is necessary (not shown). Given the means of the price and tax, a one
unit change represents a rather large effect. The elasticities presented at the
bottom of the table give a more reasonable interpretation to the estimates. For
ease of interpretation, the bottom of the table also list select marginal effects that
show the absolute change in the counts of fires from one unit change in the
relevant independent variable.
        The results in Table 4 show that a ten percent increase in price is
associated with a decrease in fires of 6.3 to 7.5 percent, while a ten percent
increase in tax is associated with a decrease in fires of 13.5 to 14.3 percent. Off
the sample mean of 92 fires per quarter, these translate to a reduction in 6 to 7
fires quarterly for price and 12 to 13 fires quarterly for tax.
        Also of interest in Table 4 are the results of the SFA laws. Smoking




                                          17
restrictions in bars and restaurants have no statistical relationship with the total
counts of cigarette fires. However, relative to areas with no bans, restrictions and
bans on smoking in private workplaces are associated with increases in fires.
Restrictions are associated with an increase of about 14 fires per quarter, and bans
are associated with an increase of about 11 fires per quarter. Such results may
occur if the restrictions do not decrease smoking (or the decrease occurs only
among the careful smokers), and the restrictions induce a switch in the location of
careless smokers. Recall that Adda and Corneglia (2010) find no effect of
workplace restrictions in reducing smoking.
        Table 5 contains the results for residential fires caused by cigarettes. The
results are rather similar to that for all fires, with the results showing negative
price and tax effects with limited statistical significance. The magnitudes here are
also very similar to that of all fires with elasticities in the range of -0.6 to -0.7 for
price and -0.15 to -0.16 for tax. The SFA results are also very similar, in that
workplace smoking restrictions are positively associated with residential fires
while restrictions and bans in restaurants and bars have no effects.
        The reduced form models for restaurants, bars, and the sum of restaurants,
bars and other eating/drinking establishments are shown in Table 6. Results with
taxes are not shown, but are very similar to the price results, which are all
statistically insignificant. However, the results of the SFA laws on restaurant and
bar fires are provocative. As shown for all locations, the ban on smoking in
private workplaces is positively associated with counts of fires in these locations.
Additionally, the coefficients on bans in smoking in restaurants and bars are
positive in all models and are statistically significant in the four of the six models.
Recall that Equation 3 above shows the total effect from bans on the incidence of
fires can come about from both the change in the number of smokers and from the
change in smoking behavior towards unsafe practices. Even when bans are
effective in reducing smoking, if the reduction is mostly among the safe smokers




                                           18
and the remaining smokers act more carelessly, then we could easily see an
increase in fires. In bars and restaurants in particular, smokers who are banned
from smoking indoors might simply move outside where careless cigarette
disposal can start fires.
            In order to further examine the effects of the SFA laws, I re-estimate some
models using the percent of the states’ populations covered by 100 percent smoke
free air laws, that is, full bans on indoor smoking. Table 7 shows no effect of
these laws on cigarette fires of all types and residential fires, although for
residential fires, a larger percentage of the state population with complete bans on
smoking in bars is associated with a slight reduction in fires, but the magnitude is
extremely small. For restaurants and bars (Table 8), however, these bans are
positively associated with fires, confirming the results using the dichotomous
indicator variables for the bans.
            From a public health perspective, deaths and injuries from fires are the
more serious concern. I show results from all cigarette fires, but most of these
deaths and injuries occur in residential structures; in the sample used here, 95
percent of all deaths and 90 percent of injuries are in residential locations. Table
9 shows the results of the cigarette prices and SFA policies on the total counts of
deaths and injuries. Results are shown with the average price and with the SFA
laws as categories. The coefficient on cigarette price is negative in all models, but
only for deaths is it statistically significant at the 10 percent level, and only in one
of the three models.10
            As for the SFA laws, workplace bans are not statistically associated with
deaths and injuries, while bans and restrictions in restaurants are positively related
to deaths. This contradicts the coefficient on the bar bans, which is negatively
associated with total deaths and injuries, but not deaths alone. In sum, these


10
     Results with tax are similar in sign, but are not statistically significant.




                                                      19
results are puzzling and inconclusive. Recall that workplace restrictions are
associated with increases in the counts of residential fires, while restaurant and
bar restrictions have no effects. It should follow that deaths and injuries, which
are primarily residential, are positively associated with workplace bans. The
coefficients are positive, but not significant at conventional levels. As for the
other SFA laws, note that Adda and Corneglia (2010) find that bans in bars and
restaurants are associated with a reduction in time spent in these locations and an
increase in time spent at home by smokers. The increase in deaths associated
with restaurant restrictions and bans corroborates their finding, but the negative
sign on the bar bans refutes it. Clearly, further research is necessary on this
question.
       While the results presented thus far provide a lot of evidence that changes
in cigarette policies over time are associated with changes in the incidence of
fires, spurious correlation between these trends is still a worry. I therefore re-
estimate some of the models presented above with the counts of fires caused by
cooking as the dependent variable. As can be seen in Figure 2, the trends in
cooking fires are similar to those of the other types of fires, yet logically, they
should not be related to cigarette smoking. Any effects of the cigarette policies
on the incidence of cooking fires would cast doubt on the main results. However,
as shown in Table 10, none of the policy variables are statistically significant in
regressions explaining the variation in the incidence of cooking fires. The same
statement holds when examining deaths and injuries from cooking fires. These
results are not shown but are available upon request.
       The results of the other control variables are also of some interest. These
include the quarterly unemployment rate, per capita income, the percent of each
state’s population with at least a bachelor’s degree, the number of housing units
per square mile and the dichotomous indicator for the states which have a fire safe
cigarette law in effect. The results of these variables are fairly consistent across




                                          20
all specifications and can be generalized as follows: Education, income and
unemployment are generally not associated with fires, although states with higher
income levels have fewer residential fires. The number of residential units per
square mile are negatively associated with counts of fires of all types and with
residential fires, but are not related to deaths and injuries. This result for the
incidence of fires might reflect better fire awareness or prevention in urban areas.
There might also simply be more people around to notice a fire and put it out
before it gets out of control.
        The results from the fire safe cigarette laws show no association of these
laws with counts of all fires or of residential fires, but a positive effect with
restaurant and bar fires (see Tables 4, 5, and 6), and a negative effect on deaths
and injuries (see Table 9). Recall that during the time period under analysis, only
5 states have this law in effect, and three passed the law in the last year of the
data, so these results should be treated as suggestive. It appears that the fire safe
cigarettes are effective in reducing deaths and injuries as the law intends,
however, there may also be some unanticipated effects that increase fires in
restaurants and bars. One reason this effect could arise is if there is a substitution
toward less safe hand rolled cigarettes away from the fire safe cigarettes. But, the
substitution would need to only occur among restaurant and bar patrons in order
to reconcile this with the reduction found for residential deaths. If the
demographics of the groups of smokers are different then this explanation could
hold. However, this is clearly an area for further research.


Conclusions
        This paper examines the determinants of cigarette fires over time and
questions whether public policies towards smoking have contributed to increases
or decreases in these fires. When smoking rates in the population decrease, one
might expect to see fewer cigarette fires as a result. However, this conclusion is




                                           21
not guaranteed, as the decline in smoking may occur among the safest smokers,
that is, those who are least likely to cause fires with their smoking behaviors. The
empirical results do point to a small positive relationship between annual per
capita sales of cigarettes and the number of cigarette fires. Using an instrumental
variables approach, I estimate that each additional pack per capita sold is
associated with a 2.2 percent increase in all cigarette fires and a 2.7 percent
increase in fires in eating and drinking establishments.
         Of more interest are the results of the reduced form models. The
conclusions can be summarized as follows: Higher cigarette prices are associated
with reductions in all fires and residential fires but not with restaurant and bar
fires. Higher prices are also negatively related to counts of deaths and injuries in
fires, with the caveat that the coefficients are of limited statistical significance.
Certain restrictions and bans on indoor smoking also influence fire rates, but the
effect is to increase, rather than decrease, fires. Specifically, workplace
restrictions and bans are associated with increases in fires in all locations and in
residential units. Restaurant and bar bans are associated with increases in fires in
restaurants and all eating/drinking establishments.
        The magnitude of the effects of the bans and restrictions on indoor
smoking are not trivial. For example, the results indicate that a workplace ban is
associated with 10 additional fires on average per quarter. The represents an 11
percent increase over the mean. Bans in smoking in restaurants result in an
increase of 0.22 fires per quarter in eating and drinking establishments, or an
increase of 15 percent over the mean of 1.46 fires per quarter.
        Further research needs to establish why these indoor smoking bans are
causing more fires. One likely explanation is that smokers change locations or
behaviors as a result of the bans. In the case of restaurants and bars, it is easy to
imagine a person going outside to smoke and then improperly disposing of the
cigarette in flammable material such as mulch or shrubbery. The Star Tribune of




                                           22
Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN reported an extreme case where a patron, facing an
indoor smoking ban on a cold night, stayed inside and dropped his secretly
smoked cigarette butt down an air duct, causing a fire and nearly $1 million worth
of damages (Humphrey, 2009).
         In the case of goods like cigarettes with negative externalities, there is a
strong argument for governments to intercede and to enact policies designed to
reduce the consumption of such goods. The results of this paper exemplify that
some policies, such as higher cigarette prices and fire safe cigarettes, can be
effective in reducing some of the externalities. However, the laws regulating the
permissible location of smoking present a situation where the public policy
intervention may create new and potentially deadly harms.




                                         23
                                  References

Adda, Jérôme and Francesca Cornaglia. “The Effect of Bans and Taxes on
Passive Smoking” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2010, 2:1, 1–
32.

Bertrand, Marianne; Duflo, Esther and Mullainathan, Sendhil. “How Much
Should We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February 2004, 119(1), pp. 249-75.

Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi Microeconometrics Using Stata. Stata
Press, 2009.

CDC. WISQARS Web-based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System.
[http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/index.html] accessed August 10, 2009.

Chaloupka, F.J. “Clean Indoor Air Laws, Addiction, and Cigarette Smoking.”
Applied Economics, 24(2), 1992, 193-205.

Czart, C., R.L. Pacula, F.J. Chaloupka, and H. Wechsler. “The Impact of Prices
and Control Policies on Cigarette Smoking Among College Students.”
Contemporary Economic Policy, 19(2), 2001, 135-149.

DeCicca, Philip and Logan McLeod. “Cigarette taxes and older adult smoking:
Evidence from recent large tax increases.” Journal of Health Economics, 27
(2008) 918–929

Dube, SR, K Asman, A Malarcher, R Carabollo. “Cigarette Smoking Among
Adults and Trends in Smoking Cessation --- United States 2008.” MMWR
Weekly November 13, 2009 / 58(44);1227-1232

Debrot, K, M Tynan, J Francis, A MacNeil. “State Cigarette Excise Taxes ---
United States, 2009” MMWR Weekly April 9, 2010 / 59(13);385-388.

Evans, W.N., M.C. Farrelly, and E. Montgomery. “Do Workplace Smoking Bans
Reduce Smoking.” American Economic Review, 89(4), 1999, 728-747.

Frazier, Patricia, James Williams, Howard Mell, and Hollis Stambaugh. Product
Safety Issues, Juvenile Fire-setter Intervention Project. TriData Corporation,
Arlington, Virginia, March 2000.
[http://www.firemarshals.org/data/File/docs/Product%20Safety%20%20Issues%2
0Addenda%20%20Area%206.pdf]




                                      24
Gallet, CA. “The Efficacy of State-Level Antismoking Laws: Demand and
Supply Considerations.” Journal of Economics and Finance, 28:(3), 2004, 404-
412.

Hall, John R. Jr. The Smoking-Material Fire Problem. National Fire Protection
Association: Quincy, MA. August 2006.

Humphrey, Katie. “Secret cigarette blamed for $1 million Farmington fire.” Star
Tribune, Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN January 8, 2009.

Karter, Michael J. Fire Loss in the United States 2008. National Fire Protection
Association Fire Analysis and Research Division, Quincy, MA. January 2010.

Karter, Jr., Michael J., Terry L. Kissinger, Alison L. Miller, Beatrice Harwood,
Rita E Fahy, and John R. Hall, Jr. “Cigarette Characteristics, Smoker,
Characteristics, and the Relationship to Cigarette Fires.” Fire Technology, Fourth
Quarter 1994, pp. 400-431.

Ohsfeldt, R.L., R.G. Boyle, and E.L. Capilouto. “Tobacco Taxes, Smoking
Restrictions, and Tobacco Use.” in The Economic Analysis of Substance Use and
Abuse: An Integration of Econometric and Behavioral Economic Research, edited
by Frank Chaloupka, Michael Grossman, Warren Bickel, and Henry Saffer.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1999, 15-30.

Orzechowski and Walker. Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation,
      2009.

Patetta, Michael J. and Thomas B. Cole. “A Population-Based Descriptive Study
of Housefire Deaths in North Carolina.” American Journal of Public Health.
1990; 80; 1116-1117.

Stehr, Mark. “Cigarette tax avoidance and evasion.” Journal of Health
Economics, 24 (2005) 277–297.

Tauras, J.A., “Public Policy And Some-Day Smoking Among Adults” Journal of
Applied Economics, 7(1), 2004, 137-162.

Tauras, J.A., “Smoke Free Air Laws, Cigarette Prices, and Adult Cigarette
Demand,” Economic Inquiry, 44(2): 333-342, 2006.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of
Smoking: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,



                                        25
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office
on Smoking and Health, 2004.

U.S. Fire Administration, Residential Smoking Fires and Casualties. Topical
Fire Research Series, Vol. 5, Issue 5. June 2005.

U.S. Fire Administration, Fire in the United States 1992-2001. USFA/FEMA.
October 2004.

U.S. Fire Administration, National Fire Incident Reporting System 5.0 Complete
Reference Guide. USFA/FEMA January 2008

Wasserman, J., W.G. Manning, J.P. Newhouse, and J.D. Winkler. “The Effects of
Excise Taxes and Regulations on Cigarette Smoking.” Journal of Health
Economics, 10(1), 1991, 43-64.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.

Yurkeli A, Zhang P. 2000. The impact of clean indoor-air laws and cigarette
smuggling on demand for cigarettes: an empirical model. Health Economics 9:
159–170.




                                      26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      All Cigarette Fires
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Residential Cigarette Fires




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6




                                                         Fires Per 100,000 Covered                                                                                                                1999_1




 All fires
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1999_2
                                                                 Population                                                                                                                       1999_3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  1999_4




                                            0
                                                     5
                                                              10
                                                                        15
                                                                                  20
                                                                                            25
                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000_2




                                     1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000_3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000_4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001_1




 Residential
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001_3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001_4




                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002_1




                                                                                                                                                        All fires
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002_2




27
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002_3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002_4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2003_1




                                     2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2003_2




                                                                                                                                                        Residential




 Cooking Fires
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2003_3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2003_4




                              Year
                                                                                                                                                                               Year and Quarter   2004_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004_3




                                     2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004_4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2005_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2005_2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2005_3
                                                                                                                                                        Restaurants and bars




                                                                                                                                                                                                  2005_4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2006_1




                                     2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2006_2
                                                                                                           Figure 2: Annual Fires and Cigarette Sales


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2006_3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2006_4




 Cigarette sales per capita
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2007_1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 1: Number of Cigarette Fires Per 100,000 Covered Population




                                                                                                                                                                                                  2007_2




                                     2008
                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2007_3




                                                10
                                                         20
                                                              30
                                                                   40
                                                                             50
                                                                                  60
                                                                                       70
                                                                                                 80
                                                                                                      90




                                                                                                                                                                                                  2007_4
                                                         Cigarette Sales Per Capita
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.14




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Restaurant and Bar Cigarette Fires
                                             Table 1
                       Summary Statistics—Quarterly data, 1999‐2007 (N=1750)
Variable                                                        Mean       Std. Dev.   Min       Max
Count of cigarette fires, all locations                         91.55       127.34      0        1085
Count of residential cigarette fires                            32.10        40.74      0        295
Count of cigarette fires in restaurants                          1.11        2.15       0         35
Count of cigarette fires in bars                                 0.19        0.52       0         5
Count of cigarette fires in restaurants, bars
and other eating establishments                                  1.46        2.60        0        39
Count of fires caused by cooking                                116.04      169.51       0       1255
Deaths from cigarette fires, all locations                       0.64        1.16         0        9
Deaths and injuries from cigarette fires, all locations          4.04        6.21         0       59
Deaths from residential cigarette fires                          0.61        1.12        0         9
Deaths and injuries from residential cigarette fires             3.64        5.58         0       57
Deaths from fires caused by cooking                              0.25        0.77        0        11
Deaths and injuries from fires caused by cooking                 1.33        2.80         0       27
Cigarette sales per capita in number of packs                   74.80        28.50     31.05     184.4
Real average price of cigarettes                                 1.99        0.38       1.20     3.92
Real state excise tax on cigarettes                              0.37        0.30       0.01     1.80
Restriction on smoking in private workplaces                     0.39        0.49         0        1
Ban on smoking in private workplaces                             0.13        0.34        0         1
Restriction on smoking in restaurants                            0.49        0.50        0         1
Ban on smoking in restaurants                                    0.15        0.35         0        1
Ban on smoking in bars                                           0.10        0.30        0         1
% of state pop. covered by 100% SFA law, private
workplaces                                                      14.89       31.81       0         100
% of state pop. covered by 100% SFA law,
restaurants                                                      18.46       36.19       0         100
% of state pop. covered by 100% SFA law, bars                    11.97       30.34        0        100
Fire safe cigarette law                                           0.02        0.14        0         1
Housing units per square mile                                    271.86     1060.22     2.49    10597.82
% of state pop. with a bachelor’s degree                         26.40        5.00     15.10      47.50
Real income per capita                                           17.03        2.68      5.23      30.06
Quarterly unemployment rate                                       4.71        1.16      2.13      9.67
Covered population                                             3,445,898   3,606,004   2,136   25,100,000




                                                          28
                                         Table 2: Effects of Annual Cigarette Sales on Annual Counts of Cigarette Fires
                             All Fires                   Residential                Restaurants                       Bars              All Eating/Drink Estab.
   Cigarette Sales: Exogenous Endogenous Exogenous             Endogenous Exogenous        Endogenous Exogenous         Endogenous Exogenous Endogenous
Annual cigarette       ‐0.0002        0.022           0.006        0.021        ‐0.003         0.023         ‐0.001           0.014       ‐0.001       0.027
sales per capita      (‐0.04)        (1.86)          (0.97)       (1.54)       (‐0.46)        (1.79)        (‐0.10)          (0.50)      (‐0.15)      (2.49)
Fire safe cigarette    ‐0.024         0.079           0.028        0.080         0.648         0.779          1.275           1.318       0.050        0.151
law                   (‐0.26)        (0.80)          (0.17)       (0.47)        (1.18)        (1.46)         (3.16)          (3.39)      (0.29)       (1.01)
Houses per sq          ‐0.001        ‐0.001          ‐0.001       ‐0.001        ‐0.001        ‐0.001         ‐0.001           ‐0.001     ‐0.001       ‐0.001
mile                  (‐7.43)       (‐7.95)         (‐9.37)      (‐9.45)       (‐7.36)       (‐7.81)        (‐9.64)          (‐9.67)   (‐16.43)     (‐17.81)
% bachelors            ‐0.006         0.014          ‐0.015       ‐0.001        ‐0.022        ‐0.003          0.006           0.021       ‐0.025      ‐0.003
                      (‐0.31)        (0.78)         (‐0.70)      (‐0.05)       (‐1.00)       (‐0.10)         (0.12)          (0.34)      (‐1.21)     (‐0.12)
Per capita income      ‐0.076        ‐0.103          ‐0.101       ‐0.119        ‐0.153        ‐0.179          0.320           0.302       ‐0.084      ‐0.117
                      (‐1.46)       (‐1.87)         (‐1.97)      (‐2.24)       (‐1.65)       (‐1.90)         (1.59)          (1.51)      (‐0.90)     (‐1.27)
Unemployment           ‐0.016         0.041          ‐0.038       ‐0.0003        0.041         0.110          0.006           0.039       0.020        0.087
rate                  (‐0.40)        (0.88)         (‐0.88)      (‐0.01)        (0.51)        (1.31)         (0.03)          (0.19)      (0.25)       (1.12)
First stage                          ‐0.030                       ‐0.021                      ‐0.034                          ‐0.022                  ‐0.037
residuals                           (‐2.54)                      (‐1.56)                     (‐2.13)                         (‐0.76)                 (‐2.66)
        Notes: N=443. T‐statistics in parentheses, intercept not shown. Models also include indicator variables for states and years. Instruments
        include the real cigarette price and SFA workplace laws. First stage F‐statistic is 8.95.




                                                                              29
                     Table 3: Effects of Annual Cigarette Sales on Annual Deaths and Injuries in Cigarettes Fires
                               All Fire Deaths         All Fires Deaths + injury       Residential Deaths         Residential
                                                                                                                 Deaths+ Injury
        Cigarette Sales: Exogenous Endogenous Exogenous             Endogenous Exogenous         Endogenous Exogenous Endogenous
Annual cigarette sales       0.008         0.029         0.006          0.007         0.009         0.032          0.006         0.007
per capita                  (0.68)        (1.47)        (1.02)         (0.87)        (0.74)        (1.61)         (1.20)        (0.86)
Fire safe cigarette law      ‐0.639       ‐0.571         ‐0.283        ‐0.280        ‐0.587         ‐0.511        ‐0.246        ‐0.243
                            (‐3.27)      (‐2.57)        (‐2.58)       (‐2.48)       (‐2.86)        (‐2.17)       (‐2.45)       (‐2.33)
Houses per sq mile           ‐0.001       ‐0.001         ‐0.001        ‐0.001        ‐0.001         ‐0.001        ‐0.001        ‐0.001
                            (‐1.10)      (‐1.14)        (‐1.22)       (‐1.22)       (‐1.10)        (‐1.15)       (‐1.14)       (‐1.15)
% bachelors                  0.008         0.026         ‐0.0004        0.001         0.002         0.021          0.002         0.003
                            (0.27)        (0.86)        (‐0.02)        (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.67)         (0.09)        (0.14)
Per capita income            0.067         0.035         ‐0.175        ‐0.177         0.085         0.052         ‐0.188        ‐0.190
                            (0.52)        (0.27)        (‐2.53)       (‐2.46)        (0.63)        (0.37)        (‐2.69)       (‐2.64)
Unemployment rate            0.034         0.087         ‐0.134        ‐0.131         0.045         0.101         ‐0.119        ‐0.115
                            (0.41)        (0.99)        (‐1.96)       (‐1.99)        (0.53)        (1.14)        (‐1.79)       (‐1.72)
First stage residuals                     ‐0.030                       ‐0.002                       ‐0.032                      ‐0.002
                                         (‐1.59)                      (‐0.19)                      (‐1.81)                     (‐0.19)
Notes: N=443. T‐statistics in parentheses, intercept not shown. Models also include indicator variables for states and years. Instruments
include the real cigarette price and SFA workplace laws. First stage F‐statistics is 8.95.




                                                                    30
                                               Table 4
                  Dependent Variable=Quarterly Counts of Cigarette Fires, All Locations
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)
Cigarette price                    ‐0.319      ‐0.378      ‐0.368
                                  (‐1.94)     (‐2.04)     (‐1.93)
Cigarette tax                                                           ‐0.363       ‐0.384       ‐0.369
                                                                       (‐1.52)      (‐1.48)      (‐1.38)
SFA restriction: workplaces         0.305                                0.325
                                   (2.89)                               (2.90)
SFA ban: workplaces                 0.218                                0.221
                                   (2.23)                               (2.19)
SFA restriction: restaurants                   0.054                                  0.056
                                              (0.51)                                 (0.53)
SFA ban: restaurants                           0.091                                  0.081
                                              (0.71)                                 (0.63)
SFA ban: bars                                               0.045                                  0.032
                                                           (0.52)                                 (0.36)
Fire safe cigarette law             0.046       0.012      ‐0.0004       0.031       ‐0.006       ‐0.016
                                   (0.51)      (0.12)     (‐0.004)      (0.33)      (‐0.05)      (‐0.16)
Houses per sq mile                 ‐0.001      ‐0.001      ‐0.001       ‐0.001       ‐0.001       ‐0.001
                                  (‐7.56)     (‐7.87)     (‐7.96)      (‐7.49)      (‐7.87)      (‐7.97)
% bachelors                        ‐0.005      ‐0.002      ‐0.003       ‐0.006       ‐0.005       ‐0.005
                                  (‐0.35)     (‐0.16)     (‐0.21)      (‐0.46)      (‐0.31)      (‐0.35)
Per capita income                  ‐0.039      ‐0.058      ‐0.058       ‐0.038       ‐0.057       ‐0.057
                                  (‐1.04)     (‐1.48)     (‐1.48)      (‐0.99)      (‐1.43)      (‐1.43)
Unemployment rate                  ‐0.009      ‐0.002      ‐0.004       ‐0.007       ‐0.0001      ‐0.002
                                  (‐0.28)     (‐0.05)     (‐0.12)      (‐0.21)      (‐0.001)     (‐0.06)
Price/tax elasticity               ‐0.63       ‐0.75       ‐0.73        ‐0.14        ‐0.14        ‐0.14

Change in count from $1           ‐14.12     ‐16.73       ‐16.30       ‐16.06      ‐17.04       ‐16.36
change in price/tax

Change in count from SFA          13.99        2.40                    14.94         2.49
restriction change from 0 to 1

Change in count from SFA          10.48        4.14         2.04       10.64         3.71            1.43
ban change from 0 to 1

    Notes: N=1750. T‐statistics in parentheses, intercept not shown. Models also include indicator
    variables for states and year/quarters.




                                                   31
                                             Table 5
                  Dependent Variable=Quarterly Counts of Residential Cigarette Fires
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)
Cigarette price                   ‐0.318       ‐0.358      ‐0.344
                                 (‐1.56)      (‐1.73)     (‐1.61)
Cigarette tax                                                           ‐0.420       ‐0.426       ‐0.410
                                                                       (‐1.49)      (‐1.50)      (‐1.39)
SFA restriction: workplaces        0.293                                 0.312
                                  (2.46)                                (2.47)
SFA ban: workplaces                0.140                                 0.147
                                  (1.55)                                (1.57)
SFA restriction: restaurants                   ‐0.026                                ‐0.017
                                              (‐0.24)                               (‐0.16)
SFA ban: restaurants                           ‐0.062                                ‐0.061
                                              (‐0.57)                               (‐0.56)
SFA ban: bars                                              ‐0.092                                 ‐0.096
                                                          (‐1.37)                                (‐1.38)
Fire safe cigarette law            0.043       ‐0.014       0.005        0.022       ‐0.036       ‐0.018
                                  (0.46)      (‐0.14)      (0.05)       (0.22)      (‐0.32)      (‐0.17)
Houses per sq mile                ‐0.001       ‐0.001      ‐0.001       ‐0.001       ‐0.001       ‐0.001
                                 (‐9.31)      (‐9.92)     (‐9.97)      (‐9.14)      (‐9.81)      (‐9.88)
% bachelors                       ‐0.012       ‐0.010      ‐0.008       ‐0.013       ‐0.012       ‐0.010
                                 (‐0.74)      (‐0.58)     (‐0.51)      (‐0.85)      (‐0.70)      (‐0.62)
Per capita income                 ‐0.060       ‐0.072      ‐0.070       ‐0.058       ‐0.070       ‐0.068
                                 (‐1.81)      (‐2.02)     (‐1.98)      (‐1.76)      (‐1.95)      (‐1.93)
Unemployment rate                 ‐0.048       ‐0.036      ‐0.031       ‐0.042       ‐0.030       ‐0.026
                                 (‐1.46)      (‐1.03)     (‐0.88)      (‐1.28)      (‐0.84)      (‐0.70)
Price/tax elasticity              ‐0.631       ‐0.710      ‐0.683       ‐0.157       ‐0.159       ‐0.153

Change in count from $1           ‐5.05       ‐5.69        ‐5.47        ‐6.68        ‐6.79       ‐6.52
change in price/tax

Change in count from SFA          4.81        ‐0.41                      5.14        ‐0.26
restriction change from 0 to 1

Change in count from SFA          2.34        ‐0.97        ‐1.40         2.47        ‐0.94       ‐1.47
ban change from 0 to 1

    Notes: N=1750. T‐statistics in parentheses, intercept not shown. Models also include indicator
    variables for states and year/quarters.




                                                   32
                                                           Table 6
    Dependent Variables=Quarterly Counts of Cigarette Fires in Restaurants, Bars, and Other Eating/Drinking Establishments
                                              Restaurants                            Bars                    Restaurants + Bars + Other
Cigarette price                     ‐0.172       ‐0.248    ‐0.294           0.243    0.169      0.153       ‐0.244      ‐0.335       ‐0.341
                                   (‐0.71)      (‐0.92)   (‐1.11)          (0.56)   (0.35)     (0.31)      (‐1.19)     (‐1.49)      (‐1.54)
SFA restriction: workplaces          0.217                                  0.427                            0.270
                                    (1.11)                                 (1.97)                           (1.46)
SFA ban: workplaces                  0.465                                  0.844                            0.466
                                    (2.76)                                 (2.29)                           (3.29)
SFA restriction: restaurants                     0.020                               0.058                               0.069
                                                (0.12)                              (0.13)                              (0.46)
SFA ban: restaurants                             0.437                               0.514                               0.422
                                                (2.33)                              (1.25)                              (2.67)
SFA ban: bars                                                 0.441                             0.487                                 0.354
                                                             (2.82)                            (1.26)                                (2.88)
Fire safe cigarette law               0.720       0.706       0.664      0.767        0.725     0.670        0.171       0.119        0.076
                                     (2.30)      (2.41)      (2.36)     (2.18)       (1.93)    (1.81)       (1.29)      (0.84)       (0.53)
Houses per sq mile                   ‐0.001      ‐0.001      ‐0.001     ‐0.001       ‐0.001    ‐0.001       ‐0.001      ‐0.001       ‐0.001
                                  (‐10.33)    (‐10.04)    (‐10.17)     (‐9.43)      (‐9.96)   (‐9.75)    (‐19.78)    (‐18.84)     (‐18.79)
% bachelors                          ‐0.037      ‐0.038      ‐0.040     ‐0.018       ‐0.010    ‐0.014       ‐0.038      ‐0.037       ‐0.039
                                    (‐1.41)     (‐1.59)     (‐1.56)    (‐0.42)      (‐0.20)   (‐0.28)      (‐1.63)     (‐1.73)      (‐1.66)
Per capita income                    ‐0.079      ‐0.097      ‐0.088      0.327        0.273     0.284       ‐0.034      ‐0.056       ‐0.046
                                    (‐1.10)     (‐1.35)     (‐1.23)     (1.84)       (1.61)    (1.58)      (‐0.51)     (‐0.85)      (‐0.70)
Unemployment rate                     0.045       0.044       0.017     ‐0.038       ‐0.041    ‐0.070        0.017       0.021       ‐0.0001
                                     (0.61)      (0.59)      (0.22)    (‐0.27)      (‐0.27)   (‐0.43)       (0.25)      (0.32)      (‐0.001)
Price elasticity                     ‐0.342      ‐0.493      ‐0.583      0.483        0.336     0.304       ‐0.485      ‐0.665       ‐0.677

Change in count from $1              ‐0.04      ‐0.05       ‐0.06     0.002        0.002        0.001       ‐0.11       ‐0.15      ‐0.15
change in price
Change in count from SFA              0.05       0.004                0.004        0.0005                    0.13        0.03
restriction change from 0 to 1
Change in count from SFA ban          0.12       0.11        0.11     0.01         0.01         0.005        0.25        0.22       0.19
change from 0 to 1
Notes: N=1750. T‐statistics in parentheses, intercept not shown. Models also include indicator variables for states and year/quarters.

                                                                      33
                                                  Table 7
                            Dependent Variables=Quarterly Counts of Cigarette Fires
                                                          All fires                           Residential Fires

Cigarette price                               ‐0.360       ‐0.358       ‐0.355       ‐0.360        ‐0.350          ‐0.326
                                             (‐1.88)      (‐1.86)      (‐1.84)      (‐1.68)       (‐1.61)         (‐1.53)
% of state pop. covered by 100% SFA law,       0.0004                                ‐0.001
     private workplaces                       (0.52)                                (‐0.90)
% of state pop. covered by 100% SFA law,                    0.0003                                 ‐0.001
     restaurants                                           (0.30)                                 (‐1.17)
% of state pop. covered by 100% SFA law,                                 0.0001                                    ‐0.001
     bars                                                               (0.13)                                    (‐1.92)
Price elasticity                              ‐0.71        ‐0.71        ‐0.70       ‐0.72          ‐0.69           ‐0.65

Change in count from $1 change in price      ‐15.94       ‐15.86      ‐15.71        ‐5.73          ‐5.57          ‐5.19

Change in count from 1 percentage point        0.02         0.01        0.005       ‐0.01          ‐0.01          ‐0.02
change in SFA
Notes: N=1750. T‐statistics in parentheses, intercept not shown. Models include the fire safe cigarette law, housing per square
mile, education, income, unemployment, and the indicator variables for states and year/quarters.




                                                          34
                                                                     Table 8
                  Dependent Variables=Counts of Cigarette Fires, in Restaurants, Bars, and Other Eating/Drinking Establishments
                                                       Restaurants                                Bars                       Restaurants + Bars + Other

Cigarette price                               ‐0.195       ‐0.244       ‐0.311       0.149        0.139       0.134        ‐0.286       ‐0.323     ‐0.354
                                             (‐0.73)      (‐0.90)      (‐1.15)      (0.31)       (0.29)      (0.27)       (‐1.26)      (‐1.42)    (‐1.56)
% of state pop. covered by 100% SFA law,       0.004                                 0.009                                  0.004
     private workplaces                       (2.90)                                (2.92)                                 (3.15)
% of state pop. covered by 100% SFA law,                   0.004                                  0.006                                  0.004
     restaurants                                          (3.09)                                 (2.03)                                 (3.04)
% of state pop. covered by 100% SFA law,                                0.005                                 0.005                                 0.004
     bars                                                              (2.85)                                (1.44)                                (2.63)
Price elasticity                             ‐0.39        ‐0.48        ‐0.62         0.30        0.27         0.27         ‐0.57        ‐0.64      ‐0.70

Change in count from $1 change in price      ‐0.04        ‐0.05        ‐0.07         0.002       0.001        0.001        ‐0.13        ‐0.14      ‐0.16

Change in count from 1 percentage point       0.001        0.001        0.001        0.0001      0.0001       0.00005       0.002       0.002       0.002
change in SFA
       Notes: N=1750. T‐statistics in parentheses, intercept not shown. Models include the fire safe cigarette law, housing per square mile,
       education, income, unemployment, and the indicator variables for states and year/quarters.




                                                                               35
                                             Table 9
                   Dependent Variables=Counts of Deaths and Injuries, All Locations
                                              Deaths                             Deaths + Injuries

Cigarette price                   ‐0.458       ‐0.528      ‐0.488       ‐0.135        ‐0.158          ‐0.111
                                 (‐1.40)      (‐1.71)     (‐1.56)      (‐0.98)       (‐1.27)         (‐0.87)
SFA restriction: workplaces        0.237                                 0.062
                                  (1.03)                                (0.44)
SFA ban: workplaces                0.266                                ‐0.047
                                  (1.30)                               (‐0.35)
SFA restriction: restaurants                   0.538                                   0.346
                                              (2.37)                                  (2.07)
SFA ban: restaurants                           0.423                                   0.044
                                              (1.69)                                  (0.27)
SFA ban: bars                                               0.101                                     ‐0.201
                                                           (0.66)                                    (‐2.01)
Fire safe cigarette law           ‐0.586       ‐0.515      ‐0.665       ‐0.332        ‐0.241          ‐0.298
                                 (‐2.74)      (‐2.86)     (‐3.82)      (‐3.53)       (‐2.81)         (‐3.34)
Houses per sq mile                ‐0.0005      ‐0.0005     ‐0.0005      ‐0.0004       ‐0.0005         ‐0.0005
                                 (‐0.93)      (‐0.92)     (‐0.96)      (‐1.10)       (‐1.13)         (‐1.16)
% bachelors                        0.009        0.025       0.012        0.001         0.013           0.006
                                  (0.29)       (0.78)      (0.40)       (0.05)        (0.75)          (0.36)
Per capita income                  0.092        0.104       0.089       ‐0.107        ‐0.089          ‐0.100
                                  (0.73)       (0.81)      (0.72)      (‐2.21)       (‐1.78)         (‐2.07)
Unemployment rate                  0.105        0.109       0.105       ‐0.101        ‐0.093          ‐0.081
                                  (1.43)       (1.52)      (1.33)      (‐1.81)       (‐1.95)         (‐1.51)
Price elasticity                  ‐0.91        ‐1.05       ‐0.97        ‐0.27         ‐0.31           ‐0.22


Change in count from $1           ‐0.09       ‐0.10        ‐0.10        ‐0.23         ‐0.27          ‐0.19
change in price

Change in count from SFA          0.05         0.10                      0.10          0.59
restriction change from 0 to 1

Change in count from SFA          0.06         0.09         0.02        ‐0.08          0.08          ‐0.31
ban change from 0 to 1

    Notes: N=1750. T‐statistics in parentheses, intercept not shown. Models also include indicator
    variables for states and year/quarters.




                                                   36
                                               Table 10
                               Dependent variable=counts of cooking fires
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Cigarette price                    ‐0.138      ‐0.154       ‐0.097
                                  (‐0.95)     (‐1.18)      (‐0.82)
Cigarette tax                                                              ‐0.028      ‐0.026        0.039
                                                                           (‐0.17)     (‐0.19)       (0.29)
SFA restriction: workplaces         0.172                                 0.179
                                   (1.13)                                (1.16)
SFA ban: workplaces                 0.106                                 0.097
                                   (0.74)                                (0.67)
SFA restriction: restaurants                    ‐0.059                                 ‐0.071
                                                (‐0.46)                                (‐0.55)
SFA ban: restaurants                            ‐0.017                                 ‐0.044
                                                (‐0.10)                                (‐0.27)
SFA ban: bars                                                  ‐0.126                               ‐0.153
                                                               (‐0.93)                              (‐1.09)
Fire safe cigarette law              0.188       0.123        0.192      0.185        0.116        0.200
                                    (0.62)     (0.40)        (0.66)     (0.60)       (0.37)       (0.69)
Houses per sq mile                  ‐0.001     ‐0.001        ‐0.001     ‐0.001       ‐0.001       ‐0.001
                                   (‐3.42)    (‐3.50)       (‐3.55)    (‐3.41)      (‐3.50)      (‐3.57)
% bachelors                         ‐0.017     ‐0.016        ‐0.013     ‐0.020       ‐0.018       ‐0.015
                                   (‐1.10)    (‐1.13)       (‐0.88)    (‐1.26)      (‐1.33)      (‐1.02)
Per capita income                   ‐0.083     ‐0.100        ‐0.089     ‐0.076       ‐0.093       ‐0.081
                                   (‐1.75)    (‐2.06)       (‐1.83)    (‐1.59)      (‐1.91)      (‐1.71)
Unemployment rate                   ‐0.020     ‐0.009        ‐0.003     ‐0.022       ‐0.010       ‐0.003
                                   (‐0.36)    (‐0.16)       (‐0.04)    (‐0.41)      (‐0.18)      (‐0.05)
    Notes: N=1750. T‐statistics in parentheses, intercept not shown. Models also include indicator
    variables for states and year/quarters.




                                                    37
