NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL MACRO-FINANCE
Anna Pavlova
Roberto Rigobon
Working Paper 16630
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16630

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

We thank Philippe Bacchetta for detail comments. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Anna Pavlova and Roberto Rigobon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

International Macro-Finance
Anna Pavlova and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 16630
December 2010
JEL No. F31,F36,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
International macro-finance is a new area of open economy macroeconomics that brings portfolio
choice and asset pricing considerations into models of international macroeconomics. The importance
of these considerations—typically relegated to Finance and largely overlooked in traditional macroeconomics—for
the international macroeconomy have been underscored by a series of recent financial crises and by
unprecedented global imbalances. In this paper, we survey recent developments in this area, primarily
on the theoretical front. We also suggest several promising directions for future research.

Anna Pavlova
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UK
apavlova@london.edu
Roberto Rigobon
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-516
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu

1.

Introduction

Financial markets and their role in international risk sharing have inspired a vast body
of theoretical literature. Over the past 40 years, international ﬁnance and economics has
evolved into a vibrant ﬁeld spreading from the basic international version of the CAPM
to some of the most sophisticated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models.
Interestingly, however, the research eﬀort in Economics has evolved almost in parallel with
that in Finance. In Economics, the main focus has been on real quantities and international relative prices such as consumption, investment, current account, terms of trade and
exchange rates. International portfolio choice and international equity markets have been
largely overlooked. Indeed, the asset structure of these models has been mostly of two types:
either the only asset is an international bond and markets are incomplete, or there is a full
set of Arrow-Debreu securities and markets are complete. Both approaches have been very
useful, but they cannot address many questions pertaining to portfolio problems and to the
international equity markets. Finance, on the other hand, has focused more on cross-country
portfolio allocations and asset prices. Terms of trade and hence exchange rates have been
largely overlooked because the majority of the models featured a single-good framework, in
which forces of arbitrage equate terms of trade to unity. Models with endogenous portfolio selection, equity prices and time-varying terms of trade and exchange rates in a single
framework have been quite rare. Although we have learned a tremendous amount from this
research, in recent years two main phenomena have required a redeﬁnition of the agenda
behind the theories of ﬁnancial markets in the international context: contagion among developed and relatively unconnected countries, and the role that asset prices and exchange
rates play in the global imbalances.
Contagion refers to the transmission of crises from one country to another. Prominent
examples of this phenomenon include the 1997 Asian crisis, the 1998 Russian crisis, and
the subprime mortgage crisis of 2007-2008. Contagion has attracted attention of academics
in the aftermath of the 1994 Mexican crisis, and from the very beginning (Gerlach and
Smets (1995)), crises were thought to be transmitted through trade relationships, driven
by competitive devaluations. Also, contagion appeared to be mostly an emerging markets
1

problem. In recent years, however, these views have shifted. Today, we tend to think that
turmoil is transmitted, most likely, through the ﬁnancial sector and that contagion is a global
problem, aﬀecting all countries, regardless of their level of ﬁnancial development.
The emphasis on the ﬁnancial sector as the main transmission mechanism started shortly
after the 1997 Asian and the 1998 Russian crises. During these crises shocks propagated
through international banks and other ﬁnancial intermediaries. The transmission had little
to do with competitive devaluations and their impact on trade, but rather with the impact
of large swings in exchange rates on asset values, balance sheets, and interest rates. For
example, Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) document that Thailand’s 1997 currency downfall
lead to capital losses for Japanese banks, forcing them to curb their lending to other Asian
countries. It is thus becoming increasingly apparent to both academics and policymakers
that no analysis of contagion is complete without a thorough understanding of how shocks
are transmitted internationally through ﬁnancial markets and intermediaries.
The second signiﬁcant development that has inﬂuenced the literature was the unprecedented rise in external deﬁcits in many developed nations, which sparked a discussion about
sustainability and the possible dramatic unraveling of global imbalances (see Roubini and
Setser (2004) for a particularly striking prediction). The rise in external deﬁcits, however,
came hand-in-hand with the explosion in cross-border risky asset holdings. Before 1985, the
US held virtually no foreign equities; nowadays, foreign equities account for a large and growing part of the country’s assets. Following inﬂuential work of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001)
and Gourinchas and Rey (2007), it has become clear that (unrealized) capital gains on these
equity positions are missing from national accounts. The alarming current accounts deﬁcits
worldwide may then be simply due to this misreported income from equity positions. Today
an extremely active literature, both empirical and theoretical, is trying to better understand
how the capital gains on foreign equity positions, or the so-called valuation eﬀects, aﬀect
our thinking about the current account and the external adjustment process. Unfortunately,
most of the existing international macro models are not well-suited for dealing with these
issues because they are missing equity markets and portfolio choice. A new and rapidly
growing strand of literature, commonly known as International Macro-Finance, is trying to

2

ﬁll this gap. This new generation of macro models provides a redeﬁnition of the current
account (adjusted for capital gains on equity holdings) and modiﬁes the standard theories
of the current account. More generally, this research program focuses on the interaction
between the ﬁnancial sector and the real economy, and as such can address a wide spectrum
of issues such as contagion, valuation eﬀects, and others.
The literature in international economics and ﬁnance can be split along several paradigms:
small open economy (partial equilibrium) vs. general equilibrium; pure exchange vs. production economies; single- vs. multiple-good models; complete vs. incomplete markets. It
is impossible to summarize the research that has been done in all these areas.1 In this survey we concentrate on a framework that has become the core of international macro-ﬁnance:
general equilibrium asset-pricing models with multiple goods. The richness of this framework
comes at a cost: most of the macro-ﬁnance models are quite complex. This literature can
be split into several parts based on their approaches. The ﬁrst approach relies on traditional
approximation methods. Ghironi, Lee, and Rebucci (2006) and Kollmann (2006) compute
portfolios and changes in net foreign assets using standard ﬁrst-order approximations around
a deterministic steady state. The second approach makes use of higher-order approximations
to analyze countries’ portfolios and the evolution of external accounts. These methodologies
grew out of Samuelson (1970) and Judd and Guu (2001) and were developed by Engel and
Matsumoto (2006), Evans and Hnatkovska (2007), Devereux and Sutherland (2010a), and
Tille and van Wincoop (2010). A disadvantage shared by these two approaches is that to
this day little is known about the behavior of these economies away from the deterministic
steady state, where the underlying volatilities are not small.2
The third strand of the macro-ﬁnance literature simpliﬁes the models and seeks to ﬁnd
1

Even a comprehensive textbook such as Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1996) is unable to cover the entire literature.
The two strands that are the closest to our subject here are international real business cycles in Economics
and international asset pricing in Finance. For the former, see Baxter (1995) and Crucini (2008) for surveys
of the international real business cycles literature, whose main focus is on economic ﬂuctuations generated
by real general equilibrium production economies and their relationship to the data. For the latter, see Stulz
(1995) and Sercu and Uppal (2000) for international asset pricing, whose main focus is on equity prices and
portfolios within single-good economies and on the international CAPM.
2
More generally, the accuracy and performance and of numerical algorithms for solving multi-country
DSGE models remain the subject of an ongoing debate. The January 2010 special issue of the Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control on numerical methods for multi-country DSGE models (see Den Haan,
Judd, and Juillard (2010)) provides an excellent reference for the current state of this debate.

3

exact solutions. The main advantage of this approach is that the economy can be analyzed
away from the steady state, but the disadvantage is that solutions only exist in few special
cases. An early work that presents one of such special cases is Helpman and Razin (1978).
Their setup has been developed further by Cole and Obstfeld (1991), Zapatero (1995), and
Pavlova and Rigobon (2007). These papers consider pure-exchange economies in which a
representative agent in each country has log-linear preferences. In recent years the literature
has made progress extending the setup beyond log-linear preferences—Coeurdacier (2005)
to the logarithm of a CES aggregator and Stathopoulos (2008) to preferences with habit formation.3 The solution is especially simple in complete markets—and we discuss this solution
in detail in Section 2—but it is also possible to introduce market frictions (Schornick (2007),
Pavlova and Rigobon (2008), and Pavlova and Rigobon (2010)). We believe that models
incorporating market incompleteness and institutional frictions are the most promising step
towards understanding the phenomena of contagion, world systemic risk, and the proper
deﬁnition of external sustainability.
In terms of the economic applications, the two questions that the theoretical literature on
macro-ﬁnance has mainly focused on so far were the (i) composition of international portfolios
and (ii) valuation eﬀects and global imbalances. Besides papers already mentioned above, the
ﬁrst strand is represented by, e.g., Coeurdacier (2009), Coeurdacier and Gourinchas (2009),
Engel and Matsumoto (2009), and Coeurdacier, Kollmann, and Martin (2010). The second
strand includes Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2007), Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas
(2008), and Devereux and Sutherland (2010b). Also related, but developed before valuation
eﬀects were on the agenda of international macroeconomists, are portfolio balance models
of Kraay and Ventura (2000), Kraay and Ventura (2003), and Devereux and Saito (2006).
Recently, the Journal of International Economics ran a special issue on international macroﬁnance (see Devereux, Engel, Matsumoto, Rebucci, and Sutherland (2010)). This collection
of works gives an excellent overview of the latest contributions to this ﬁeld and provides
further references.
3

See also Li and Muzere (2010) for a related model with heterogenous beliefs.

4

2.

The Workhorse Model

In this section, we develop a simple multi-good multi-country general equilibrium asset pricing model that allows for closed-form solutions. While the setup here is certainly simpliﬁed,
it possesses many elements that form the core of international macro-ﬁnance. We believe it
is this kind of models that should lead future research in this area.
We consider a discrete-time pure exchange economy along the lines of Lucas (1982). Let
time t run from 0 to T . There is a ﬁnite number of trading dates, but one can also look at
the inﬁnite-horizon version of our economy by adding an appropriate transversality condition
and taking the limit as T → ∞. There are two countries in the world: Home and Foreign.
Each country is endowed with a Lucas tree producing a country-speciﬁc perishable good. In
our baseline model, the uncertainty about the output of the trees is the only source of risk
in the economy. The state ωt , an element of the set Ωt , is the history of the economy up to
time t. This history occurs with probability π(t, ωt ). In our notation hereafter, we suppress
the second argument, ωt , unless necessary for clarity. The state-dependent outputs of the
Home and Foreign trees are denoted by Y (t) and Y ∗ (t), respectively, and the corresponding
prices of the goods by p(t) and p∗ (t). The terms of trade, T oT , are deﬁned as the price of the
Home good relative to that of the Foreign good: T oT ≡ p/p∗ .4 We ﬁx the world numeraire
basket to contain α ∈ (0, 1) units of the Home good and (1-α) units of the Foreign good,
and normalize the price of this basket to be equal to unity.
Available for investment are one-period riskless bonds, with prices B(t) and B ∗ (t), paying
out in units of Home and Foreign good, respectively, and claims to the Home and Foreign
trees (stocks), with prices S(t) and S ∗ (t). Additionally, agents can trade a complete set
of Arrow-Debreu securities. In what follows, we are particularly interested in determining
equilibrium prices of the stocks and bonds. Due to space limitations, we do not examine the
4

The presence of time-varying terms of trade is what makes this framework diﬀerent from standard
international asset pricing models in Finance. Most of these models feature a single good, and therefore, by
construction, the terms of trade and the real exchange rate are equal to unity. Nontrivial implications for
terms of trade or exchange rates in single-good models have been obtained by either introducing shipping
costs into a real model, or by exogenously specifying a monetary policy and focusing on the nominal exchange
rate. For models with shipping costs see Dumas (1992) and a textbook by Sercu and Uppal (2000). See
Bakshi and Chen (1997), Basak and Gallmeyer (1999) for monetary general equilibrium models, and Solnik
(1974), Adler and Dumas (1983) for the international CAPM.

5

countries’ portfolios, and so we allow for more assets than what is needed to ensure market
completeness. The surplus assets will simply be priced by no-arbitrage. In the presence of
redundant assets, of course, the countries’ portfolios are indeterminate. To make our model
a meaningful model of portfolio allocation, we simply need to drop the assumption that the
Arrow-Debreu securities are available for trade and instead to (dynamically) complete the
markets with the countries’ stocks, bonds, and possibly other assets. One, of course, has
to ensure that there are at least as many assets as there are states of the world at each
node; otherwise, our solution approach needs to be modiﬁed to explicitly account for market
incompleteness.
Each country i is populated by a representative agent with preferences characterized by
the expected utility function
[ T
]
∑
E
β t ui (Ci (t), Ci∗ (t)) ,

i = {H, F },

(1)

t=0

with 0 < β < 1. In particular, the agents in each country derive utility from consuming both
the domestic and the foreign good. Since we have assumed that markets are complete, we
can write the budget constraints of the agents in their Arrow-Debreu form:
[ T
]
∑
E
q(t)(p(t)Ci (t) + p∗ (t)Ci∗ (t)) = Wi ,
i = {H, F },

(2)

t=0

where q(t, ωt ) is the Arrow-Debreu state price of ωt divided by the probability of that state
π(t, ωt ). The quantity Wi denotes the initial wealth of country i; here, we have WH = S(0)
and WF = S ∗ (0). This form of a budget constraint is widely used in the asset-pricing
literature; it is often called a “static” budget constraint, implying that all asset trades take
part at time 0 and no trades take place afterwards. The ability to do so, of course, requires
market completeness. If markets are incomplete or there are other frictions, one can still
write the budget constraint in its static form, but the state prices q(t) entering the budget
constraint will be country-speciﬁc.
A competitive equilibrium in this economy consists of state-contingent allocations (Ci , Ci∗ ), i ∈
{H, F } and prices (T oT, q) such that (i) both countries maximize their utility subject to
the budget constraint and (ii) goods and asset markets clear. We ﬁnd it convenient to solve
6

for this equilibrium using the Negishi method. We ﬁrst solve the social planner’s problem,
for a set of utility weights {λi }, and then pin down the weights λi ’s and the competitive
equilibrium prices. The planner’s problem is as follows:
max

∗ ,C ,C ∗ }
{CH ,CH
F
F

E

T
∑

[
]
∗
∗
β λ uH (CH (t), CH (t)) + uF (CF (t), CF (t))
t

(3)

t=0

with multipliers
s. t.

CH (t) + CF (t) = Y (t) ,

η(t),

(4)

CH∗ (t) + CF∗ (t) = Y ∗ (t) ,

η ∗ (t),

(5)

where, without loss of generality, we have normalized the weight on the Foreign country to be
equal to one. This problem can be broken down into a series of state-by-state maximizations
of the quantity inside the summation, weighted by the probability of the corresponding state
π(t, ωt ), subject to the resource constraints (4)–(5) for that state. The multipliers from that
maximization allow us to compute the state prices prevailing in the decentralized equilibrium.
The multiplier on (4), η(t, ωt ), is the price of one unit of the Home good to be delivered at
time t in state ωt . Therefore, the price of one unit of the numeraire to be delivered in state
ωt , scaled by the probability of that state, is
q(t, ωt ) =

η(t, ωt )
.
π(t, ωt )p(t, ωt )

(6)

In Finance, this quantity q is typically referred to as the state-price deﬂator. It is, of
course, nothing else than the marginal utility of the representative agent evaluated over the
consumption index (over the two goods) at the optimum. The terms of trade are simply
the marginal rate of substitution between the Home and Foreign goods, or, equivalently, the
ratio of the multipliers on the resource constraints:
T oT (t) =

η(t)
.
η ∗ (t)

(7)

The planner’s weight λ is determined by substituting the solution to (3)–(5) into either
country’s budget constraint (2).
We are now ready to price ﬁnancial assets in our model. By no-arbitrage, the prices of
stocks and bonds are given by their state-contingent payoﬀs, discounted with the state-price
7

deﬂator q:
S(t) =

B(t) =

1
Et
q(t)

[

T
∑

]
S ∗ (t) =

q(s)p(s)Y (s) ,

s=t+1

[
]
1
Et q(t + 1)p(t + 1) ,
q(t)

B ∗ (t) =

1
Et
q(t)

[

T
∑

]
q(s)p∗ (s)Y ∗ (s) ,

(8)

s=t+1

[
]
1
Et q(t + 1)p∗ (t + 1) ,
q(t)

(9)

where Et [·] denotes the expectation conditional on the information available up to time t. In
our baseline model, the bonds mature in one period. To price s-period zero-coupon bonds,
we obviously need to replace t + 1 by s in (9).

2.1.

Log-Linear Preferences

We now examine a well-known special case of our model which serves as an important
benchmark in international ﬁnance. In this benchmark, stock prices can be computed in
closed form. Suppose that the countries’ utilities are log-linear. That is,
ui (C, C ∗ ) = ai log C + (1 − ai ) log C ∗ ,

ai ∈ (0, 1), i ∈ {H, F }

(10)

This setup appears in Helpman and Razin (1978) and, more recently, in Cole and Obstfeld
(1991) and Zapatero (1995). For this economy, the expressions that we have presented
above simplify signiﬁcantly. Let us ﬁrst compute the multipliers on the resource constraints
of Home and Foreign (equations (4) and (5)). They are
η(t) = β t π(t)

λ a H + aF
Y (t)

and η ∗ (t) = β t π(t)

λ(1 − aH ) + 1 − aF
.
Y ∗ (t)

(11)

Hence, the state-price deﬂator is
q(t) = β t

λ aH + aF
.
p(t)Y (t)

(12)

Substituting (11) into (7), we ﬁnd the terms of trade:
T oT (t) =

Y ∗ (t)
λ aH + aF
.
λ(1 − aH ) + 1 − aF Y (t)

(13)

The reason why it is typically quite diﬃcult to solve for asset prices and portfolios in
macro-ﬁnance models is that the conditional expectations in (8)–(9) cannot be evaluated
8

explicitly. Numerical evaluation is not straightforward because future payoﬀs of the trees and
the state prices are endogenously determined in equilibrium. Solving for optimal portfolios,
accordingly, is also complicated because portfolio positions depend on the expected returns
on the assets. To this day, the main methods that we have in macro-ﬁnance for solving these
types of problems are the methods involving approximations around a deterministic steady
state. We have reviewed this literature in the introduction. The advantage of the setup here
is that there is a helpful simpliﬁcation and the conditional expectations in the expressions for
stock prices admit closed-form representations. In particular, the Home stock’s price turns
out to be
1
S(t) =
Et
q(t)
=

[

T
∑

]

1
q(s)p(s)Y (s) =
Et
q(t)
s=t+1

[

T
∑

]
β t (aH + λaF )

s=t+1

T oT (t)
β(1 − β T −t )
β(1 − β T −t )
p(t) Y (t) =
Y (t),
1−β
1−β
α T oT (t) + 1 − α

(14)

where in the last equality we have used our price normalization α p(t) + (1 − α) p∗ (t) = 1.
Similarly, the Foreign stock’s price is
1
β(1 − β T −t )
S (t) =
Y ∗ (t).
1−β
α T oT (t) + 1 − α
∗

(15)

Remark 1. Single consumption good. The majority of models of international asset pricing
considers single-good economies. Interestingly, multi-good frameworks can be more tractable
than single-good ones, despite the fact in single-good economies one does not need to solve
for the countries’ terms of trade. To see why, consider a variation of our model in which
both trees pay oﬀ in the same (Home) good and the countries derive utility only from that
good. In particular, we can set aH = aF = 1 in (10). This is the model considered in
Cochrane, Longstaﬀ, and Santa-Clara (2008). In this model, T oT (t) = p(t) = 1, with the
latter equality occurring because the consumption good is the numeraire. The state-price
deﬂator is now
1
q(t) =
.
(16)
(λ + 1)(Y (t) + Y ∗ (t))
Note that the world’s total output of the good is now Y + Y ∗ , and the denominator in (16)
reﬂects this adjustment. Let us again focus on the Home stock; the argument for the Foreign
stock is analogous. The price of the Home stock is given by the same formula as in (8), but
with p(t) = 1:
[ T
]
[ T
]
∑
∑
1
1
Y
(s)
S(t) =
Et
q(s)Y (s) =
Et
βt
(17)
q(t)
q(t)
Y (s) + Y ∗ (s)
s=t+1
s=t+1
9

In a closed economy, Y ∗ = 0, and so one can again readily evaluate the conditional expectation in (17). In an international setting, the task is far more complex. Even under the
most tractable distributional assumptions for the output processes used in asset pricing—
lognormality—the expectation in (17) is not straightforward to compute. This is because
the sum of lognormally distributed random variables is not itself lognormally distributed.
Cochrane, Longstaﬀ, and Santa-Clara are able to evaluate the conditional expectation of the
quantity in (16) only (i) under i.i.d. Y (t) and Y ∗ (t), distributed lognormally, (ii) for speciﬁc
values of the discount factor and the volatility of output, and (iii) in continuous time.5
Remark 2. Real Exchange Rate. The real exchange rate, e, is deﬁned as e(t) = PH (t)/PF (t),
where PH and PF are Home and Foreign price indexes, respectively. For the preferences that
we consider here, the price indexes are6
(
)a ( ∗
)1−aH
(
)a ( ∗
)1−aF
p(t) H
p (t)
p(t) F
p (t)
PH (t) =
,
PF (t) =
.
aH
1 − aH
aF
1 − aF
Hence, the real exchange rate, expressed as a function of the terms of trade, is
e(t) = T oT (t)aH −aF

(1 − aF )1−aF aaFF
.
(1 − aH )1−aH aaHH

We ﬁnd it more convenient to work with the terms of trade rather than the exchange rate. In
our analysis, we just keep in mind that there is a one-to-one mapping between the exchange
rate and the terms of trade. If we assume further that aH − aF > 0—an inequality that
will be satisﬁed once we assume home bias in consumption—the real exchange rate is an
increasing function of the terms of trade.
The explicit computation of bond prices and interest rates requires additional distributional assumptions on the output processes Y and Y ∗ . We do not make these assumptions
at this point, because, as it turns out, our setup here is not a good one for studying asset
prices. The reason for that is apparent from examining (14)–(15):
S(t)
λaH + aF
=
,
∗
S (t)
λ(1 − aH ) + 1 − aF

(18)

where the last equality follows from (13). The right-hand side of (18) is constant, and hence
the two stock markets are perfectly correlated! Cole and Obstfeld show further that the
existence of ﬁnancial markets does not matter in this model at all: even with no investment
opportunities available, the countries are able to reach a Pareto eﬃcient allocation through
international trade (in goods) alone; there are no beneﬁts to investing internationally. Even
5
6

See Martin (2009) for an important extension involving general utility and N trees.
See Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1996) for the details of this construction.

10

if we restrict the countries’ investment opportunities to stocks alone, their portfolios are
indeterminate because the two stocks represent the same investment opportunity. This
result has had big impact in the international ﬁnance literature. While quite stark, however,
the result is not robust: it holds only for asset-market economies with log-linear consumer
preferences in which all goods are tradable.7 Any departure from that setup leads to an
economy with regular equilibria. One such departure that maintains the tractability of
the setup but breaks the perfect correlation among international stock markets has been
suggested by Pavlova and Rigobon (2007), who introduce demand shocks.

2.2.

Log-linear Preferences with Demand Shocks

Consider the following modiﬁcation of the preferences speciﬁed in (10):
ui (C, C ∗ ) = θi (ai log C + (1 − ai ) log C ∗ ),

i ∈ {H, F },

(19)

where θi is a state-dependent quantity representing a country’s demand shock. We require
further that each θi is a martingale; that is, Et [θi (s)] = θi (t). A demand shock creates shifts
in the countries’ demand schedules which may or may not be related to supply. An example
of a demand shock is news about weather. This news is unrelated to supply news, but it
does aﬀect agents’ demands (e.g., for heating oil). The empirical evidence indicates that
demand shocks are important for reproducing the real-world dynamics; supply shocks alone
are typically not suﬃcient. For example, Stockman and Tesar (1995) calibrate preference
shocks to be roughly 85% of the size of supply shocks. Pavlova and Rigobon (2007) estimate
the model presented here and conclude that demand shocks have approximately the same
volatility as supply shocks.
The solution to this model follows similar steps to the ones outlined above. The terms
of trade, now reﬂecting demand shocks, are given by
T oT (t) =

λ θH (t)aH + θF (t)aF
Y ∗ (t)
.
λ θH (t)(1 − aH ) + θF (t)(1 − aF ) Y (t)

(20)

7
One attempt to “break” the perfect stock market correlation result and address the issue of portfolio
home bias with the introduction of nontradables has been made by Serrat (2001). However, Kollmann (2006)
argues that the claims to the trees producing tradables are still perfectly correlated, and so that model is
still not suitable for studying portfolio choice.

11

The stock prices also have a simple closed-form representation, the same one as that presented
above:
S(t) =

β(1 − β T −t )
T oT (t)
β(1 − β T −t )
1
Y (t) and S ∗ (t) =
Y ∗ (t),
1−β
α T oT (t) + 1 − α
1−β
α T oT (t) + 1 − α
(21)

Now the ratio S(t)/S ∗ (t) is stochastic, and so the countries’ stock markets are no longer
perfectly correlated. Bond prices and interest rates are still diﬃcult to compute in this
model, even under additional distributional assumptions. One way to resolve this technical
diﬃculty is to cast the model in continuous time.
To convey the economic mechanisms behind the formulas, we need to make the following
assumption:
Assumption 1 (Home Bias in Consumption): aH (1 − aF ) − aF (1 − aH ) > 0.
For this assumption to be satisﬁed it is suﬃcient that aH > 1 − aH and 1 − aF > aF , or,
in words, the expenditure shares on the domestic good for the Home and Foreign country,
respectively, exceed the expenditure shares on the foreign good.
The following simple table summarizes how the terms of trade and the stock respond
to movements in the underlying state variables and some important comparative statics.
Boldface in the table means that the sign obtains unambiguously; otherwise (also in green,
for emphasis), the sign obtains if and only if Assumption A1 is satisﬁed.
Eﬀects of

Y

Y∗

θH

θF

λ

On the terms of trade T oT

−

+

+

−

+

+

+

+

−

+

+

+

−

+

−

On the Home stock

S

On the Foreign stock S ∗

A positive output shock at Home (an increase in Y ) raises the dividend on the Home
stock and so Home’s stock price increases. At the same time, it increases the supply of the
Home good in the world. As the good becomes less scarce, its price falls relative to that
of the Foreign good. Hence Home’s terms of trade deteriorate and Foreign’s terms of trade
12

improve. This eﬀect of an output shock on the terms of trade is known as the Ricardian
eﬀect (Ricardo (1817)). The improvement of Foreign terms of trade increases the value of
Foreign’s output and hence the Foreign stock goes up. The response following a Foreign
output shock (a shock to Y ∗ ) is analogous. So, the stock markets always comove in response
to an output shock.
A positive demand shock at Home (an increase in θH ) creates an excess demand in the
world for both goods. Since Home has a preference bias for the domestic good, however, the
demand for the Home good goes up by more. This pushes up its price relative to that of
the Foreign good and therefore improves Home’s terms of trade. This eﬀect is best known
as the dependent economy eﬀect, highlighted in Dornbusch (1980), Chapter 6. The value of
Home’s output (dividend) increases while that of Foreign’s decreases. Hence Home’s stock
market goes up and Foreign’s stock market falls. Demand shocks thus cause divergence in
the international ﬁnancial markets.
A positive shift in λ represents an increase of the weight of the Home country’s utility in
the representative agent. This weight reﬂects the initial wealth distribution in the economy.
We leave this as an exercise to the reader to show that WH /WF = λ θH (0)/θF (0). An increase
in λ is then akin to a wealth (income) transfer from Foreign to Home. To develop an intuition
for the eﬀect of the wealth transfer on the terms of trade it is useful to recall the classic
Transfer Problem.8 A wealth transfer to Home raises Home’s demand for both goods. But
in the presence of home bias in consumption, demand for the Home good goes up by more.
Hence the relative price of the Home good increases, i.e., Home’s terms of trade improve, just
as in the Transfer Problem. Since Home’s terms of trade improve, the value of its output
(dividend) goes up, and hence Home’s stock price increases. As Foreign’s terms of trade
deteriorate, the value of that country’s output goes down and the price of its stock falls.
One of the reasons we highlight the eﬀect of a change in the planner’s weight λ here is its
relevance for models with ﬁnancial market frictions such as, for example, portfolio constraints
8
The original “Transfer Problem” was the outcome of a debate between Bertil Ohlin and John Maynard
Keynes regarding the true value of the burden of reparations payments demanded of Germany after World
War I. Keynes argued that the payments would result in a reduction of the demand for German goods and
cause a deterioration of the German terms of trade, making the burden on Germany much higher than the
actual value of the payments. See Krugman and Obstfeld (2003) for an elaboration and references.

13

or incomplete markets. One solution method, proposed by Cuoco and He (2001), involves
solving for a competitive equilibrium using a representative agent with stochastic weights.
Here, weights in the planner problem are constant an the allocation is Pareto eﬃcient.
A device involving stochastic weights is employed for solving for an ineﬃcient allocation,
occurring in models with frictions. The solution technique follows much the same steps as
the ones in our exposition above, except that a stochastic weight λ emerges in place of the
constant λ that we have here. This stochastic λ becomes a new (endogenous) state variable
in the model, and much of interesting dynamics are due to movements in this state variable
(i.e., endogenous wealth transfers). The ﬁnal step—solving for λ—is more complex than
in complete markets models, but still feasible. For more on this method and for further
references, see Pavlova and Rigobon (2010).

3.

Next Steps

The models we have referenced so far oﬀer important insights on how elements of international asset pricing, international trade, and open economy macroeconomics can be combined
within one framework and how they interact with each other. The literature is evolving in
several directions, and future research in this area is going to be active and fruitful. Although we have learned a great deal, many questions remain open. In order to tackle more
ambitious questions raised by the data and current events, the existing models certainly
require improvements along several dimensions.
First, the discussion of global imbalances, current account sustainability, and, more generally, of international portfolios and risk sharing requires the introduction of market incompleteness into the story. This direction is important not only because markets are generally
believed to be incomplete, but also because there is no role for policy under complete markets (an allocation is already Pareto eﬃcient). Having incomplete markets adds a layer of
methodological complexity. In his Ohlin lecture, Maurice Obstfeld remarks that “portfolio
choice under incomplete markets is largely terra incognita.” Developing such models and
understanding their workings constitutes frontier research in international macroeconomics
these days. In the standard textbook models, market incompleteness is due to the inability
14

to trade any asset other that an international bond. This is one form of incompleteness
that is certainly relevant, but in order to understand portfolio choices and how portfolio
income contributes to the current account, we need to consider a broader menu of ﬁnancial
assets. Otherwise, one can no longer address the question “What makes a country’s current
account path sustainable?”—the question that continues to be at the core of international
macroeconomics for more than 150 years now.
Second, many models that have been developed in international macro-ﬁnance so far feature pure-exchange economies. This view of production is too simplistic. The natural next
step is to include factors of production into these asset pricing models. Labor market considerations such as eﬀort and unemployment, as well as investment, are important elements
through which the real economy and ﬁnancial markets interact with each other.
Third, our models are missing a full-ﬂedged ﬁnancial sector, the importance of which has
been underscored by a series of recent contagious crises. The ﬁrst step could be to model
the ﬁnancial ineﬃciencies stemming from the organizational structure of the ﬁnancial sector
in reduced-form—for example, in the form of ﬁnancial constraints on certain market participants (margin constraints, VaR considerations), which may prevent them from supplying
liquidity at times when it is needed the most. The next step would then be to endogenize
these constraints—i.e., to model the agency problems that give rise to the need to restrict
traders to take unlimited asset positions and unlimited risk. The fact that constraints on
traders that we observe in the real world tend to bind at the same time, normally in bad
times, can emerge as one of the leading explanations of contagion and as a channel of propagation of systemic risk. Another set of interesting frictions includes enforcement problems
(as in, e.g., Kehoe and Perri (2002)) and ﬁnancial market deepness (as in Caballero, Farhi,
and Gourinchas (2008)). All these frictions are important and complementary, and exploring
their role constitutes a promising direction of future research.
Finally, so far closed-form solutions have been obtained only in models in which agents
have log-linear preferences. Although some closed-form solutions have been found for the
CES case (Coeurdacier (2005)), future research should continue extending the workhorse
model to include utility functions that generate more realistic price/dividend ratios, equity

15

premia, and other asset-pricing moments. Some promising work in this direction is by
Stathopoulos (2008). Of course, there is a natural limit to a set of models that admit
closed-form solutions; for the remaining, more general, models the literature will need to
rely on numerical methods. Problems involving portfolio choice are particularly diﬃcult
to analyze because for these problems standard ﬁrst-order approximation methods cannot
deliver desired results (see Devereux and Sutherland (2010a) and Tille and van Wincoop
(2010)). The literature is now testing the appropriateness of higher order approximation
methods, with the approximations taken around a deterministic steady state. Perhaps even
more complex methods (ﬁnite-element methods or projection methods) is what is required.
The ﬁeld of international macro-ﬁnance is a new and active area of research. There are
many ways in which one can push its frontier. Here we have highlighted just several possible
promising directions. We are sure that there are many more.

16

References
Adler, M., and B. Dumas (1983): “International Portfolio Choice and Corporation Finance: a Synthesis,” Journal of Finance, 38, 925–984.
Bakshi, G. S., and Z. Chen (1997): “Equilibrium Valuation of Foreign Exchange Claims,”
Journal of Finance, 52, 799–826.
Basak, S., and M. Gallmeyer (1999): “Currency Prices, the Nominal Exchange Rate,
and Security Prices in a Two Country Dynamic Monetary Equilibrium,” Mathematical
Finance, 9, 1–30.
Baxter,
M. (1995):
“International Trade and Business Cycles,”
in
G. Grossman and K. Rogoﬀ, eds., Handbook of International Economics, vol. III,
(Elsevier Science B.V.), 1801–1864.
Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2008): “An Equilibrium Model of
“Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 98, 358–393.
Cochrane, J. H., F. A. Longstaff, and P. Santa-Clara (2008): “Two Trees,”
Review of Financial Studies, 21, 347–385.
Coeurdacier, N. (2005): “Globalisation des Marchés de Capitaux et Choix de Portefeuilles
Internationaux,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales.
(2009): “Do trade costs in goods market lead to home bias in equities?,” Journal
of International Economics, 77, 86–100.
Coeurdacier, N., and P.-O. Gourinchas (2009): “When Bonds Matter: Home Bias in
Goods and Assets,” working paper, London Business School.
Coeurdacier, N., R. Kollmann, and P. Martin (2010): “International Portfolios,
Capital Accumulation and the Dynamics of Capital Flows,” Journal of International Economics, 80, 100–112.
Cole, H. L., and M. Obstfeld (1991): “Commodity Trade and International Risk Sharing,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 28, 3–24.
Crucini, M. J. (2008): “international real business cycles,” in The New Palgrave Dictionary
of Economics, ed. by S. N. Durlauf, and L. E. Blume. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Cuoco, D., and H. He (2001): “Dynamic Aggregation and Computation of Equilibria in
Finite-Dimensional Economies with Incomplete Financial Markets,” Annals of Economics
and Finance, 2, 265–296.
Den Haan, W., K. Judd, and M. Juillard (2010): “Computational Suite of Models with Heterogenous Agents: Multi-Country Real Business Cycle Models,” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, forthcoming.
Devereux, M. B., C. Engel, A. Matsumoto, A. Rebucci, and A. Sutherland
(2010): “JIE special issue on international macro-ﬁnance,” Journal of International Economics, 80(1), 1 – 2, Special Issue: JIE Special Issue on International Macro-Finance.
Devereux, M. B., and M. Saito (2006): “A Portfolio Theory of International Capital
Flows,” working paper, University of British Columbia.
Devereux, M. B., and A. Sutherland (2010a): “Country Portfolios in Open Economy
Macro Models,” Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

17

(2010b): “Valuation Eﬀects and the Dynamics of Net External Assets,” Journal of
International Economics, 80, 129–143.
Dornbusch, R. (1980): Open Economy Macroeconomics. Basic Books, Inc. Publishers,
New York.
Dumas, B. (1992): “Dynamic Equilibrium and the Real Exchange Rate in a Spatially
Separated World,” Review of Financial Studies, 5(2), 153–180.
Engel, C., and A. Matsumoto (2006): “Portfolio Choice in a Monetary Open-Economy
DSGE Model”,” working paper, University of Wisconsin.
(2009): “International Risk Sharing: Through Equity Diversiﬁcation or ExchangeRate Hedging?,” working paper, University of Wisconsin.
Evans, M., and V. Hnatkovska (2007): “Solving General Equilibrium Models with
Incomplete Markets and Many Financial Assets,” working paper, Georgetown University.
Gerlach, S., and F. Smets (1995): “Contagious speculative attacks,” European Journal
of Political Economy, 11(1), 45–63.
Ghironi, F., J. Lee, and A. Rebucci (2006): “The Valuation Channel of External
Adjustment,” working paper, Boston University.
Gourinchas, P.-O., and H. Rey (2007): “International Financial Adjustment,” Journal
of Political Economy, 115, 665–703.
Helpman, E., and A. Razin (1978): A Theory of International Trade under Uncertainty.
Academic Press, San Diego.
Judd, K. L., and S.-M. Guu (2001): “Asymptotic Methods for Asset Market Equilibrium
Analysis,” Economic Theory, 18, 127–157.
Kaminsky, G. L., and C. M. Reinhart (2000): “On Crises, Contagion, and Confusion,”
Journal of International Economics, 51(1), 145–168.
Kehoe, P. J., and F. Perri (2002): “International Business Cycles with Endogenous
Incomplete Markets,” Econometrica, 70, 907–928.
Kollmann, R. (2006): “A Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of International Portfolio
Holdings: Comment,” Econometrica, 74, 269–273.
Kraay, A., and J. Ventura (2000): “Current Accounts in Debtor and Creditor Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 1137–1166.
(2003): “Current Accounts in the Long and Short Run,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2002, 17, 65–94.
Krugman, P. R., and M. Obstfeld (2003): International Economics: Theory and Policy. 6th edition, Addison Wesley, Massachusetts.
Lane, P. R., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2001): “The External Wealth of Nations:
Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,” Journal of International Economics, 55, 263–294.
Li, T., and M. L. Muzere (2010): “Heterogeneity and Volatility Puzzles in International
Finance,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

18

Lucas, R. E. (1982): “Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country World,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 10, 335–359.
Martin, I. (2009): “The Lucas Orchard,” working paper, Stanford University.
Mendoza, E., V. Quadrini, and J. V. Rios-Rull (2007): “Financial Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances,” NBER working paper 12909.
Obstfeld, M., and K. S. Rogoff (1996): Foundations of International Macroeconomics.
The MIT Press, Cambridge.
Pavlova, A., and R. Rigobon (2007): “Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” Review of
Financial Studies, 20, 1139–1181.
(2008): “The Role of Portfolio Constraints in the International Propagation of
Shocks,” Review of Economic Studies, 75, 1215–1256.
(2010): “Equilibrium Portfolios and External Adjustment under Incomplete Markets,” working paper, London Business School.
Ricardo, D. (1817): “On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation,” Sraﬀa, P.,
ed., (London, 1951).
Roubini, N., and B. Setser (2004): “The US as a Net Debtor: The Sustainability of the
US External Imbalances,” working paper, New York University.
Samuelson, P. A. (1970): “The Fundamental Approximation Theorem of Portfolio Analysis in terms of Means, Variances and Higher Moments,” Review of Economic Studies, 37,
537–542.
Schornick, A. (2007): “International Stock Market Volatilities and Comovements: Eﬀects
of Diﬀerences in Opinion and Portfolio Constraints,” Ph.D. Dissertation, London Business
School.
Sercu, P., and R. Uppal (2000): Exchange Rate Volatility, Trade, and Capital Flows
under Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Serrat, A. (2001): “A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of International Portfolio Holdings,”
Econometrica, 69, 1467–1489.
Solnik, B. (1974): “An Equilibrium Model of the International Capital Market,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 8, 500–524.
Stathopoulos, A. (2008): “Asset Prices and Risk Sharing in Open Economies,” working
paper, Columbia University.
Stockman, A. C., and L. L. Tesar (1995): “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country
Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” American Economic Review, 85, 168–185.
Stulz, R. M. (1995): “International Portfolio Choice and Asset Pricing: An Integrative Survey,” in Handbook of Modern Finance, ed. by R. Jarrow, M. Maximovich, and
W. Ziemba, pp. 201–228.
Tille, C., and E. van Wincoop (2010): “International Capital Flows,” Journal of International Economics, 80, 157–175.
Zapatero, F. (1995): “Equilibrium Asset Prices and Exchange Rates,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 19, 787–811.

19

