                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE GENERAL THEORY OF EMPLOYMENT, INTEREST, AND MONEY AFTER 75 YEARS:
      THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING IN THE RIGHT PLACE AT THE RIGHT TIME

                                        Matthew N. Luzzetti
                                         Lee E. Ohanian

                                        Working Paper 16631
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16631


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Matthew N. Luzzetti and Lee E. Ohanian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money After 75 Years: The Importance
of Being in the Right Place at the Right Time
Matthew N. Luzzetti and Lee E. Ohanian
NBER Working Paper No. 16631
December 2010
JEL No. E12,E32

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper studies why the General Theory had so much impact on the economics profession through
the 1960s, why that impact began to wane in the 1970s, and why many economic policymakers cling
to many of the tenets of the General Theory. We discuss three key elements along these lines, including
the fact macroeconomic time series through the 1960s seemed to conform qualitatively to patterns
discussed in the General Theory, that econometric developments in the area of simultaneous equations
made advanced the General Theory to a quantitative enterprise, and that the General Theory was published
during the Great Depression, when there was a search for alternative frameworks for understanding
economic crises.


Matthew N. Luzzetti
Department of Economics, UCLA
405 Hilgard Ave.
LA, CA 90095
mluzzetti@ucla.edu

Lee E. Ohanian
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA, Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
ohanian@econ.ucla.edu
    The General Theory of Employment, Interest,
    and Money After 75 Years: The Importance of
      Being in the Right Place at the Right Time
                Matthew N. Luzzetti∗                Lee E. Ohanian†

                                November 19, 2010



1       Introduction
There is no doubt that Keynes’s The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and
Money (GT) significantly influenced the economics profession and economic policy-
makers. “Google Scholar” currently shows more than 12,000 citations to the GT.
To put this in perspective, Robert Lucas’s famous 1972 paper “Expectations and
the Neutrality of Money”, and Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott’s famous 1982
paper “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations”, both of which helped supplant
the GT as the dominant macroeconomics paradigm, and both of which were cited
by the Nobel committee when these economists won Nobel prizes in 1995 and 2004,
respectively, have combined citations that account for less than half of the number
of GT citations. And the GT’s citation count doesn’t fully reflect the fact that the
Keynesian revolution was perceived by many economists between the late 1930s and
1970, including Nobel Laureates Laurence Klein, Paul Samuelson, Robert Solow,
and James Tobin, as the only game in town for analyzing business cycle fluctuations
and for developing government policies to stabilize the economy. For much of this
period, Milton Friedman’s pathbreaking work on the quantity theory of money and
the associated tenets of monetarism took a backseat to the GT. Perhaps the best
one-liner that represents the influence of Keynes, at least in policymaking circles, was
    ∗
    UCLA
    †
    Department of Economics UCLA, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Center for the Ad-
vanced Study of Economic Efficiency, Arizona State University

                                           1
President Richard Nixon’s statement “I am now a Keynesian in economics” after he
eliminated the United States’ remaining ties to gold in 1971 [Pearlstein, 2008].
    This essay discusses the GT from the perspective of neoclassical macroeconomics,
which is the macroeconomics that in many quarters replaced the GT over the last 40
years. We focus our analysis on understanding the impact of the GT on economic
theory and on policymaking, why beginning in the 1970s research economists largely
abandoned the GT, and why some ideas from the GT continue to have significant
impact, particularly among economic policymakers.
    The GT was published during the Great Depression, one of the most devastating
international economic crises, and one in which the GT offered hope for understand-
ing what otherwise seemed inexplicable, and that also offered a promise for economic
policies that could restore prosperity. Our view is that the GT had such significant
and long-lasting impact because Keynes was in the right place at the right time,
involving two key elements. For at least some time, the evolution of macroeconomic
variables seemed to conform to the predictions of the theory, as wartime spending,
at least in the United States, coincided with a wartime economic boom, lending cre-
dence to the view that increasing government spending fosters higher employment
and output. And the relative economic stability of the 1950s and 1960s convinced
many economists that the tenets of the GT were responsible for curing depression
and providing an economic management blueprint for governments. The second ele-
ment is that fundamental econometric breakthroughs occurred just after publication
of the GT, and these econometric developments provided a methodological basis to
advance the ideas in the GT and provide a quantitative framework for analyzing
macroeconomic problems.
    But the same broad features that gave the GT such prominence in theory and
policymaking for so many years – methodological developments that made it feasible
to build and quantify economic models and the empirical features of the macroe-
conomies – were ultimately the reasons why the GT was replaced as the dominant
macroeconomic paradigm. In particular, the evolution of Muth’s approach of ra-
tional expectations [Muth, 1961], combined with the integration of dynamic general
equilibrium theory with recursive methods, made it feasible to develop formally spec-
ified dynamic macroeconomies with deeper theoretical foundations than was present
in the GT. And the recognition that supply-side factors were important for fluctua-
tions, together with the breakdown of the Phillips curve, also contributed to the end
of the Keynesian Revolution, at least among research economists.
    This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the elements of the
GT that we choose to discuss. Section 3 discusses why the GT had such a long-
lasting impact on economic theory and policymaking. Section 4 details the reasons


                                         2
for the decline of the GT among research economists. Section 5 briefly discusses
theoretical innovations in equilibrium macroeconomics that helped supplant the GT
as the primary macroeconomics paradigm. And finally Section 6 concludes.


2    Some Defining Features of The General Theory
Keynes certainly intended the General Theory to be just that – an overall framework
for understanding the macroeconomy, not just an analysis of business cycle fluctu-
ations. As in his essay, “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren”, Keynes
opined about what the world might look like in the future. Some of his long-run
assessments are of considerable interest in their own right, including Keynes’s view
that society might become sated with consumption of physical goods, which could
lead to solving the problem of scarcity, and the idea that society could run out of
profitable investment opportunities. The idea of satiation was discussed in Ohanian
(2008), while the notion that there was a finite number of profitable investments
sheds light on Keynes’s views about the social creation of new ideas, and their im-
portance for growth. That is, either society would run out of ideas, which is an issue
that has been explored recently by Chad Jones (2002), or alternatively, that ideas are
not that relevant for future growth. And while these and other long-run visions of
Keynes are fascinating, both for understanding Keynes and understanding his social
views, we focus on some of the most well known components of the GT, those which
are commonly cited as important passages and which have specific impact.
    These include the broad view that economic fluctuations are largely demand-
driven, that some of that change in demand is not due to fundamentals, but rather
“animal spirits” that impact expectations about future profitability, and that in
turn impact capital investment, that expanding government demand is useful for
stabilizing an economy and in particular helping to restore employment loss from a
recession, that wages are countercyclical, that there is a tradeoff between inflation
and measures of labor utilization, such as unemployment, that consumption, which
represents roughly 2/3 of output, is largely determined by concurrent income, which
leads to a multiplier related to government spending. All of these ideas have been
advanced along many dimensions by other economists during the heyday of the
Keynesian revolution.




                                          3
3    The Impact of the General Theory on Economic
     Theory and Policymaking
The GT had a major impact on economic thinking among economists and policy-
makers for a long time, and in some circles, still remains influential today. The
substantial and long-running influence of the GT is due in our view to a “perfect
storm” of timing of events that surrounded the GT and turned it into a paradigm
shifter that dominated macroeconomics until the 1970s. Specifically, the GT was
written during the Great Depression, a catastrophic episode in which the economic
theory of that time seemed to be of little use, and in which there was demand for
new ideas that could aid in restoring prosperity. And there are two developments
around the time of the GT that advanced its prominence substantially. One is that
the theory seemed to be consistent with the subsequent evolution of economic time
series, at least for a while. A second fundamental component is that the major de-
velopments in econometric identification and estimation of simultaneous equations
models made possible the large-scale econometric models which featured a number
of ideas from the GT.
     The GT was published in 1936, and seems to have been written in 1935, but it
is likely that Keynes was presenting these ideas before this, which is to say that the
GT had its genesis during the Great Depression. This is very important, because the
Depression was not only the most broad-based international crisis, involving most of
Europe and other advanced countries, but it was also the deepest and most persistent
crisis in many of those countries, including the U.S., Canada, France, and Germany.
     The persistence and depth of the Depression seemed to defy explanations based on
the equilibrium reasoning of the standard theory of that time, which held that price
adjustments would bring supply and demand into balance. But the market-clearing
implications of standard equilibrium theory seemed to have little to say about the
very high and persistent unemployment that characterized the U.K. throughout the
1920s and much of the 1930s, and for the U.S. for the entire decade of the 1930s.
     And while there is debate over how to measure unemployment in the U.S. during
this period, reflecting whether or not to count individuals on government work relief
programs, employment statistics clearly indicate more than a decade of labor market
weakness in the U.S. Cole and Ohanian (1999) report that per-capita hours worked,
including those who worked government jobs, had recovered very little by 1939 as
compared to the trough levels of 1933. Specifically, total hours worked per adult fell
by about 27 percent between 1929 and 1933, and remained about 22 percent below
its 1929 level in 1939, a decade after the Depression began in the U.S.
     Keynes jumped on the tension of using standard equilibrium reasoning to ana-

                                          4
lyze a prolonged depression in the GT by reviewing Pigou’s analysis of the labor
market. Pigou’s model, which was presented in his 1933 text The Theory of Un-
employment, develops a fairly representative model of the labor market by today’s
standards. The model features a standard labor-leisure tradeoff that is now embed-
ded in the familiar intratemporal first order condition that appears in many models
in which a household equates the marginal rate of substitution between consump-
tion and leisure to the marginal product of labor. But as Depressions stretched out
for decades across both the U.K. (whose Depression began after World War I), and
the U.S., it became increasingly difficult to reconcile the chronically persistent high
rates of unemployment with a theory that posited wage adjustments in response to
variations in nominal prices that ultimately reduced unemployment by equilibrating
labor supply and labor demand. Moreover, the persistence of high unemployment
that coincided in some countries with rising – not falling – real wages, seemed to
be well outside the bounds of equilibrium theory. The GT was written partly in
response to this tension about economic depression and equilibrium theory. Keynes
wrote:
    “This (specification of Pigou’s model) amounts, of course, to assuming that there
is no involuntary unemployment in the strict sense, i.e. that all labour available at
the existing real wage is in fact employed” [Keynes, 1936, p. 274].
    Pigou’s view was that wage adjustments would bring the supply of labor and
demand for labor into balance, just as was the case for any commodity in which
competitive market mechanisms were working well. This is where Keynes declared
victory, and in which there was not much of a rejoinder. How could Pigou’s equilib-
rium model, or any equilibrium reasoning that was founded on the view that prices
would adjust to bring supply and demand together, shed light on such deep and
prolonged depressions?
    Specifically, it seemed implausible that individuals were unwilling to work at ob-
served wages. And the fact that real wages were rising in some countries during the
Depression, including the U.S., made equilibrium reasoning seem even more off base.
The impact of the GT was partly due to the view that it provided a description of
how depression could be so deep and last so long, reflecting the idea that negative
expectations – animal spirits – reduced demand, which in turn reduced output and
employment. Perhaps even more seductive, Keynes offered policy prescriptions for
combating depression that not only promised recovery, but in some sense seemed
too good to be true. The GT argued that depression was the result of insufficient
spending, and that employment and output could be restored by increasing govern-
ment demand for goods and services. In this sense, higher expenditures could make
everyone better off. Fiscal policy seemed to offer a free lunch when households or


                                          5
businesses were not spending “enough”.
    In the absence of any other economic theorizing that could provide a framework
for analyzing the Great Depression, Keynesian economics ultimately became the only
game in town. Moreover, following the publication of the GT, U.S. macroeconomic
time series seemed consistent with the predictions of the GT. Specifically, World War
II seemed to provide a major empirical victory for the GT. A central component of
the Keynesian model is that deficient nominal demand is the key factor behind
recession and depression, and that expanding demand from government increases
employment and output. As government spending soared in the 1940s, rising from
about 16 percent of GDP in 1939 to 48 percent of GDP in 1944, employment, which
had been depressed for more than a decade, jumped sharply, with the unemployment
rate falling from 17.2 percent in 1939 to 1.2 percent in 1944 [Margo, 1993, p. 43].
    The presumption that higher government wartime spending expanded aggregate
demand, and brought the U.S. economy out of the Depression, set the stage for
increasing economists’ confidence in the Keynesian model. And data from the 1950s
and 1960s further solidified the apparent empirical support for the Keynesian model.
The 1950s was stable and the 1960s boomed. The decade-long depression of the
1930s never returned, and even recessions, when they came, were relatively mild.
    There was growing consensus that economic stability, featuring low and stable
unemployment, reflected the expansion of government economic management con-
sisting of activist monetary and fiscal policy. The 1960s were the heyday of the
Keynesian Revolution, which seemed well summarized by Walter Heller, a Univer-
sity of Minnesota economist and adviser to President Kennedy, who coined the term
“fine tuning” to mean the discretionary use of fiscal and monetary policy to keep the
economy as close as possible to its “full employment” level. And many economists
believed that the principles of the GT had conquered the business cycle, as unemploy-
ment fluctuated within very narrow bands. Between 1966 and 1969, unemployment
ranged between 3.4 percent and 4 percent.
    But perhaps the most fundamental component that fostered the longevity of
the GT were the breakthroughs in econometric methods that started in the 1940s,
shortly after the publication of the GT. These methodological developments were key
in advancing the qualitative ideas in the GT into quantitative propositions. More
specifically, whether a macroeconomic paradigm achieves long-run influence ulti-
mately lies in how it can be transformed from abstract ideas to concrete quantitative
applications. Kydland and Prescott’s (1982) real business cycle model had so much
influence because it came with a ready-made quantitative framework, featuring a
method for approximating recursive equilibria, choosing parameter values, and com-
paring model economy simulated time series to actual national income and product


                                         6
account data. For the GT, the econometric developments of the 1940s and 1950s
provided a quantitative framework for showcasing Keynes’s ideas and for developing
a full-fledged quantitative Keynesian toolkit.
    Much of the GT’s impact was based on method, perhaps as much from this
quarter as from ideas, despite the fact that there is virtually nothing in the way of
methodology in the book. Beginning in the early 1940s, the foundations for modern
econometric analyses of simultaneous equations models began to develop, including
Trygve Haavelmo’s 1944 paper which integrated more formally probability theory
with econometric methods, with a focus on simultaneous equations that later earned
Haavelmo a Nobel Prize. Just a few years later, the Cowles Commission published
important monographs in econometric theory that would become true classics, in-
cluding Studies in Econometric Method edited by William C. Hood and Tjalling
Koopmans (1953). This volume included major pieces such as Herb Simon’s “Causal
Ordering and Identifiability”, which still has considerable impact today, as it relates
to the causal ordering that identify many systems in the VAR literature, and “The
Estimation of Simultaneous Linear Economic Relationships” by Tjalling Koopmans
and William Hood. A second volume edited by Koopmans in 1950, Statistical In-
ference in Dynamic Economic Models, contained classics on identification by Wald,
Hurwicz, and Haavelmo, estimation, by Wald, T.W. Anderson, Koopmans, and Hur-
wicz, and precursors to issues about trends, including Hurwicz’s small sample bias,
and what is structural, including a classic by Koopmans.
    These pathbreaking advances were central for the continuation of the Keynesian
revolution and the impact of the GT, as they explicitly made it possible to take
the ideas from the GT and make them concretely quantifiable. These econometric
developments formed the basis of the main toolkit used in analyzing business cycles
in the 1950s and particularly the 1960s. The large-scale econometric models, devel-
oped in concert with the Federal Reserve Board, MIT, with Nobel Laureate Franco
Modigliani, and Penn, with Albert Ando, as well as the Wharton model under the
direction of Nobel Laureate Laurence Klein, were impressive technical feats, as these
models ultimately would include hundreds of equations, with each equation summa-
rizing demand or supply behavior in some part of the economy. These models were
used widely within policy-making circles and formed the basis of dozens of Ph.D.
dissertations at top economics departments in the 1960s. Chances are, if you ask a
macroeconomist who received their Ph.D. in the 1960s about their dissertation topic,
they will likely say “I worked on the ‘x’ equation in the MPLS model”.
    The breadth of impact that these models had can’t be overstated. Ed Prescott, an
Assistant Professor at the University of Pennsylvania, and his Ph.D. student, Thomas
Cooley, wrote papers on varying parameter regression [Cooley and Prescott, 1973;


                                          7
Cooley and Prescott, 1976] to try to formalize the ad-hoc practice of add-factoring in
these models, in which practitioners would subjectively adjust estimated equations,
often by changing the constant term of the equation, depending on whether the
forecast from that equation seemed implausibly high or low. These contributions by
Cooley and Prescott are hard to fathom today, given both scholars’ current views
towards Keynesian macroeconometrics. The contributions by Cooley and Prescott
are an important example of the interplay between the development of economic
ideas and the associated quantitative applications of those ideas.
    The large-scale models had the biggest impact among policymakers, and not
surprisingly so. Time series during the 1960s seemed to be consistent with the
predictions of the Keynesian model, there was a sense that fine tuning or more
broadly, aggregate demand management, had conquered the business cycle, and the
models were at the stage where they could easily be used to make unconditional
forecasts as well as the more challenging task of conditional forecasting, in which
policymakers would make forecasts under various “what if” assumptions, such as how
much would the unemployment rate change if tax rates, or other policy variables, were
changed? Quantitative analyses at virtually all central banks in advanced countries
were largely based on large-scale, Keynesian, econometric models. Throughout the
1960s, the legacy of the GT was vibrant in and out of policy circles, as the economy
continued to grow with remarkable stability. And for many observers, this stable
prosperity was due in considerable part to the tenets of the Keynesian model.
    To gain a better idea of how much the Keynesian model changed aggregate eco-
nomics, note that it was almost radical in its departure from standard, classical eco-
nomic thinking, which was founded on incentives, opportunity costs, and marginal
choices. In the entire GT, we found only seven references to the word “incentive(s)”,
no references to the phrase “opportunity cost” and few references to “marginal pro-
ductivity” outside of his discussion of classical economics.


4    The Decline of the Keynesian Model
By the early 1970s, macroeconomic time series in the U.S. and other economies be-
gan to evolve in patterns that were difficult to reconcile with the Keynesian model.
And much like the criticism Keynes leveled at equilibrium theory for failing to pro-
vide a framework to make sense of chronically high unemployment in the 1920s and
1930s, the 1970s began as a decade in which empirical criticisms were advanced
against Keynesian models. These critiques included the forecasting performance
of the large-scale Keynesian econometric models, the increasing recognition that
supply-side factors were central for understanding fluctuations, that Phillips curve

                                          8
relationships shifted in ways that were inconsistent with the Keynesian model, and
critiques regarding the theoretical foundations of the Keynesian model.
    The first significant empirical criticism came from Charles Nelson’s (1972) in-
fluential paper that showed that low-order integrated autoregressive-moving average
(ARIMA) models produced lower mean square error forecasts than the large-scale
Keynesian econometric models. This was particularly important, because ARIMA
models do nothing more than generate forecasts from historical serial correlation
patterns. This meant that a purely atheoretic model which did nothing more than
exploit historical patterns captured in autocovariances was more accurate than the
very detailed Keynesian models that were the industry standard. Nelson’s work,
and subsequent work on relative forecasting performance by others, including the
pseudo-Bayesian VARs developed by Robert Litterman (1986), led to considerably
less reliance on Keynesian models for unconditional forecasting.
    Additional empirical challenges with the Keynesian model began to emerge.
These included the fact that empirical relationships were changing in ways that were
at variance with the Keynesian model. Perhaps nowhere was the breakdown in rela-
tionships more evident than in the Phillips curve. Figures 1 and 2, which are drawn
from Atkeson and Ohanian (2001), demonstrate the significant changes in the rela-
tionship between unemployment and inflation that have occurred over time. Figure
1 shows monthly observations on CPI inflation and the unemployment rate between
1959-1969, the heyday of the Keynesian model. This relationship, which is the fo-
cus of Samuelson and Solow’s (1960) famous discussion of the Phillips curve, shows
a clear negative relationship between these variables, with a correlation of around
-.6. This pattern was interpreted by some economists that unemployment could be
permanently kept at low levels provided that there was at least some inflation. But
this pattern changes substantially after the 1960s.
    Figure 2 shows no relationship whatsoever between these variables between 1970-
1999, as the regression line has a slope very close to zero. Some economists tried to
salvage the Phillips curve by adopting a modification, based on the idea of a non-
accelerating rate of inflation level of unemployment, or NAIRU. This suggested a
relationship between the change in the inflation rate and the unemployment rate. But
as figures 3 and 4 show, there is no systematic relationship between these variables
either. Lucas and Sargent (1979) jumped on this empirical failure of the Keynesian
labor market, much as Keynes had jumped on the apparent empirical failure of the
Pigouvian labor market in the 1930s.
    Additional evidence that challenged the Keynesian foundation of the dominance
of the demand side of the economy is the empirical relationship between nominal
prices and real output and real wages and real output over the cycle. An important


                                         9
prediction of some classes of the Keynesian model, and one which was taken up
more broadly in other theories, including those of Lucas (1972), is the procyclical
behavior of prices. Figures 5 and 6, which draw in part from Cooley and Ohanian
(1991), show the relationship between detrended real GNP and the GNP deflator
between 1930 and 2010. Note that prices are indeed procyclical in the 1930s, which
is consistent with the GT, and they continue to be procyclical through World War
II, as the correlation between detrended output and prices is about .57 between 1930
and 1947. But after World War II, prices are countercyclical, with a correlation of
-.24 between 1948 and 1999, and -.53 between 1970 and 2010. Note that changing the
measure of prices to inflation does not change this very much, since the relationship
is .18 between 1970 - 2010.
    Figure 7 depicts the real wage, measured by real employee compensation, and

                                         10
real GNP net of an HP trend between 1948 and 2010. These data clearly show
a positive relationship, which indicates that when the economy is above trend, so
are wages, and when the economy is in recession (below trend), real wages are also
below their trend level. This stands in sharp contrast to Keynes’s view regarding
countercyclical real wages. It is interesting that the implied Keynesian pattern of the
cyclicality of real wages was addressed early on by Tarshis (1939) and Dunlop (1938)
who studied the cyclicality of real wages. Using annual wage data from the U.K. from
1860 to 1937 and monthly wage data from the U.S. from 1932 to 1938, Dunlop and
Tarshis found nominal and real wages to be positively correlated over this period.
In addition, Tarshis uncovered a negative relationship between real wages and hours
worked in the U.S. during the 1930s.
    While the Tarshis findings appear to be consistent with the Keynesian model,

                                          11
recent research paints a very different picture of this period. Specifically, Ohanian
(2009) and Cole and Ohanian (2004) present theory and evidence that government
cartelization policies were responsible for raising real wages and depressing the econ-
omy. Ironically, this cartelization view indicates that the depth and persistence of
the U.S. Great Depression were because of activist government policies that tried to
raise demand, and not because government stood on the sidelines.
    The facts that prices are typically countercyclical, and that real wages are typi-
cally procyclical, suggests that a substantial fraction of fluctuations may arise from
the supply side of the economy, which Keynes largely ignored in the GT. To address
the importance of one supply-side component, Figure 8 shows detrended real GDP
and detrended total factor productivity (TFP). The graph shows that TFP is clearly
procyclical, as TFP is above trend when the economy is above trend, and similarly

                                          12
TFP is below trend during recessions, with a correlation of .73 between these two
series. Of course, the fact that TFP historically is procyclical and relatively volatile
is what led Kydland and Prescott and the large body of research that followed to
develop the real business cycle program, in which fluctuations arise from a source
not considered in the GT.




    Taken together, this evidence indicates that supply-side factors are quantitatively
and systematically important determinants of business cycles. The growing recog-
nition of the importance of supply-side factors, which increased considerably in the
1980s and 1990s, reduced interest in the Keynesian model, as it is largely silent about
the supply side of the economy.

                                          13
   Economists also have critically examined detailed elements of the GT regarding
the foundations of consumption and investment. The GT posited that consumption
depended significantly on current income. Many developments of the Keynesian
model simplified the Keynesian consumption function to just this single argument:

                                       C = C(Y ).

    Friedman’s permanent income theory (1957), however, provided a very different
view about the determinants of consumption. Friedman’s model connects closely to
modern models of consumption, which stress the importance of intertemporal ele-
ments, the smoothing of temporary fluctuations, and the importance of wealth in
determining consumption. Friedman argued that consumption was largely deter-
mined by permanent income, or wealth. Friedman’s theory attracted considerable
attention, as it shed light on what appeared to be an anomaly from the perspective of
the Keynesian model. Specifically, the marginal propensity to consume was around
one in the cross section, but was significantly less than one in time series observations.
Friedman’s permanent income theory is consistent with both of these relationships,
as cross-sectional data tends to capture long-run features, while relatively high fre-
quency time series captures short-run features. In time series observations, transitory
income, which according to Friedman had little impact on consumption, is operative,
and thus the regression coefficient in the time series will be biased downwards, which
follows from the standard errors-in-variables problem in econometrics. In the cross
section, however, transitory income becomes irrelevant and the marginal propensity
to consume is significantly higher.
    In terms of investment, Keynes spoke about the importance of animal spirits
impacting the quantity of investment in physical capital. Many readers of the GT
interpret this as the notion that expectations can change suddenly and significantly,
which then leads to large changes in the quantity of physical investment. Keynes
wrote in the GT:
    “Most, probably, of our decisions to do something positive, the full consequences
of which will be drawn out over many days to come, can only be taken as the result
of animal spirits - a spontaneous urge to action rather than inaction, and not as the
outcome of a weighted average of quantitative benefits multiplied by quantitative
probabilities” [Keynes, 1936, p. 162].
    But is investment impacted in a quantitatively substantial way by large and sud-
den changes in expectations about the future? To address this question, we use
historical data from the United States to construct Euler equation residuals under
the assumption of perfect foresight. This provides a useful test of Keynes’s animal
spirits view, as the perfect foresight assumption means that investment takes place

                                           14
in a deterministic environment in which those investing correctly see the entire fu-
ture path of the economy. This extreme assumption regarding expectations is very
different from the Keynesian view, in which expectations change suddenly and dra-
matically over time. Under the Keynesian view, the Euler equation errors should
be very large and volatile, representing these large changes in expectations. More-
over, depressions should be periods with very large negative residuals, as this case
represents negative expectations about future returns to capital.
    To conduct this analysis, we use a standard model economy with separable utility
between consumption and leisure, log preferences over consumption, and in which
there is a Cobb-Douglas production technology. The Euler equation is:
                               γct+1
                                     = β[rt+1 + 1 − δ]
                                ct
which yields the Euler equation residual:
                                    γct+1
                           εt+1 =         − β[rt+1 + 1 − δ].
                                     ct
   We first consider the post-World War II evidence. In contrast to the Keynes
view of large swings in expectations of investors, the Euler equation errors are small
and appear to be uncorrelated. Figure 9 shows quarterly Euler equation residuals
from 1947 to 2010. While Keynes provides no benchmark for understanding how
big these changes should be, it seems difficult to interpret these changes as having
quantitatively important effects. Of course, postwar fluctuations are small - but what
about those during the Depression?




                                           15
   Figure 10 shows the Euler residuals for the Depression. The residuals are larger,
but they are of the wrong sign. Specifically, the GT implies these residuals should be
negative, indicating that investors expected low returns relative to the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution. Instead, the residuals are positive, suggesting that
investors were optimistic in expecting higher returns than those that materialized.




5    Equilibrium Macroeconomics
The Keynesian paradigm dominated macroeconomics, particularly in policy circles,
for more than 40 years. And despite the shortcomings of the Keynesian model noted
above, there has been considerable effort involved at resuscitating the paradigm (see
Gordon, 2009). But the Keynesian model as presented in the large econometric mod-
els, with hundreds of equations that were not microfounded, was not well suited for
the theoretical developments occurring in the 1960s and 1970s in economic theory.
Muth (1961) and subsequent research developed the theory of modelling expecta-
tions in dynamic settings. Lucas and Prescott (1974) and Mehra and Prescott (1980)
showed how to integrate infinite dimensional economies with recursive methods to
make it feasible to quantitatively assess fully microfounded dynamic stochastic equi-
librium economies. And this all came together in 1982 with Kydland and Prescott’s
“Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations”, which was about as far from the Key-
nesian world as you can get.
    Kydland and Prescott’s analysis was one in which fluctuations were entirely from
the supply side of the economy; there was no mention of monetary or fiscal policy,

                                         16
or unemployment, and in which the welfare theorems held, such that equilibrium
allocations were Pareto optimal. The many innovations in Kydland and Prescott,
including an algorithm to approximate the equilibrium, a procedure for choosing
parameter values, and a procedure for comparing the model to the data, led to a
paradigm shift. This work motivated a number of extensions of the Kydland-Prescott
framework, including the incorporation of imperfectly flexible prices and wages such
that the model could more closely feature Keynesian ideas (see Chari, Kehoe, and
McGrattan (2000)). Much macroeconomic research today takes as a foundation the
Kydland-Prescott model, even if the features of the model differ considerably from
Kydland and Prescott.
    Moreover, equilibrium macroeconomics has also addressed questions that pre-
viously were considered beyond its grasp. Specifically, equilibrium macroeconomic
frameworks are now being used to analyze issues that largely led to the abandonment
of equilibrium theory in favor of the GT, including major economic disruptions such
as the Great Depression or World War II. And equilibrium models are generating
very different answers for understanding these episodes than the GT.
    In addition to the work on the severity and persistence of the Great Depression
cited above (see Ohanian (2009) and Cole and Ohanian (2004)), more recent work has
considered the economic boom that occurred during World War II. McGrattan and
Ohanian (2010) study how various factors, including higher government spending,
impacted the U.S. economy during World War II in a purely neoclassical model. They
find that higher government spending did spur economic growth, but not through the
channels emphasized in the GT. Rather, the enormous resource drain of government
spending - which exceeded 50 percent of trend output at the peak of the war - led to
higher employment and output through large wealth effects. Specifically, the size and
persistence of the war reduced the present value of resources available to households
for consumption and investment, which then led to increased employment under
the assumption that leisure is a normal good. Thus, higher government spending
also expands employment and output in the neoclassical model, but the welfare
consequences of this spending differ remarkably from that in the GT. Specifically,
higher wartime spending - which contributes relatively little to private consumption
or investment - reduces welfare, whereas raising aggregate demand in the Keynesian
model when the economy is below trend employment improves welfare.


6    Conclusion
There is no doubt that the GT was one of the major economic events of the 20th cen-
tury, reflecting the genesis of the GT during the Depression, the subsequent evolution

                                         17
of macroeconomic time series that seemed to support the predictions of the GT, and
econometric breakthroughs that made the ideas in the GT quantitatively operational.
From the perspective of these two latter events, Keynes was in the right place at the
right time. However, this should not detract from the fact that Keynes produced a
framework that provided economists and policymakers with a remarkably different
way of assessing and fighting depression, which was in itself a major achievement.
From this standpoint, the impact of the GT, which dispensed with equilibrium ag-
gregate economics, was at least as important as the impact of Kydland and Prescott
(1982), which at some level dispensed with Keynesian economics.
    But some ideas from 1936 persist, at least in policymaking circles. In fact, some
of the forecasting models utilized by the Federal Reserve are in many ways similar
to the Keynesian models of the 1960s [Brayton, Levin, Tryon and Williams, 1997].
The notion of an inflation-unemployment tradeoff and aggregate demand manage-
ment to stabilize the economy remain at central banks, and the Keynesian vision
provides a well-established framework for carrying this vision on within the context
of policies that tie central bank behavior to the joint mandate of promoting both low
unemployment and price stability.
    Because of this joint mandate, it is politically unimaginable that a central bank
could ever respond to a crisis by indicating either that there was little they could do
to increase output, or that attempts to do so might make matters worse. The GT
will continue to have a large audience among policymakers as long as governments
are pressed to boost nominal spending during periods of crisis, whether or not those
efforts are effective.




                                          18
7    References
Anderson, T. Jr. (1950), ‘Estimation of the Parameters of a Single Equation by the
Limited-Information Maximum-Likelihood Method’, in T. Koopmans (ed.), Statis-
tical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc., pp.
311-22.

Atkeson, A. and Ohanian, L. (2001), ‘Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting
Inflation?’, Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Winter, pp. 2-
11.

Brayton, A., Levin, A., Tryon, R. and Williams, J. (1997), ‘The Evolution of Macro
Models at the Federal Reserve Board’, Unpublished Paper.

Chari V.V., Kehoe, P. and McGrattan, E. (2000), ‘Sticky Price Models of the Busi-
ness Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Problem?’, Economet-
rica 68 (5), September, pp. 1151-80.

Cole, H. and Ohanian, L. (1999), ‘The Great Depression in the United States from
a Neoclassical Perspective’, Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
Winter, pp. 2-24.

Cole, H. and Ohanian, L. (2004), ‘New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great
Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis’, Journal of Political Economy 112 (4),
August, pp. 779-816.

Cooley, T. and Ohanian, L. (1991), ‘The Cyclical Behavior of Prices’, Journal of
Monetary Economics 28 (1), August, pp. 25-60.

Cooley, T. and Prescott, E. (1973), ‘Systematic (Non-Random) Variation Models:
Varying Parameter Regression: A Theory And Some Applications’, in Annals of
Economic and Social Measurement, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., 2
(4), pp. 462-72.

Cooley, T. and Prescott, E. (1976), ‘Estimation in the Presence of Stochastic Pa-
rameter Variation’, Econometrica 44 (1), January, pp. 167-84.




                                        19
Dunlop, J. (1938), ‘The Movement of Real and Money Wage Rates’, The Economic
Journal 48 (191), pp. 413-34.

Friedman, M. (1957), A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Gordon, R. (2009), ‘Is Modern Macro or 1978-era Macro More Relevant to the Un-
derstanding of the Current Economic Crisis?’, Unpublished Paper.

Haavelmo, T. (1944), ‘The Probability Approach in Econometrics’, Econometrica 12,
July, pp. iii-vi+1-115.

Haavelmo, T. (1950), ‘Remarks on Frisch’s Confluence Analysis and Its Use in Econo-
metrics’, in T. Koopmans (ed.), Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models,
New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc., pp. 258-65.

Hood, W. and Koopmans, T. (1953), ‘The Estimation of Simultaneous Linear Eco-
nomic Relationships’, in W. Hood and T. Koopmans (eds.), Studies in Econometric
Method, New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc., pp. 112-99.

Hurwicz, L. (1950), ‘Generalization of the Concept of Identification’, in T. Koopmans
(ed.), Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, New York: Wiley and Sons,
Inc., pp. 245-57.

Hurwicz, L. (1950), ‘Prediction and Least Squares’, in T. Koopmans (ed.), Statistical
Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc., pp. 266-
300.

Hurwicz, L. (1950), ‘Least-Squares Bias in Time Series’, in T. Koopmans (ed.),
Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc.,
pp. 365-83.

Jones, C. (2002), ‘Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas’, The Amer-
ican Economic Review 92 (1), March, pp. 220-39.

Keynes, J. (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, New
York: Harcourt, Brace & World.



                                         20
Keynes, J. (1963), ‘Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren’, Reprinted in Es-
says in Persuasion, New York: W.W. Norton, pp. 358-73.

Koopmans, T. (1950), ‘The Equivalence of Maximum-Likelihood and Least-Squares
Estimates of Regression Coefficients’, in T. Koopmans (ed.), Statistical Inference in
Dynamic Economic Models, New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc., pp. 301-04.

Koopmans, T. (1950), ‘When Is an Equation System Complete for Statistical Pur-
poses?’, in T. Koopmans (ed.), Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models,
New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc., pp. 393-409.

Kydland, F. and Prescott, E. (1982), ‘Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations”,
Econometrica 50 (6), November, pp. 1345-70.

Litterman, R. (1986), ‘Forecasting with Bayesian Vector Autoregressions–Five Years
of Experience,’ Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4 (1), January, pp.
25-38.

Lucas, R. Jr. (1972), ‘Expectations and the Neutrality of Money’, Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory 4 (2), April, pp. 103-24.

Lucas, R. Jr. and Prescott, E. (1974), ‘Equilibrium Search and Unemployment’,
Journal of Economic Theory 7 (2), February, pp. 188-209.

Lucas, R. Jr. and Sargent, T. (1979), ‘After Keynesian macroeconomics’, Quarterly
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Spring.

Margo, R. (1993), ‘Employment and Unemployment in the 1930s’, Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 7 (2), Spring, pp. 41-59.

McGrattan, E. and Ohanian, L. (2010) ‘Does Neoclassical Theory Account for the
Effects of Big Fiscal Shocks? Evidence from World War II’, International Economic
Review, forthcoming.

Mehra, R. and Prescott, E. (1980), ‘Recursive Competitive Equilibrium: The Case
of Homogeneous Households’, Econometrica 48 (6), September, pp. 1365-79.




                                         21
Muth, J. (1961), ‘Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements’, Econo-
metrica 29 (3), July, pp. 315-35.

Nelson, C. (1972), ‘The Prediction Performance of the FRB-MIT-PENN Model of
the U.S. Economy’, The American Economic Review 62 (5), December, pp. 902-17.

Ohanian, L. (2008), ‘Back to the Future with Keynes’, in L. Pecchi and G. Piga
(eds.), Revisiting Keynes, MIT Press.

Ohanian, L. (2009), ‘What - or who - started the great depression?’, Journal of
Economic Theory 144 (6), November, pp. 2310-35.

Pearlstein, S. (2008). ‘Keynes on Steroids’, Washington Post, November 26, 2008.

Pigou, A. (1933), The Theory of Unemployment, London: Macmillan and Co., Ltd.

Samuelson, P. and Solow, R. (1960), ‘Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy’,
The American Economic Review 50 (2), Papers and Proceedings of the Seventy-
second Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, pp. 177-94.

Simon, H. (1953), ‘Causal Ordering and Identifiability’, in W. Hood and T. Koop-
mans (eds.), Studies in Econometric Method, New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc., pp.
49-74.

Tarshis, L. (1939), ‘Changes in Real and Money Wages’, The Economic Journal 49
(193), pp. 150-54.

Wald, A. (1950), ‘Note on the Identification of Economic Relations’, in T. Koopmans
(ed.), Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, New York: Wiley and Sons,
Inc., pp. 238-44.

Wald, A. (1950), ‘Remarks on the Estimation of Unknown Parameters in Incom-
plete Systems of Equations’, in T. Koopmans (ed.), Statistical Inference in Dynamic
Economic Models, New York: Wiley and Sons, Inc., pp. 305-10.




                                        22
