                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              HOW DOES THE BUSINESS CYCLE AFFECT EATING HABITS?

                                            Dhaval M. Dave
                                           Inas Rashad Kelly

                                         Working Paper 16638
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16638


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




The authors thank Shin-Yi Chou, Resul Cesur, and participants at the 2010 Eastern Economic Association
and 2010 Southern Economic Association conferences for helpful comments. The authors alone are
responsible for errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Dhaval M. Dave and Inas Rashad Kelly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How Does the Business Cycle Affect Eating Habits?
Dhaval M. Dave and Inas Rashad Kelly
NBER Working Paper No. 16638
December 2010
JEL No. I12

                                              ABSTRACT

As economic expansions raise employment and wages, associated shifts in income and time constraints
would be expected to also impact individuals’ health. This study utilizes information from the Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System (1990-2007) to explore the relationship between the risk of unemployment
and the consumption of various healthy and unhealthy foods. Estimates, based on fixed effects methodologies,
indicate that a higher risk of unemployment is associated with reduced consumption of fruits and vegetables
and increased consumption of “unhealthy” foods such as snacks and fast food. In addition to estimation
of the average population effect, heterogeneous responses are also identified through detailed sample
stratifications and by isolating the effect for those predicted to be at highest risk of unemployment
based on their socio-economic characteristics. Among individuals predicted to be at highest risk of
being unemployed, a one percentage point increase in the resident state’s unemployment rate is associated
with a 2-8% reduction in the consumption of fruits and vegetables. The impact is somewhat higher
among married individuals and older adults. Supplementary analyses also explore specific mediating
pathways, and point to reduced family income and adverse mental health as significant channels underlying
the procyclical nature of healthy food consumption.


Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

Inas Rashad Kelly
Queens College / CUNY
Economics Department
300 Powdermaker Hall
65-30 Kissena Boulevard
Flushing, NY 11367
and NBER
Inas.Kelly@qc.cuny.edu
“People may indulge themselves a little bit more when times are tough.”
-Jack P. Russo, investment firm analyst, quoted in Haughney (2009)

    I. INTRODUCTION

        As economic expansions raise employment and yield financial benefits, associated shifts

in income and time constraints would be expected to also impact individuals’ health. While it

may be intuitive to suppose that improved macroeconomic conditions would improve population

health due to rising incomes, the evidence is surprisingly mixed. A number of studies point to

health and health behaviors being countercyclical, or increasing during recessions. These studies

indicate that strengthened economies or income receipt are associated with increases in acute

myocardial infarction, mortality, alcohol consumption, smoking, physical activity, diet, and other

outcomes related to health.1 The effects are mainly temporary, and there is some evidence that

the adverse effects dissipate in the longer run. Xu and Kaestner (2010), for instance, estimate the

structural effect of wages and hours worked on health behaviors among low-educated

individuals, and find that an increase in working hours is associated with higher cigarette

smoking, a reduction in physical activity, and fewer visits to the physician. They also find that

increases in wages, due to expanded economic activity, are associated with higher levels of

cigarette consumption.

        Other studies find the opposite or no effect (Charles and DeCicca 2008; Dee 2001; Novo

et al. 2000). Sullivan and von Wachter (2009), for instance, use administrative data on the

quarterly employment and earnings of Pennsylvanian workers in the 1970s and 1980s matched to

Social Security Administration death records covering 1980–2006 to estimate the effects of job

displacement on mortality. They find that for high-seniority male workers, mortality rates in the



1
 See Evans and Moore 2009; Ruhm 2007; Gerdtham and Ruhm 2006; Ruhm 2005; Ruhm and Black 2005;
Dustmann and Windweijer 2000; Ruhm 2000; and Ettner 1997.


                                                                                                    3
year after displacement are 50%–100% higher than would otherwise have been expected. They

also find that workers with larger losses in earnings tend to suffer greater increases in mortality.

         The National Income and Product Accounts, maintained by the Bureau of Economic

Analysis, reveal a steady increase over time in real expenditures on food services (which

includes consumption at limited-service restaurants, such as fast-food outlets, and full-service

restaurants), with slight increases during downturns. (See Figure 1, Top Panel.) The correlation

between these expenditures and the national unemployment rate is 0.21 (1947-2007), suggesting

that unhealthier food consumption may be somewhat countercyclical. Similarly, expenditures on

food consumed for off-premise consumption (which includes purchases at grocery stores) tends

to be slightly procyclical.

         Prior studies that estimate the structural effect of individual work status or wages on

health outcomes fail to account for potential pathways that operate ecologically. For instance,

macroeconomic conditions may impact individual health outcomes or behaviors even if the

individual does not become unemployed or experience a reduction in earnings. Prior studies that

rely on a reduced-form approach, relating health outcomes to measures of macroeconomic

conditions, do capture all potential pathways but they have generally estimated a population

average effect, which can mask considerable heterogeneity. Reduced-form effects also often do

not shed light on the specific pathways that drive observed associations between macroeconomic

factors and health. While prior studies have considered health behaviors such as smoking,

drinking, physical activity, and preventive healthcare utilization, they have generally not

considered how individuals’ eating habits respond over the business cycle.2




2
 In addition to other outcomes, Ruhm (2000) does look at daily servings of fruits and vegetables, in addition to
grams of fat consumed daily, using 1987-1995 data from the BRFSS.


                                                                                                                   4
       This study contributes to the literature by addressing these limitations. Specifically, we

utilize micro-level data representative of the U.S. population from the Behavioral Risk Factor

Surveillance System, spanning 1990 through 2007, to explore the relationship between the

economic cycle and food choices. The focus on healthy and unhealthy food consumption is

policy-relevant given that caloric intake and nutrition are proximate inputs into obesity and

overall population health. If the economic cycle impacts individuals’ health-related outcomes,

then the effect would also be more easily identifiable in a statistical sense on health behaviors;

health outcomes and obesity, on the other hand, tend to be cumulative and may not respond

readily or over the short-term. We proxy the business cycle with area (state- and county-

specific) unemployment rates to capture the link between the risk of being unemployed and food

consumption choices using a fixed-effects methodology. In addition to estimating the average

population effect, this study also identifies heterogeneous responses across various demographic

groups and further estimates the impact for those who are predicted to be at highest-risk of

unemployment. Results indicate that the consumption of healthier foods such as fruits and

vegetables increases when the unemployment rate decreases, or that a healthy diet is procyclical.

While the reduced-form captures the net effect of unemployment risk on health behaviors

operating through all (and potentially competing) pathways, we also implement supplementary

analyses to identify the importance of specific hypothesized pathways. These models point to

reduced family income and adverse mental health as significant channels underlying the

procyclical nature of healthy food consumption.

   II. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

       The objective of this study is to assess the extent to which the risk of unemployment

impacts healthy and unhealthy food consumption. This question can be framed within a




                                                                                                     5
modified static version of the human capital model for the demand for health (Grossman, 1972,

2000). Grossman combines the household production model of consumer behavior with the

theory of human capital investment to analyze an individual’s demand for health capital. In this

paradigm, individuals demand health for its consumptive and investment aspects. That is, health

capital directly increases utility and also reduces work loss due to illness, consequently

increasing healthy time and raising earnings.3 The individual may also derive direct utility from

consuming high-calorie foods, though this may raise body mass index and adversely impact

health. Thus, the individual maximizes a utility function that contains health (H) and other

household goods (Z), in addition to caloric intake (F), as arguments.4

(1)     U = U(H, F, Z)

Utility is increased at a diminishing rate with respect to all arguments. Maximization occurs

subject to the following production constraints for health, caloric intake, and other household

commodities, each of which is produced using time inputs (TH, TF, TZ) and relevant market

inputs (M, J, X); E represents an efficiency parameter and is typically proxied by the individual’s

educational attainment.5

(2)     H = H[F, M, TH; E]

(3)     F = F[J, TF; E]

(4)     Z = Z[X, TZ; E]

Equation (2) denotes that health is produced with caloric intake, other market inputs M (for

instance, medical care) and time inputs TH (for instance, exercise). Caloric intake (or food

3
  Investment in health capital may also raise earnings by raising the marginal product of labor and consequently the
wage rate.
4
  Expanding the above model to an intertemporal context does not alter the main conclusions or the directions of the
comparative statics. See Grossman (2000) for a full exposition of the general intertemporal model. Also, see Ruhm
(2010) for an extension of the model to incorporate a dual decision-making framework based on neuro-biology and
behavioral economics.
5
  See Grossman and Kaestner (1997).


                                                                                                                   6
consumption) is produced with market inputs (J) and time (TF), as indicated in equation (3). For

simplicity of exposition, we assume that healthy food consumption on average is low in calories

and its production is more intensive in both market and time inputs, relative to unhealthy “junk”

food consumption. Equation (4) denotes the analogous production function for other household

commodities. All inputs have positive and diminishing marginal products with one exception; it

is assumed that (∂H/∂F ≡ HF) < 0 denoting that high caloric “junk” food consumption has an

adverse effect on health.6

         In addition to production constraints, the individual also faces income and time

constraints.

(5)      PMM + PJJ + PXX = W*TW

(6)      T = TW + TH + TF + TZ + TL

Equation 5 notes that total income (product of wage W and work time TW) is exhausted on all

market expenditures where Pi (i=M, J, X) represents the price of the market input. Equation (6)

notes that total time (T) consists of time at work (TW), time inputs in the production of health

(TH), caloric intake (TF), and other commodities (TZ), and time lost due to illness (TZ). Note

that investments in health reduce time lost to illness and therefore raise total available time for

other pursuits including work (∂TL/∂H ≡ TLH < 0); this is the investment return to health.

         Maximizing utility subject to the full income constraint results in the following first-order

condition with respect to caloric intake (F), equating marginal benefits to marginal costs:

(7)      UF / λ = [PJJF + W*TFF] – [HF (UH / λ)] + [HF (TLH)(W)]7




6
  More realistically, HF is expected to be non-monotonic, such that both very low or very high caloric intake has
adverse effects on health. The monotonicity assumption on HF is made for convenience and does not materially
affect the general conclusions from this framework.
7
  Subscripts denote derivatives with respect to the subscripted variable.


                                                                                                                    7
The marginal benefit of high caloric intake (“junk” food consumption) includes the direct

marginal effect of such consumption on utility (UF), monetized by the marginal utility of wealth

(λ). The costs of high caloric intake comprise three components. The first term represents the

direct marginal cost of caloric intake, which depends on market and time inputs. The second

term represents the monetized value of the loss in utility due to the adverse health effect. The

third term represents the value of the foregone time, as high caloric intake adversely impacts

health and increases the time lost to illness.

       Whether unemployment risk increases or decreases healthy food consumption (and vice

versa for unhealthy food consumption) depends on how unemployment risk affects the marginal

benefits and marginal costs of such food consumption. A higher probability of being

unemployed or reduction in hours worked (TW ↓) raises total available time but reduces income.

This tends to reduce the direct marginal cost of food consumption that is relatively more

intensive in time inputs and less intensive in market inputs. Noting that healthy food

consumption is generally more intensive in both market and time inputs relative to unhealthy

snacks and fast-food consumption, the effect is ambiguous depending on the relative intensity of

market versus time inputs. Greater availability of time tends to raise the demand for home-

cooked meals and healthy food consumption, but lower income tends to raise the demand for

cheaper fast-food and unhealthy food consumption.

       If married women increase their labor supply to compensate for the reduction in

household income due to their spouse’s unemployment or reduction in hours of work, then there

may be a decrease in effective available time if females are relatively more efficient in household

production; household income may increase or decrease depending on whether the wife’s

increased labor supply compensates for the husband’s loss in earnings. This shift in time and




                                                                                                   8
income constraints within the household would also affect the direct marginal cost of food

consumption.

        A reduction in wages during economic downturns also reduces the opportunity cost of

time lost to illness due to higher caloric intake and unhealthy food consumption (third

component of marginal costs in equation 7). This in turn would reduce the demand for healthy

food consumption and raise the demand for fast-food or other high-caloric unhealthy food

consumption.

        The marginal cost of food consumption is further impacted by any changes in relative

food prices over the economic cycle. In general, data from ACCRA do not show substantial

cyclicality in the relative price of fruits/vegetables in conjunction with the economic cycle. The

correlations between food prices and the unemployment rate are consistently negative, as

expected, since food prices tend to decrease during economic downturns and increase during

expansions. (See Figure 1, Bottom Panel.) Yet the correlations are very low, ranging from -

0.0117 to -0.2534 in magnitude.8 Hence, this is not likely to be a significant mechanism through

which unemployment may impact caloric intake. Nevertheless, we estimate models controlling

for food prices to assess the importance of this channel of effect in our analyses of potential

mechanisms.9

        The marginal benefits of unhealthy food consumption may also increase during economic

downturns. It is well-documented in the literature that unemployment leads to higher levels of

stress, depression, and psychological distress (Dooley et al., 1994). This may raise the marginal

utility of high-caloric unhealthy food consumption (UF). Studies have shown that individuals


8
  The ACCRA food prices we analyzed pertain to potatoes, milk, eggs, beef, steak, sausage, fried chicken,
hamburgers, lettuce, bananas, and margarine, for which we had the most observations.
9
  BLS price indices for various types of food generally fall with rising unemployment, as expected. See Christian
and Rashad (2009) for more detail on trends in food prices from 1950 to 2007.


                                                                                                                    9
who are depressed tend to consume more calories and consume greater amounts of junk food

(Wurtman 1993). While causality is difficult to establish in these studies, part of the underlying

mechanism may be consistent with the “self-medication” hypothesis. For instance, research has

shown that individuals with mental disorders are more likely to smoke and drink in order to

alleviate symptoms of mental distress, and there is evidence of a causal link from depression to

substance abuse (Saffer and Dave, 2005).

       Other specific mechanisms may further explain how individuals’ food consumption

responds to the risk of unemployment. For instance, loss of health insurance and reduced access

to care, as a result of job loss, may impact eating habits. Numerous studies have shown that

physician advice and interventions are successful in influencing patient behaviors such as

smoking, drinking, exercise, and diet (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 2003, 2004).

Reduced contact with physicians due to loss in coverage may lead to an increase in unhealthy

behaviors. On the other hand, the pure ex ante moral hazard effect operates in the opposite

direction; loss of health insurance may promote more healthy behaviors since the individual now

bears the full cost of illness and medical care. Dave and Kaestner (2009) show that these two

opposing effects are generally of similar magnitudes, at least among older adults, such that the

net effect of health insurance on health behaviors is close to zero.

       Some studies have also pointed to higher rates of watching television among unemployed

individuals (Raynor et al., 2006). This may raise individuals’ exposure to fast-food advertising,

and subsequently increase the demand for such unhealthy food consumption. Chou, Rashad, and

Grossman (2008) show that individuals’ fast-food consumption is indeed responsive to the

frequency of television-viewing and to advertising by fast-food outlets.




                                                                                                   10
        The above discussion is conditional on a given demand for physical health. Note that

caloric intake is both a consumption good providing direct utility as well as an input into the

individual’s health production. Thus, the demand for various foods comprises direct demand as

well as input demand derived from the individual’s underlying demand for health. If the

individual’s demand for health decreases with a higher risk of unemployment, then this scale

effect translates into a higher demand for caloric intake and unhealthy food consumption, ceteris

paribus. The literature has generally found mixed evidence with respect to the behavior of

mortality over the economic cycle, though more recent studies, as cited above, tend to find that

mortality rates, with the exception of suicide, tend to move in a procyclical manner. Rising

suicide rates during economic downturns may point to a reduced demand for health, at least

among the most vulnerable and affected populations. However, it is difficult to disentangle from

the procyclicality of other mortality indicators whether this reflects shifts in the underlying

demand for health or direct shifts in health behaviors with subsequent effects on health.

        Overall, the theoretical framework suggests that there may be good reason to believe that

individuals respond to the risk of unemployment by varying their food consumption due to shifts

in the marginal costs and benefits. However, the direction of the impact is ambiguous depending

on the relative intensity of time and market inputs in the production process and the importance

of other potential channels of effect. There may also be considerable heterogeneity across

different segments of the affected population.

      III. METHODOLOGY

        The first-order condition (equation 7) implies the following reduced-form demand

function pertaining to measures of food consumption (HC):

(8)     HCist = Β0 + B1 UNEMPst + Xist Π + μs + νt + εist




                                                                                                   11
The above specification denotes that food consumption for the ith individual, residing in

geographic area s in year t, is a function of the risk of unemployment (UNEMP) and other

observable exogenous characteristics such as age, gender, race, education, and marital status (X),

with ε representing an individual-level classical disturbance term.

       The risk of unemployment is proxied by the unemployment rate in the respondent’s area

of residence (state or county, in alternate specifications). Rather than the individual’s actual

unemployment status, it is this risk of unemployment that is the relevant and appropriate

determinant in the demand for food consumption. First, the individual’s actual unemployment

status is endogenous to their food consumption choices and other health behaviors. The use of

area unemployment rates bypasses potential non-random selection into actually unemployment

and shifts in the individual’s food consumption. Second, actual unemployment only partially

captures potential pathways through which the economic cycle may affect food choices. Even if

an individual is not actually unemployed, the economic downturn would be expected to impact

the marginal costs and benefits of caloric intake. For instance, as noted above, psychological

distress due to the risk of unemployment or due to the unemployment of a spouse or family

member may lead to a lower (higher) demand for healthy (unhealthy) food consumption. The

decline in household wages or labor supply, even if the individual remains employed, would also

be expected to shift the marginal cost of food consumption. Third, the use of area

unemployment rates more proximally captures the effect of the economic cycle since within-area

changes in the unemployment rate are strongly countercyclical. Individual shifts in

unemployment on the other hand are a function of the economic cycle as well as other observed

and unobserved individual-specific factors. Thus, the parameter of interest is Β1, which is the




                                                                                                   12
reduced-form net impact of the unemployment risk on the individual’s food choices operating

through all (and potentially competing) channels of effect.

       While the area-specific unemployment rate is plausibly exogenous to the individual’s

food consumption, the possibility of other cofounding area-specific factors remains. To account

for this “statistical endogeneity,” specifications control for area fixed effects (μs), which capture

all unobservable time-invariant area-specific factors, and time fixed effects (νt) to capture all

unobserved national trends. In addition, alternate specifications also control for state-specific

linear trends to account for systematically-varying unobserved factors within a given state over

time. Equation (8) is estimated via ordinary least squares, and standard errors are adjusted for

arbitrary correlation across individuals within a given area (state or county, in alternate models).

       The estimation strategy proceeds in four parts. First, we estimate equation (8) with area

and time fixed effects, alternately utilizing the respondent’s resident state- and county-level

unemployment rates to capture the risk of unemployment. Models are estimated alternately for

the full sample and for healthy individuals for two reasons. First, health status may be

endogenous to food choices; thus, restricting the sample to individuals in good health leads to a

more homogeneous sample and bypasses this endogeneity. Second, restricting the analysis to

healthy individuals isolates the direct demand for food consumption, whereas analysis on the full

sample allows the models to capture the input demand for food consumption derived from the

underlying demand for health.

       The parameter Β1, in equation (8), captures the average population effect of the risk of

unemployment on consumption choices. Since this average overall effect may mask

considerable heterogeneity, next we also estimate differential effects based on models stratified

across socio-demographic factors. Furthermore, the affected population – that is, individuals




                                                                                                    13
who are most at risk of unemployment during an economic downturn and therefore most

responsive in their consumption choices – is likely to be small. In this case the overall

population effect, which represents an intent-to-treat effect, substantially underestimates the

response amongst the affected population. Thus, we also modify the analysis to isolate the effect

of unemployment risk among those who are most impacted by it.

       We do so by exploiting the fact that certain socio-demographic groups (such as low-

educated individuals) are much more likely to become unemployed as the unemployment rate

rises in their state. Specifically, the following logit model is estimated to predict the

unemployment status of an individual residing in area s at time t, based on the area

unemployment rate (UNEMP), predetermined or exogenous individual-specific characteristics

such as age, gender, race/ethnicity, education, marital status, and health status (X), and

interactions between these factors and the area unemployment rate. Indicators for state and year

are also included.

(9)


The parameter α1 and the vector Σφ capture the impact of area-specific unemployment rates on

the individual’s actual unemployment status, allowing the effects to differ across socio-

demographic cells.

       The predicted probability (or propensity) of being unemployed captures variation across

individuals with respect to their risk of unemployment. Note that this propensity score is clearly

exogenous since it is a linear combination of the area unemployment rate and individual-specific

predetermined factors. Thus, whether or not the individual is actually unemployed, the

propensity score measures their proximal risk of being unemployed based on their socio-

demographic characteristics and their surrounding unemployment rate. We then estimate a



                                                                                                  14
modified version of equation (8) by interacting the area unemployment rate with this individual-

specific propensity of being unemployed (denoted RISK).

(10) HCist = Г0 + Г1 UNEMPst + Г2 (UNEMPst*RISKist) + γ HEALTHist + Xist Π + μs + νt + εist

Equation (10) is analogous to a difference-in-difference-in-differences specification, where the

coefficient of the interaction term represents the differential effect of the area unemployment rate

among individuals most likely to be affected, relative to individuals who are least at risk of being

unemployed. Specifically, the parameter Г2 captures the effect of the unemployment risk on

food choices among those individuals predicted to be most at-risk of being unemployed, and Г1

captures the effect of unemployment risk on food choices among those individual who are at

zero risk of being unemployed as predicted by the propensity score. As a falsification check, we

expect Г1 to be insignificant and close to zero since individuals who are not at risk of being

unemployed should not be affected by area unemployment rates. As a further specification

check, we expect Г2 to be larger than Β1 (from equation 8) in absolute magnitude since the

effects should be largest among the at-risk population (Г2) whereas Β1 captures the average

effect among all affected and non-affected individuals.10

         Finally, we implement an analysis of potential mediators to inform on the strength of the

specific mechanisms underlying the impact of unemployment risk on food choices. The baseline

specifications are parsimonious and only include exogenous socio-demographic factors so as not

to “over-control” for factors that may be potential pathways. In alternate analyses, we re-

estimate specification (10) by incorporating measures of actual work status, family income, food

prices from ACCRA, mental and physical health, and health insurance coverage to gauge the


10
  Since the propensity score is a predicted value, we also estimate models with bootstrapped standard errors (using
50 repetitions), which Heckman et al. (1997) and Dehejia and Wahba (2002) use in a similar context. Results are
almost identical, and doing this does not alter any conclusions regarding significance. Results are available from the
authors upon request.


                                                                                                                   15
extent to which the estimated effect of the state unemployment rate on food choices can be

explained by these mediators.

     IV. DATA

        Our analysis relies on the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), an

individual-level data set representative of the population of the United States. As the largest

telephone-based health survey available, the BRFSS has tracked health conditions and risk

behaviors for adults 18 years of age and older in the US. The survey is conducted by state health

departments in collaboration with the Centers for Disease Control. While only 15 states

participated in 1984, the number grew to 33 in 1987, to 45 in 1990, and to all 51 states (including

the District of Columbia) in 1996.11 More than 350,000 adults are interviewed each year, with

response rates hovering around 50%.12 The average number of interviews per state ranged from

approximately 800 in 1984 to around 3,500 in more recent years. These data are publicly

available from the Centers for Disease Control at http://www.cdc.gov/brfss, and provide

information on a variety of personal characteristics, including gender, age, education, marital

status, family income, and state of residence.

        Measures of food consumption are included, although not consistently. Moreover, these

variables are occasionally ‘module’ variables, asked of only a limited number of respondents,

rather than ‘core’ variables, asked of all respondents. Consumption of carrots, fruit, fruit juice,

11
   The following 15 states were in the BRFSS in 1984: Arizona, California, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Minnesota,
Montana, North Carolina, Ohio, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. In
1985, Connecticut, the District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky Missouri, New York, and North Dakota
entered the survey. In 1986, Alabama, Hawaii, Massachusetts, and New Mexico entered. In 1987, Maine,
Maryland, Nebraska, New Hampshire, South Dakota, Texas, and Washington entered. In 1988, Iowa, Michigan,
and Oklahoma entered. In 1989, Oregon, Pennsylvania, and Vermont entered. In 1989, Colorado, Delaware,
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Virginia entered. In 1991, Alaska, Arkansas, and New Jersey entered. In 1992, Kansas
and Nevada entered. Wyoming entered in 1994. Rhode Island, which entered the survey in 1984, was not in it in
1994. The District of Columbia, which entered in 1985, was not in the survey in 1995.
12
   Survey weights are included in the BRFSS to ensure that those included in the survey are reflective of the US
population. In addition, the study shows that means for those responding and the general population are
comparable. (See http://www.cdc.gov/brfss.)


                                                                                                              16
green salad, and vegetables are asked consistently in years 1990-2007, with the exception of

2004 and 2006. The survey questions are generally phrased as follows: “How often do you eat

(FOOD)?” Options are given for the respondent to record his/her answer in times per day, week,

month, or year. Answers are converted to times per year for the purposes of this paper. While

nutritionists caution using the terms ‘healthy’ and ‘unhealthy’ regarding foods in order to avoid

classifying foods per se in preference for a focus on a balanced diet, we use the term healthy for

the aforementioned foods as the food pyramid stresses their consumption. Moreover, most

Continuing Surveys of Food Intakes by Individuals show consumption of fats, oils, and sweets,

meant to be consumed sparingly, to be higher than recommended.13 Consumption of snacks,

hamburgers, hot dogs, French fries, and fried chicken is not as frequently observed in the

BRFSS, yet we also analyze these outcomes in order to compare these results with those of our

healthy food outcomes.

           State unemployment rates are obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Local Area

Unemployment Statistics (LAUS). An individual is classified as unemployed if he/she does not

have a job, has actively looked for work in the prior four weeks, and is currently available for

work. Individuals working part-time and discouraged workers are not included among the

unemployed. While more family members are likely to seek work during downturns and thus

increase the unemployment rate, there has been limited empirical evidence for this added-worker

hypothesis.

           In alternative specifications accounting for potential mediators, we also include measures

of actual work status (whether the individual is currently working, either employed for wages or

self-employed), real total family income, mental health (number of days in the past month that

mental health was not good), physical health (number of days in the past month that physical
13
     See http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=14392.


                                                                                                   17
health was not good), self-reported general health status (indicators for whether the respondent

reported general health as Excellent, Very Good, Good, Fair, or Poor), and current health

insurance coverage from any source, all derived from the BRFSS.

         Data on food prices are obtained from the American Chamber of Commerce Researchers

Association (ACCRA), a research organization based in Arlington, VA, available at the city

level.14 While there is some concern with aggregating these prices, as all cities are not included

in every quarter, state- and MSA-level aggregations have been used elsewhere (Chou et al. 2004;

Rashad 2007; Rashad 2009). In 1968, the first year ACCRA collected data, 147 cities were in

the sample, but reached 200 by 1978, 250 by 1986, and has exceeded 300 since 1990. As of

1999, ACCRA cities represented more than 70% of the urban U.S. population, including more

than 80% of the population in the 50 largest metropolitan areas (Council for Community…

2008). We first divided ACCRA prices by the ACCRA Cost of Living Index to account for

differences across cities, aggregated by state and quarter, then aggregated by state and year to

form annual state-level estimates for each price.

         We restrict the sample to individuals between the ages of 21 and 64 and further exclude

retired individuals from the analyses, in order to focus on working-age adults who have

completed their schooling.15 This yields a final sample size of about 1.25 million for the analysis

of healthy food consumption, and about 61,500 for the analysis of unhealthy food consumption.

Table 1 presents the means of the relevant variables over the sample period, for the full sample

and by employment status. The average percentage unemployed of 9.2% is higher than the

national average for the time period as it includes those not actively seeking work and those

14
   In collecting their data, ACCRA does its pricing in chain supermarkets and chooses the lowest price available (not
necessarily a consistent brand), which alleviates potential concerns with consumer substitution within a category.
ACCRA typically prices items during the Thursday, Friday, and Saturday of the pricing period (Council for
Community… 2008).
15
   Further restricting the age range to 25-59 does not materially alter the results.


                                                                                                                  18
unable to work. Individuals who are not unemployed in our sample report significantly higher

consumption of fruits, carrots, green salad, vegetables, and snacks. The raw statistics suggest,

therefore, that healthy food consumption is generally procyclical. However, the unemployed

also tend to somewhat older, have fewer years of education, and are more likely to be female,

unmarried, and non-White, which may explain part of the differential in eating habits.

Unemployed individuals further report significantly lower family income, are more likely to be

uninsured, and have lower levels of mental and physical health, all of which may be potential

pathways that mediate the impact of economic stress on eating habits. The multivariate models

presented next address these possibilities.

   V. RESULTS

       Table 2 presents estimates of the conditional impact of the state unemployment rate on

measures of healthy food consumption, based on equation (8). A higher unemployment rate in

the respondent’s state of residence is associated with lower levels of consumption of fruits, juice,

carrots, green salad, and vegetables. The effect is statistically significant at conventional levels

for three out of the five outcomes, and is jointly significant across all models at the five percent

level. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the impact is expectedly small since it represents the

average impact over all individuals; a one percentage point increase in the state unemployment

rate will reduce the annual frequency of fruits and vegetables consumption by between 1.3 and

2.5 times, approximately one percent of the sample mean.

       The effects of other factors are consistent with prior studies. The frequency of fruits and

vegetables consumption is generally lower among males, with the exception of fruit juice.

Healthy food consumption also increases with education, consistent with the hypothesis that

educated individuals are more allocatively efficient and tend to choose healthier inputs (Cutler




                                                                                                   19
and Lleras-Muney, 2006; Kenkel, 1991). Healthy consumption is also generally rising over the

life cycle, across the observed sample age range. There is some evidence that married

individuals may have a higher frequency of healthy consumption, relative to never-married

individuals, whereas those who are divorced tend to consume fruits and vegetables on fewer

occasions. Some significant racial and ethnic differences also emerge. Blacks tend to consume

fruit juice more frequently and vegetables less frequently, relative to whites, whereas individuals

of other race are generally found to have a higher frequency of all forms of healthy food

consumption. Individuals of Hispanic origin also generally consume more servings of fruits and

vegetables.16

         Table 3 presents models for measures of unhealthy food consumption. These estimates

should be interpreted with caution due to the limited sample sizes; as noted in the previous

section, measures of fast food and other forms of unhealthy consumption are available only for a

small number of states across a few intermittent years in the BRFSS. The estimated effects are

individually and jointly insignificant due to inflated standard errors and the lack of statistical

power. Nevertheless, the direction of the effects is consistent across all measures and suggests

that a higher risk of unemployment may raise the frequency of unhealthy food consumption by

between one-half to three percent. This suggests that individuals may be substituting unhealthy

for healthy food consumption during periods of high unemployment. The effects of other factors

are generally opposite in sign to those estimated for healthy food consumption, again suggesting

a substitution effect rather than just an overall decrease in the frequency of food consumption.

16
  All measures from the BRFSS capture frequency of consumption (standardized to an annual basis). Data on the
amount of consumption per occasion is not available. Unless the direction of effect for serving size per occasion is
the opposite of the effect for frequency and also larger in absolute magnitude, our general conclusions are not
affected. Studies, in the context of other forms of consumption, have shown that frequency and total quantity are
highly correlated (Thompson and Subar, 2001). We therefore interchangeably use frequency and quantity in our
interpretation of the effects. We also estimated models controlling for the individual’s body mass index (BMI),
since BMI may be correlated with both the frequency and amount of food consumption, to account for any
measurement errors. Estimates, with respect to both significance and magnitudes, remain robust.


                                                                                                                  20
For instance, males are found to consume more snacks, hamburgers, hot dogs, French fries, and

fried chicken in substitution for lower consumption of fruits and vegetables. A similar effect is

also found for low-educated individuals, who tend to consume more snacks and forms of fast-

food and fewer fruits and vegetables.

        The above estimates, being estimated across all individuals, may mask important

heterogeneity across sub-populations. Tables 4 and 5 therefore estimate equation (8) for various

samples stratified across additional dimensions. These stratifications may shed light on potential

heterogeneous responses and possible mechanisms at play.

        Table 4 presents estimates for the measures of healthy food consumption, based on

models stratified across socio-demographics and health status. Table 5 presents similar estimates

for measures of unhealthy consumption. Each cell represents a separate regression model and

reports the marginal effect of the state unemployment rate on the relevant outcome. Since the

demand for food consumption and caloric intake is partly a derived demand based on the

individual’s underlying demand for health, the first row restricts the sample to individuals who

report themselves as being in good health in order to bypass this channel. In addition,

individuals in poor health may be non-randomly selected into unemployment and unhealthy food

consumption.17 The impact of unemployment risk on healthy food consumption remains

generally robust to excluding individuals in poor or fair health, suggesting that the effect of

unemployment risk on the demand for fruits and vegetables is not confounded by shifts in the

underlying demand for health. The positive effects of unemployment risk on unhealthy food



17
   First, individuals in poor health may be non-randomly selected into a higher risk of unemployment and greater
frequency of healthy (unhealthy) consumption, which would attenuate (inflate) the effects if these individuals are
included in the analyses. Second, consistent with Ruhm (2007), reductions in mortality over economic downturns
may reflect an increase in the underlying demand for health, which in turn would increase the demand for healthy
inputs and behaviors. Thus, limiting the sample to healthy individuals bypasses this derived input effect on the
demand for healthy food consumption.


                                                                                                                 21
consumption (with the exception of snacks) become stronger, though this may indicate parameter

instability due to limited sample size.

       Rows 2 and 3 limit the sample to younger (ages 21-44) and older (ages 45-64) adults.

Unemployment risk significantly reduces the frequency of healthy food consumption for both

age groups in general, and there is some suggestive evidence that the impact may be slightly

larger for older adults. With respect to unhealthy food consumption, unemployment risk tends to

increase the frequency of snacks, hamburger, and hot dogs consumption more for older adults,

though the effects are not statistically significant. This may be due to several factors, including

the possible stress associated with recessions for older individuals, who likely have more

responsibilities and personal obligations.

       Rows 4 and 5 stratify the sample across gender. Males and females both respond to the

risk of unemployment by reducing their healthy food consumption. Females, in particular, also

respond by increasing their consumption of unhealthy foods, and the effect is jointly significant

across all outcomes.

       The final two rows present estimates based on models stratified across marital status.

There is suggestive evidence the married individuals have a greater response to the risk of

unemployment in terms of lower healthy consumption and higher unhealthy consumption; in

both cases, the effects are jointly significant at the five percent level. Income and time

constraints in addition to the psychological distress associated with the risk of being unemployed

are likely to be compounded within a household context, thus eliciting a larger response among

married individuals.

       One challenge in our estimation of the expectedly small average population effect is the

potential lack of statistical power. Despite the 1.25 million observations in the analyses of




                                                                                                  22
measures related to healthy food consumption, our main indicator varies at the state level. This

yields on average 816 state-year cells and points of variation on the state unemployment rate, as

the average model utilizes 16 years of data from the BRFSS. To address this issue, we exploit

cross-equation correlation in the error terms since outcomes related to various forms of healthy

(and unhealthy) food consumption are likely to be highly correlated for a given individual.

Indeed, unadjusted data indicate positive correlation across all measures of fruits and vegetables

consumption, and across all measures of fast-food and snacks consumption.18 First, we

transformed the dependent variables into standard normal deviates

[(Y-mean)/standard deviation]. Transforming the dependent variables in this way allows us to

obtain estimates of the effect of the state unemployment rate on healthy and unhealthy food

consumption using a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) framework, and in turn allows us to

test joint hypotheses across equations. All effects are measured as changes in standard normal

deviations of the dependent variables and we test whether the average effect across models of

healthy and unhealthy food consumption, respectively, is statistically different from zero.

           Table 6 presents these results. The p-value of the average effect is shown in brackets.

Higher unemployment risk (as measured by the state unemployment rate) reduces healthy food

consumption, and the effect is statistically significant across all samples. For instance, the

estimate for the full sample indicates that a one percentage point increase in the state

unemployment rate is associated with a 0.008 standard deviation decrease in healthy food

consumption on average. The effect is expectedly small since it is averaged over the entire

population. Similarly, higher unemployment risk is generally associated with higher unhealthy

food consumption (with the exception of males and unmarried individuals), although the effect is

significant only for females and for individuals in good health.
18
     Correlations range from 0.15 to 0.68.


                                                                                                     23
        The general pattern of results from the SUR analyses across socio-demographic groups is

consistent with those reported in Tables 4 and 5. Older adults and married individuals are more

responsive to unemployment risk with respect to the consumption of both healthy and unhealthy

foods. For instance, associated with a one percentage point increase in the state unemployment

rate, married individuals reduce healthy consumption by 0.009 standard deviations (SD) and

increase unhealthy consumption by 0.022 standard deviations, on average. Females are also

more responsive, relative to males, with respect to consuming unhealthy foods.

        Table 7 presents models based on an alternate indicator of unemployment risk, as

measured by the unemployment rate in the individual’s county of residence. These models

control for county and year fixed effects. While the resident county unemployment rate is more

proximate to the individual, it may also be less salient since individuals may choose to work in

other counties or relocate across counties within a given state.19 The general patterns of the

estimates remain robust across all outcomes and samples. Panel A indicates that a higher

county-level unemployment rate reduces healthy food consumption across all outcomes and

samples, though imprecise standard errors render some of these estimates statistically

insignificant. Panel B indicates a generally higher frequency of unhealthy food consumption

associated with a higher county-level unemployment risk, though there is heterogeneity across

the groups as indicated in the results based on state-level unemployment rates. The magnitudes

of these effects are considerably smaller than those reported based on state-level unemployment

rates. This is not surprising due to greater measurement error in county-level unemployment

rates and the ability of individuals to bypass high local unemployment by working or relocating

across counties.


19
  Relocating across states is less common. Data from the Census indicates that 86.7 per 1,000 population migrated
across states between 1995 and 2000 (Franklin, 2003).


                                                                                                               24
        The results thus far have represented the average population effect – that is, the intent-to-

treat effect, the magnitude of which is expectedly small since only a small proportion of the

population is likely affected by the risk of unemployment. Thus the average effect may be

masking much stronger effects realized over the affected population most at risk of being

unemployed. Table 8 presents estimates for healthy food consumption based on equation (10),

isolating the differential effect based on this risk of being unemployed.20 The coefficient of the

interaction term (between the propensity of being unemployed and the state unemployment rate)

represents the differential effect of unemployment risk on individuals who are most at risk of

being unemployed (as predicted by the propensity score) relative to individuals who are not at

risk of being unemployed.

        Panel A presents the estimates for the full sample. Across all measures except fruit juice,

unemployment risk significantly reduces healthy food consumption among the affected

population. It is validating that these effects are generally significantly larger in magnitude

relative to the average population effect. Among individuals at highest risk of being

unemployed, a one percentage point increase in the state’s unemployment rate is predicted to

reduce the frequency of healthy food consumption by between 1.9 and 14.5 times more in a

given year, relative to individuals who are least affected; this translates into a 2.1 to 7.9 percent

reduction in fruits and vegetables consumption (evaluated at the baseline means). The

coefficient of the state unemployment rate is generally insignificant and much smaller in

magnitude. This is again validating in that the risk of unemployment is not having much of an

effect on individuals who are not predicted to be at risk of being unemployed.




20
   We are unable to conduct analyses for outcomes related to unhealthy food consumption due to limited sample
sizes which leads to highly inflated standard errors and parameter instability.


                                                                                                                25
            Panel B addresses the possibility that there may be unobserved state-varying factors that

may be confounding the relationship between the unemployment risk and food consumption.

These specifications control for state-specific linear trends, which account for systematically-

varying unobserved state factors.21 Magnitudes of the main effects and standard errors remain

robust.

            Table 9 presents supplementary analyses of the potential mediators and pathways that

link the risk of unemployment to healthy food choices. To do this, we include measures of

potential mediators in specification 10 and examine the change in the estimate of the impact of

the state unemployment rate on healthy food consumption among those predicted to be at high-

risk of being unemployed (coefficient of the interaction between state unemployment rate and

the propensity of being unemployed). The first row presents the baseline estimates (also

reported in Panel A of Table 8) from specifications that only control for exogenous and

predetermined factors. In each subsequent row, we present estimates controlling alternately for

actual work status, real family income, food prices, mental health, physical health, self-reported

general health, and health insurance coverage. The final row presents estimates from the full

extended specification that controls for all of these mediators and pathways. The final column in

Table 10 also presents parallel estimates for an alternative indicator of healthy behavior,

measuring whether the respondent currently takes vitamins or supplements, as a specification

check. Similar to healthy food consumption, higher unemployment risk reduces the probability

of taking vitamins by about 3.2 percentage points (5.8 % relative to the baseline mean).

            Specifications that control for work status (Row 2) inform on the extent to which time

constraints underlie the link between the economic cycle and healthy food consumption. If

healthy food consumption is relatively more (less) intensive in time inputs, then it is predicted to
21
     Results are also robust to controls for state-specific quadratic trends.


                                                                                                     26
increase (decrease) during unemployment due to greater availability of time and a lower

opportunity cost, ceteris paribus. Shifts in household time constraints due to the substitution of

the wife’s labor supply for the husband’s unemployment may also affect healthy food

consumption. Controlling for work status causes the effects on fruits and vegetables

consumption to become somewhat more negative, suggesting that healthy food consumption is

relatively time intensive and that it may respond positively to the easing of time constraints. To

the extent that taking vitamins is not a very time intensive pursuit, the coefficient magnitude is

robust to controlling for work status.

        Specifications reported in Row 3 control for real family income and its square. The

effect magnitudes for fruits, vegetables, and salad consumption generally decline by between 30-

53%. This is consistent with these forms of healthy food consumption being superior goods that

respond to the drop in family income during periods of economic downturn.22 A similar pattern

is reassuringly also found with respect to taking vitamins.

        The marginal cost of food consumption is further impacted by any changes in relative

food prices over the economic cycle. Specifically, the price of fruits and vegetables tends to be

procyclical. Since the price elasticity of such food consumption is negative, it is expected that

controlling for food prices should raise the magnitudes of the adverse effects of the state

unemployment rate on healthy food consumption. Estimates from Row 4 are generally very

similar to the baseline estimates, suggesting that shifts in relative prices are not a major pathway

underlying the link between unemployment risk and healthy food consumption. This is not

surprising given that food prices are only weakly procyclical and are not strongly correlated with

changes in local or national unemployment rates.


22
  Separate specifications confirm that these measures of healthy food consumption increase with family income,
albeit at a diminishing rate, and that family income is negatively associated with the state unemployment rate.


                                                                                                                  27
       Estimates in Row 5 suggest that adverse effects on mental health and greater

psychological distress resulting from the higher unemployment risk is a significant pathway

underlying the effects. Controlling for measures of mental health, the coefficient magnitudes on

fruits, vegetables and salad consumption decline (become less negative) by between 11-80%.

       The next two rows alternately control for measures of physical health and self-reported

general health status. If the demand for health is countercyclical (procyclical), then controlling

for health status should make the effect magnitudes more (less) negative. We find this to be the

case for vegetables consumption and for consuming vitamins. Shifts in magnitudes for the other

measures are more inconsistent. The literature on how health status changes over the economic

cycle is generally mixed, with Ruhm (2007) finding that mortality is countercyclical (with the

exception of suicide) and Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) finding the opposite.

       Unemployment may also be associated with loss of health insurance coverage, which

may in turn increase healthy food consumption through a pure ex ante moral hazard effect or

decrease healthy food consumption by reducing physician contact since physicians have been

shown to be instrumental in encouraging healthy behaviors. Dave and Kaestner (2009) show

that for some unhealthy behaviors, these two effects are roughly of equal and opposite

magnitudes and cancel. Estimates reported in Row 8 are based on specifications that control for

health insurance coverage. For fruits and salad consumption, the coefficients remain robust; for

the consumption of fruit juice and carrots, the coefficients become less negative / more positive;

and for the consumption of vegetables, the coefficient becomes more negative. In general, there

is no consistent evidence that insurance coverage is a substantial mediating pathway.

       The final set of specifications (row 9) controls for all of these mediating variables

simultaneously. The coefficient magnitudes decline by between 17-52%, with most of this




                                                                                                 28
decline being driven by two pathways: declines in real income and adverse mental health. The

parallel pattern of effects for an alternate but related healthy behavior, as reflected in the

consumption of vitamins, also adds a note of confidence to the estimates. However, the fact that

a significant negative effect on healthy food consumption still remains even after accounting for

these mediator variables suggests that other mechanisms may also be at play which we are

unable to examine (for instance, relating to increases in television watching, complementarity

between leisure and food consumption, shifts in activities and resources within the household,

changes in hours worked, and shifts in risk or time preference). Some of the mediator variables

that we examine are also only crudely measured in the BRFSS; for instance, while we observe

total family income and whether the individual is currently working, personal income and actual

hours worked are not observed. Finally, these estimates should be interpreted with caution since

some of these mediator variables are simultaneously determined with food choice. Overall, the

pattern of estimates reported in Table 10 is nevertheless validating in that it suggests that at least

part of the empirical link between the state unemployment rate and healthy food consumption

reflects theoretically plausible pathways as hypothesized earlier.

   VI. DISCUSSION

       This study analyzes the effects of the business cycle, as proxied by area unemployment

rates, on individuals’ food consumption choices. A variety of methodological approaches is used

to address the possible endogeneity of unemployment: state and county fixed effects to address

area-specific unobserved time-invariant characteristics, state-specific trends to address

systematically-varying unobservables over time within states, and seemingly unrelated

regressions to account for the correlation across errors and data limitations. The specifications

control for various confounding factors, and supplementary analyses also explore hypothesized




                                                                                                    29
mediating pathways. In addition to an estimation of the average population effect,

heterogeneous responses are also identified through detailed sample stratifications and by

isolating the effect for those predicted to be at highest risk of unemployment based on their

socioeconomic characteristics.

       Results, which remain robust across various specifications, indicate that a higher risk of

unemployment is associated with reduced consumption of fruits and vegetables. Estimates also

suggest substitution into increased consumption of unhealthy foods such as snacks and fast food,

although this portion of the analysis is limited in statistical power. Specifically, among those

who are predicted to be at the highest risk of unemployment, a one percentage point increase in

the resident state’s unemployment rate is associated with a 2-4% reduction in the frequency of

fruits and vegetables consumption, and an 8% reduction in the consumption of salad. Since

December of 2007 (the start of the latest recession), the national unemployment rate doubled

from 5% to 10% over the following two years. The results from this study suggest that the

frequency of fruits and vegetables consumption would decline by between 10-20 % among the

most vulnerable populations such as low-educated individuals, ceteris paribus. Based on the

stratified analyses, the impact may also be somewhat higher among married individuals and

older adults.

       Models further point to reduced family income and adverse mental health as significant

pathways underlying the procyclical nature of healthy food consumption. This suggests that

income-support programs, counseling, and access to mental health services, among those at

highest risk of being unemployed, may be health promoting. The Patient Protection and

Affordable Care Act, which goes into effect in 2014, views mental health coverage as an

essential health benefit, and requires insurers to provide coverage at parity with coverage




                                                                                                   30
provided for other medical conditions.23 Such coverage, by improving access to mental health

services, may also moderate declines in healthy behaviors during recessions.

        Although the results of this study should be interpreted with caution due to the

aforementioned data limitations, they suggest that individuals do not necessarily choose healthier

lifestyles during downturns for reasons other than investing in health in order to return to the

labor force. Faced with constraints, individuals may in fact consume fewer healthy foods, which

will likely have adverse effects on long-term health.24




23
   Between 2010 and 2014, the 2008 Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act applies, which requires mental
health and substance abuse parity with respect to financial requirements and treatment benefits. However, the 2008
Act applies only to plans that already include mental health coverage in their benefits package and does not mandate
coverage if not already offered. See Dave and Mukerjee (Forthcoming).
24
   The USDA recommends two and a half to three cups of vegetables on a daily basis for adults
(http://www.mypyramid.gov). In our sample, the daily average for vegetables is 1.18 servings for the unemployed,
but still only 1.25 servings for those not unemployed, suggesting that vegetable intake should be encouraged.


                                                                                                                 31
REFERENCES

Charles, K. K., Decicca, P. Local Labor Market Fluctuations and Health: Is There a Connection
       and for Whom? Journal of Health Economics 27(6): 1532-1550; 2008.

Chou, S., Grossman, M., Saffer, H., 2004. An economic analysis of adult obesity: results from
       the behavioral risk factor surveillance system. Journal of Health Economics. 23, 565–
       587.

Christian Thomas J.; Rashad I. Trends in U.S. Food Prices, 1950-2007. Economics and Human
        Biology, Vol. 7(1), 113-120, (March 2009).

Council for Community and Economic Research, 2008. ACCRA Cost of Living Index Manual.
      Available at: http://www.coli.org/surveyforms/colimanual.pdf. [Accessed 15 July 2008.]

Cleveland, Linda E., Annetta J. Cook, John W. Wilson, James E. Friday, Jane W. Ho, and
       Parshotam S. Chahil. Pyramid Servings Data: Results from USDA’s 1994 Continuing
       Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals. Agricultural Research Service. U.S. Department
       of Agriculture. March 1997.

Dave D.; Mukerjee S. Mental Health Parity Legislation, Cost-Sharing and Substance Abuse
      Treatment Admissions. Health Economics, Forthcoming.

Dave D.; Kaestner R. Health Insurance and Ex Ante Moral Hazard : Evidence from Medicare.
      International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 9, No. 4 (December 2009)
      367-390.

Davidson R, MacKinnon J. Estimation and Inference in Econometrics. New York: Oxford, 1993.

Dee, T. S.: Alcohol Abuse and Economic Conditions: Evidence from Repeated Cross-Sections of
       Individual-Level Data. Health Economics. 10(3); 257-70: 2001.

Dehejia, Rajeev H., and Sadek Wahba. Propensity Score-Matching Algorithms for Non-
       Experimental Causal Studies. The Review of Economics and Statistics, February 2002,
       84(1): 151–161.

Dooley, David; Catalano, Ralph; Wilson, Georjeanna. Depression and unemployment: Panel
      findings from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area study. American Journal of Community
      Psychology, 22(6): 745-765, December 1994.

Dustmann, C., Windeijer, F.: Wages and the Demand for Health – A Lifecycle Analysis. IZA
      Discussion paper; 171: 2000.

Ettner, S. L.: Measuring the Human Cost of A Weak Economy: Does Unemployment Lead to
        Alcohol Abuse? Social Science and Medicine. 44(2); 251-60: 1997.




                                                                                                32
Evans, William N., and Timothy J. Moore. 2009. The Short-Term Mortality Consequences of
       Income Receipt. Working Paper, Department of Economics and Econometrics,
       University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN.

Franklin, Rachel S. Domestic Migration Across Regions, Divisions, and States: 1995 to 2000,
       Census 2000 Special Reports, U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics
       Administration, U.S. Census Bureau, Issued August 2003.

Gerdtham, Ulf-G. & Ruhm, Christopher J., 2006. Deaths Rise in Good Economic Times:
      Evidence From the OECD. Economics and Human Biology, Elsevier, vol. 4(3), pages
      298-316, December.

Haughney Christine. When Economy Sours, Tootsie Rolls Soothe Souls. New York Times,
      March 23, 2009.

Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, and Petra Todd, "Matching as an Econometric Evaluation
     Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme," Review of Economic
     Studies 64:4 (October 1997), 605–654.

Novo M, A Hammarström and U Janlert. Health hazards of unemployment–only a boom
      phenomenon? A study of young men and women during times of prosperity and times of
      recession. Public Health. Volume 114, Issue 1, January 2000, Pages 25-29.

Rashad, Inas. Associations of Cycling With Urban Sprawl and the Gasoline Price. American
      Journal of Health Promotion, 24(1): 27-36, Sept/Oct 2009.

Rashad, Inas. 2007. Obesity and diabetes: the roles that prices and policies play. Advances in
      Health Economics and Health Services Research, 17, 113-128.

Raynor, Douglas A.; Phelan, Suzanne; Hill, James O.; Wing, Rena R. Television Viewing and
      Long-Term Weight Maintenance: Results from the National Weight Control Registry.
      Obesity (2006) 14, 1816–1824; doi: 10.1038/oby.2006.209.

Ruhm, Christopher. Understanding Overeating and Obesity. National Bureau of Economic
      Research Working Paper 16149, (July 2010).

Ruhm, Christopher. A Healthy Economy Can Break Your Heart. Demography 44, 4 (November
      2007): 829-848.

Ruhm, Christopher. Macroeconomic Conditions, Health and Mortality. Elgar Companion to
      Health Economics. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2006.

Ruhm, Christopher. Healthy living in hard times. Journal of Health Economics. Volume 24,
      Issue 2, March 2005, Pages 341-363

Ruhm, Christopher. Are Recessions Good for Your Health? The Quarterly Journal of
      Economics. May 2000, Vol. 115, No. 2, Pages 617-650.



                                                                                                 33
Saffer H.; Dave D. Mental Illness and the Demand for Alcohol, Cocaine, and Cigarettes.
       Economic Inquiry, 43, No. 2 (2005), 229-246.

Sullivan, Daniel; von Wachter, Till. Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
       Administrative Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 124, No. 3, Pages 1265-1306,
       August 2009.

Thompson FE, Subar AF. Dietary assessment methodology. In: Coulson AM, Rock CL, Monsen
     ER, eds. Nutrition in the Prevention and Treatment of Disease. San Diego, Calif:
     Academic Press; 2001:3-30.

Wurtman, Judith J. Depression and weight gain: the serotonin connection. Journal of Affective
     Disorders, Volume 29, Issues 2-3, October-November 1993, Pages 183-192.

Xu Xin; Kaestner Robert. 2010. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
      15737.




                                                                                                34
                                                   Table 1
                                               Summary Statistics

                                                                                                               Not
              Variable                        Description                         Full Sample Unemployed
                                                                                                           Unemployed
State Unemp. Rate        State unemployment rate                                    5.568***     5.635        5.562
                                                                                     (1.417)    (1.382)      (1.422)
Unemployed               Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent             0.092
                                                                                                  ---          ---
                         is out of work or unable to work                            (0.289)
Fruits                   Annual consumption of fruits                             289.759***    270.285      291.917
                                                                                   (305.511)   (322.195)    (303.742)
Fruit Juice              Annual consumption of fruit juice                        248.672***    255.301      247.929
                                                                                   (303.700)   (363.388)    (296.665)
Carrots                  Annual consumption of carrots                            96.096***      92.465       96.510
                                                                                   (154.792)   (167.589)    (153.397)
Green Salad              Annual consumption of green salad                        181.709***    160.150      184.050
                                                                                   (187.952)   (189.509)    (187.188)
Vegetables               Annual servings of vegetables (not carrots, potatoes,    455.376***    430.526      457.657
                         or salad)                                                 (346.701)   (353.303)    (345.636)
Snacks                   Annual consumption of snacks                             119.856***    102.725      121.120
                                                                                   (167.966)   (150.884)    (169.109)
Hamburgers               Annual consumption of hamburgers, cheeseburgers,            76.944      79.527       76.804
                         or meatloaf                                                (91.634)    (99.250)     (91.113)
Hot Dogs                 Annual consumption of hot dogs                              91.295      93.324       91.145
                                                                                   (201.530)   (148.974)    (204.835)
French Fries             Annual consumption of fries                                 64.594      65.688       64.543
                                                                                   (111.107)   (104.531)    (111.611)
Fried Chicken            Annual consumption of fried chicken                      33.538***      45.265       32.706
                                                                                    (68.163)    (97.004)     (65.592)
Male                     Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is        0.496***      0.478        0.498
                         male, and 0 if respondent is female                         (0.500)     (0.500)      (0.500)
Some High School         Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent           0.072***      0.165        0.062
                         completed at least 9 but less than 12 years of school       (0.258)     (0.371)      (0.242)
High School              Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent           0.304***      0.367        0.298
                         completed exactly 12 years of schooling                     (0.460)     (0.482)      (0.457)
Some College             Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent          0.269***       0.233        0.273
                         completed at least 13 but less than 16 years of school      (0.443)     (0.423)      (0.445)
College                  Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent          0.316***       0.151        0.333
                         graduated from college                                      (0.465)     (0.358)      (0.471)
Age                      Age of respondent in years                                39.468***     41.936       39.214
                                                                                    (11.489)    (12.365)     (11.364)
Married                  Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is        0.643***      0.452        0.662
                         married                                                     (0.479)     (0.498)      (0.473)
Divorced                 Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is        0.124***      0.224        0.114
                         divorced or separated                                       (0.330)     (0.417)      (0.318)
Widowed                  Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is        0.018***      0.042        0.016
                         widowed                                                     (0.134)     (0.200)      (0.126)
Black                    Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent           0.098***      0.179        0.089
                         is black and not Hispanic                                   (0.297)     (0.383)      (0.285)



                                                                                                              35
Hispanic                         Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent            0.118***      0.150         0.114
                                 is of Hispanic origin                                        (0.322)     (0.357)       (0.318)
Other Race                       Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent’s          0.051***      0.062         0.050
                                 race is other than white, black, or Hispanic                 (0.220)     (0.240)       (0.218)
Work                             Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is         0.782***      0.000         0.861
                                 employed                                                     (0.413)     (0.000)       (0.346)
Family Income                    Real household income in thousands of 1982-84            33776.360*** 16511.030       35452.550
                                 dollars                                                   (26876.690) (18551.980) (26969.770)
Mental Health                    Number of days in past month mental health not good 3.448***              8.256         2.916
                                                                                              (7.465)    (11.314)       (6.698)
Physical Health                  Number of days in past month physical health not           2.915***      10.178         2.110
                                 good                                                         (7.049)    (12.405)       (5.626)
Health Plan                      Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent            0.829***      0.673         0.846
                                 currently has health insurance                               (0.377)     (0.469)       (0.361)
Potato Price                     Real ACCRA potato price in respondent’s state of           2.625***       2.759         2.611
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (0.813)     (0.858)       (0.807)
Milk Price                       Real ACCRA milk price in respondent’s state of             1.531***       1.587         1.526
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (0.328)     (0.336)       (0.327)
Eggs Price                       Real ACCRA eggs price in respondent’s state of             1.041***       1.080         1.037
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (0.239)     (0.248)       (0.238)
Beef Price                       Real ACCRA beef price in respondent’s state of             1.664***       1.736         1.657
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (0.421)     (0.448)       (0.418)
Steak Price                      Real ACCRA steak price in respondent’s state of            6.082***       6.382         6.051
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (1.596)     (1.638)       (1.590)
Sausage Price                    Real ACCRA sausage price in respondent’s state of          2.863***       2.935         2.856
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (0.534)     (0.501)       (0.537)
Fried Chicken Price              Real ACCRA fried chicken price in respondent’s state 0.910***             0.931         0.908
                                 of residence, in 1982-84 dollars                             (0.136)     (0.135)       (0.135)
Hamburger Price                  Real ACCRA hamburger price in respondent’s state of 1.990***              2.056         1.983
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (0.375)     (0.377)       (0.374)
Lettuce Price                    Real ACCRA lettuce price in respondent’s state of          1.002***       1.039         0.998
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (0.232)     (0.235)       (0.231)
Banana Price                     Real ACCRA banana price in respondent’s state of           0.464***       0.472         0.463
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (0.063)     (0.060)       (0.063)
Margarine Price                  Real ACCRA margarine price in respondent’s state of 0.722***              0.747         0.720
                                 residence, in 1982-84 dollars                                (0.141)     (0.144)       (0.141)
      Notes: Standard deviation is reported in parentheses. Maximum number of observations is 2,858,973. BRFSS
      sample weights are used in calculating the mean and standard deviation. The sample excludes those who are retired.
      Unemployed individuals here are defined as out of work or unable to work, and retired individuals are omitted.
      Those not unemployed are employed, homemakers, or students. Asterisks indicate that the difference between the
      two groups is statistically significant at the following levels: *** p-value≤ 0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤ 0.05; * 0.05<p-
      value≤ 0.1. Significance levels indicate that these two groups are systematically different.




                                                                                                                       36
                                            Table 2
                 Impact of State Unemployment Rate on Healthy Food Consumption
                                      BRFSS – Ages 21-64

Specification               1                   2                   3                    4                   5
Outcome                   Fruits           Fruit Juice           Carrots           Green Salad          Vegetables
State Unemp.            -2.5371*             -1.5611           -1.8112***           -1.9286**             -1.3309
Rate                    (1.3296)            (1.2987)            (0.5841)             (0.8576)            (2.0566)

                                                    Joint significance: p-value = 0.052

                      -77.9122***           19.7784***         -20.8496***          -34.5025***          -79.1652***
Male                     (2.4027)             (1.9937)            (0.6508)             (0.7915)             (2.6521)
Some High             -31.9743***          -16.2197***         -12.6726***             3.7379*            25.1520***
School                   (5.0534)             (3.7555)            (2.6873)             (2.1883)             (3.4970)
                       -15.3839**          -12.8413***           -7.7122**          20.6287***            51.6724***
High School              (5.8152)             (4.7569)            (3.0147)             (2.2628)             (3.9877)
                      16.1221***                3.2102             4.5007            42.6255***           95.1522***
Some College             (5.9291)             (5.2997)            (3.2440)             (2.7077)             (4.0687)
                      73.7127***             13.6147**          14.7149***           64.7345***          138.3072***
College                  (5.9636)             (5.4894)            (3.3292)             (2.8776)             (4.5298)
                       -0.9773***          -11.2323***           2.3958***            2.3310***            1.7102***
Age                      (0.2872)             (0.2505)            (0.1038)             (0.1622)             (0.2501)
                       0.0358***             0.1227***          -0.0190***           -0.0095***           -0.0113***
Age Squared              (0.0033)             (0.0027)            (0.0013)             (0.0019)             (0.0028)
                      23.9464***            -5.3077***           3.8589***           10.1032***           30.5292***
Married                  (1.7435)             (1.1332)            (0.6099)             (0.7694)             (1.3509)
                       -8.3301***              -0.8597          -1.9740***           -3.3890***           -9.5921***
Divorced                 (1.4050)             (1.1246)            (0.5423)             (0.6953)             (1.1729)
                          -0.1125            8.9839***             0.4771            -5.4421***           -7.4795***
Widowed                  (2.0713)             (1.8348)            (0.9897)             (1.0933)             (2.1682)
                          2.1223            89.8564***         -11.9787***          -11.3401***          -32.1538***
Black                    (4.1021)             (3.3109)            (1.1268)             (1.8329)             (4.9858)
                      39.1654***            67.9373***          19.0820***           16.2605***          -82.2068***
Hispanic                 (5.2944)             (5.5861)            (2.0101)             (3.3156)             (9.2857)
                        13.3346*            45.8611***           9.0001***              0.3194              11.5655
Other Race               (6.6995)             (5.0148)            (2.3988)             (2.8921)             (8.8347)
State Indicators            Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Year Indicators             Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Observations            1,251,638            1,252,098           1,242,795            1,254,689            1,248,964
R-Squared                  0.055                0.032               0.020                0.046               0.054
Notes: Retired individuals are omitted from the analysis. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation across
individuals within each state, and are presented in parentheses. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows:
*** p-value≤ 0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤ 0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤ 0.1.




                                                                                                                     37
                                            Table 3
                Impact of State Unemployment Rate on Unhealthy Food Consumption
                                      BRFSS – Ages 21-64

Specification               1                   2                   3                    4                    5
Outcome                  Snacks            Hamburgers           Hot Dogs           French Fries        Fried Chicken
State Unemp.             2.5352              0.7729              0.6428               2.0382               0.3755
Rate                    (2.6058)            (1.6207)            (1.7296)             (2.3229)             (1.0216)

                                                    Joint significance: p-value = 0.774

                      10.0057***            23.5854***          42.5692***           28.6107***           11.1934***
Male                    (1.3360)             (0.9440)             (1.9975)             (1.2124)             (1.0569)
Some High             24.2145***             7.0521**           13.9810***              -5.7524              -0.8104
School                  (4.7393)             (3.3806)             (5.0013)             (3.5101)             (3.9276)
                      19.8734***               2.9421               0.4763          -13.3224***           -9.5725***
High School             (4.0322)             (3.3794)             (4.2743)             (3.5374)             (2.5496)
                       11.1918**              -3.9841           -11.3004**          -21.5768***          -14.9473***
Some College            (4.6078)             (3.5593)             (4.1419)             (3.7660)             (2.8485)
                         4.7670            -16.7763***         -26.4997***          -30.7264***          -21.6490***
College                 (4.8469)             (3.6392)             (3.6540)             (3.7279)             (2.8923)
                         -0.4984            -1.4184***          -2.9884***           -3.0134***              -0.1228
Age                     (0.4463)             (0.3158)             (0.5151)             (0.2429)             (0.2427)
                       -0.0135**               0.0030            0.0201***            0.0168***              -0.0003
Age Squared             (0.0055)             (0.0038)             (0.0059)             (0.0027)             (0.0028)
                       5.6707***             -3.0698*               3.4091           -5.2454***           -3.4274***
Married                 (1.8920)             (1.6936)             (2.5944)             (1.3175)             (0.6184)
                       -3.8029**               0.4019              -0.5401               0.2978           -3.4801***
Divorced                (1.5245)             (1.5848)             (2.9891)             (1.2271)             (0.8334)
                       -9.1987**              -3.9067              -2.9755            -4.9698**           -4.8075***
Widowed                 (3.4300)             (2.9986)             (2.9939)             (2.2660)             (1.4325)
                        -6.1076*            -6.3902***         -10.1304***             -4.6292*           41.2505***
Black                   (3.3549)             (2.2350)             (2.9746)             (2.2828)             (1.5480)
                      -19.8768***           -5.9438***          -8.3116***              -1.2946           12.5828***
Hispanic                (3.7291)             (1.2920)             (2.7289)             (2.1777)             (2.1532)
                      -14.7561***             -2.8064              -6.9405               0.3761           17.6833***
Other Race              (3.3837)             (4.2270)             (4.7189)             (2.5276)             (2.8169)
State Indicators           Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Year Indicators            Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Observations              61,217              61,589               61,423               61,285               61,340
R-Squared                 0.024                0.065                0.027                0.055                0.058
Notes: Retired individuals are omitted from the analysis. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation across
individuals within each state, and are presented in parentheses. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows:
*** p-value≤ 0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤ 0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤ 0.1.




                                                                                                                   38
                                                Table 4
                  Impact of State Unemployment Rate on Healthy Food Consumption
                       Differential Effects by Health Status and Demographics

Sample                                                                  Outcome
                                     Fruits          Fruit Juice         Carrots        Green Salad        Vegetables
                                    -1.9317           -2.0297           -1.9374***        -1.9398**       -0.3723
1             Good Health1         (1.4164)          (1.4577)          (0.6300)          (0.8929)          (2.1539)

                                                           Joint significance: p-value = 0.074

                                    -2.2046           -1.3737           -1.8722***        -1.7693**       -0.8567
2             Ages 21-44           (1.3438)          (1.5073)          (0.5938)          (0.8204)          (2.2347)

                                                           Joint significance: p-value = 0.053

                                    -3.4040**         -2.3704**         -1.7662**         -2.0267**       -2.0762
3             Ages 45-64           (1.5198)          (1.1355)          (0.6711)          (0.9767)          (1.9668)

                                                           Joint significance: p-value = 0.072

                                    -2.6278**         -2.7128*          -1.4197**         -1.9380**       -2.1856
4             Males                (1.2331)          (1.4579)          (0.6151)          (0.7678)          (1.9949)

                                                           Joint significance: p-value = 0.129

                                    -2.5112           -0.7884           -2.0671***        -1.8822*        -0.6553
5             Females              (1.5921)          (1.2960)          (0.6425)          (0.9854)          (2.2188)

                                                           Joint significance: p-value = 0.018

                                    -2.5750*          -2.0239           -1.9457***        -1.5557*        -2.4009
6             Married              (1.4087)          (1.3666)          (0.6272)          (0.8244)          (2.2648)

                                                           Joint significance: p-value = 0.021

                                    -2.4609*          -0.6066           -1.6016**         -2.4142**       0.2279
7             Unmarried            (1.3964)          (1.4701)          (0.6009)          (1.0494)         (1.9439)

                                                           Joint significance: p-value = 0.079

Notes: Each cell represents a separate regression model. Retired individuals are omitted from the analysis. Standard
errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation across individuals within each state, and are presented in parentheses. All
models control for state and year fixed effects. Sample sizes range from 502,415 to 746,713. Asterisks denote
statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤ 0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤ 0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤ 0.1.
1
  Sample is restricted to individuals who reported that their health is Excellent, Very Good, or Good. Sample sizes
range from 1,041,488 to 1,051,231.




                                                                                                                      39
                                                Table 5
                Impact of State Unemployment Rate on Unhealthy Food Consumption
                       Differential Effects by Health Status and Demographics

                                                                       Outcome
          Sample                    Snacks         Hamburgers          Hot Dogs         French Fries     Fried Chicken
                                 -3.0113***        14.0009***         12.8333***         7.2509***        4.8392***
1          Good Health1            (0.7338)         (0.7098)           (0.9118)           (0.6084)          (0.5370)

                                                          Joint significance: p-value = 0.000

                                    1.6897            0.6347             -0.3261           2.5053            1.1582
2          Ages 21-44              (2.8537)          (1.8463)           (2.2961)          (2.7626)          (1.2823)

                                                          Joint significance: p-value = 0.739

                                    4.6601            1.1179             3.1482            0.9173            -1.4131
3          Ages 45-64              (4.8224)          (2.6926)           (2.5376)          (1.5319)          (1.1170)

                                                          Joint significance: p-value = 0.566

                                    2.2391            -0.8504            -1.6602           1.8672            -0.7765
4          Males                   (2.6236)          (2.5265)           (2.8313)          (3.9055)          (1.7464)

                                                          Joint significance: p-value = 0.857

                                    2.8759            1.9331             2.4948            2.0442            1.3183
5          Females                 (3.5699)          (1.2824)           (2.0912)          (1.3303)          (1.0347)

                                                          Joint significance: p-value = 0.044

                                   5.6289*            2.8548             1.6961            3.6320            0.2075
6          Married                 (2.9086)          (2.1063)           (1.9614)          (3.0972)          (0.8825)

                                                          Joint significance: p-value = 0.048

                                   -2.0127            -2.7317            -0.6536          -0.1395            0.5548
7          Unmarried               (4.7920)          (2.1657)           (3.3521)          (2.4450)          (1.6022)

                                                          Joint significance: p-value = 0.851

Notes: Each cell represents a separate regression model. Retired individuals are omitted from the analysis. Standard
errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation across individuals within each state, and are presented in parentheses. All
models control for state and year fixed effects. Sample sizes range from 17,575 to 43,843. Asterisks denote
statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤ 0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤ 0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤ 0.1.
1
  Sample is restricted to individuals who reported that their health is Excellent, Very Good, or Good. Sample sizes
range from 9,986 to 10,047.




                                                                                                                       40
                                              Table 6
                          Cross-Equation Estimates of the Average Effect of
                   State Unemployment Rate on Healthy & Unhealthy Consumption
                                  Seemingly Unrelated Regression

                       Sample                               Healthy Food        Unhealthy Food
                                                            Consumption           Consumption
                                                             -0.0080***               0.0100
                        1           All (Ages 21-64)           (0.0031)             (0.0096)
                                                                [0.010]              [0.297]
                                                              -0.0076**            0.0699***
                        2           Good Health1               (0.0034)             (0.0051)
                                                                [0.024]              [0.000]
                                                              -0.0074**               0.0098
                        3           Ages 21-44                 (0.0032)             (0.0108)
                                                                [0.021]              [0.361]
                                                             -0.0094***               0.0120
                        4           Ages 45-64                 (0.0032)             (0.0159)
                                                                [0.003]              [0.452]
                                                             -0.0091***              -0.0001
                        5           Males                      (0.0032)             (0.0130)
                                                                [0.005]              [0.994]
                                                              -0.0072**             0.0189**
                        6           Females                    (0.0034)             (0.0078)
                                                                [0.032]              [0.016]
                                                             -0.0089***              0.0219*
                        7           Married                    (0.0031)             (0.0119)
                                                                [0.004]              [0.084]
                                                               -0.0064*              -0.0069
                        8           Unmarried                  (0.0033)             (0.0156)
                                                                [0.054]              [0.658]
Notes: Models are jointly estimated using a seemingly unrelated regression framework, and control for all
covariates, and state and year fixed effects, as noted in Tables 2 and 3. All outcomes are transformed into standard
normal deviates (see text). Estimates of the average effect of the state unemployment rate on the five measures of
healthy food consumption and the five measures of unhealthy food consumption are presented. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses and adjusted for arbitrary correlation across individuals within each state, and associated p-
values are reported in brackets. Retired individuals are omitted from the analysis. Asterisks denote statistical
significance as follows: *** p-value≤ 0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤ 0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤ 0.1.
1
  Sample is restricted to individuals who reported that their health is Excellent, Very Good, or Good.




                                                                                                                    41
                                         Table 7
        Impact of County Unemployment Rate on Healthy & Unhealthy Food Consumption

                                                              Healthy Food Consumption
          Panel A                    Fruits          Fruit Juice        Carrots     Green Salad            Vegetables
                                    -1.1158***        -0.8221*         -0.4198*       -0.5234**           -1.3553
1          All (Ages 21-64)        (0.3530)          (0.4422)         (0.2241)       (0.2381)              (1.3425)
                                    -1.0383**         -0.8977*         -0.3570*       -0.5197**           -1.4849
2          Good Health1            (0.4129)          (0.4829)         (0.2154)       (0.2569)              (1.3940)
                                    -1.1297***        -0.5999          -0.2684        -0.3593             -1.0441
3          Ages 21-44              (0.3795)          (0.5913)         (0.2167)       (0.2359)              (1.4566)
                                    -1.4024***        -1.3149***       -0.6097**      -0.7682**           -2.0072
4          Ages 45-64              (0.4718)          (0.4515)         (0.2422)       (0.3369)              (1.3657)
                                    -1.1648***        -0.9890**        -0.5751**      -0.5571**           -1.5036
5          Males                   (0.3955)          (0.4391)         (0.2744)       (0.2385)              (1.1446)
                                    -1.1064**         -0.6993          -0.3000        -0.4776*            -1.2419
6          Females                 (0.4309)          (0.5157)         (0.2268)       (0.2606)              (1.5059)
                                    -1.1215***        -0.7100          -0.4069*       -0.6459**           -1.1980
7          Married                 (0.4184)          (0.5034)         (0.2455)       (0.2674)              (1.2812)
                                    -1.0802**         -0.9341*         -0.4360*       -0.3585             -1.5582
8          Unmarried               (0.4466)          (0.4808)         (0.2429)       (0.3103)              (1.4598)

                                                               Unhealthy Food Consumption
           Panel B                     Snacks         Hamburgers         Hot Dogs         French Fries     Fried Chicken
                                      -0.1720            0.4465            -0.4795           0.6651            -0.2494
1           All (Ages 21-64)          (0.5899)          (0.3713)          (0.6434)          (1.1042)          (0.2935)
                                       1.4591           1.3054*             0.4670           2.6617           -0.5276*
2           Good Health1              (0.7942)          (0.5960)          (0.3645)          (2.3780)          (0.2478)
                                      -0.6151            0.7793            -0.2248           0.3740            -0.2038
3           Ages 21-44                (0.6889)          (0.4879)          (0.7084)          (0.9349)          (0.4432)
                                       0.9125            -0.2785           -0.9475           1.3256           -0.3808*
4           Ages 45-64                (1.1678)          (0.4984)          (0.8117)          (1.6678)          (0.2291)
                                       0.5549            0.1387            -0.7609           0.2183            -0.3775
5           Males                     (0.8896)          (0.6196)          (1.4342)          (1.2170)          (0.4053)
                                      -0.6067          0.8207**            -0.1347           1.0263            -0.1542
6           Females                   (0.8202)          (0.3910)          (0.5635)          (1.1174)          (0.3199)
                                       0.0680           0.7751*             0.3766           0.9962             0.0559
7           Married                   (1.1471)          (0.4030)          (1.0889)          (0.8731)          (0.2062)
                                      -0.5140            0.0316           -1.7839*           0.3880            -0.6597
8           Unmarried                 (1.0500)          (0.9695)          (0.9014)          (1.8925)          (0.6037)
Notes: Each cell represents a separate regression model. Retired individuals are omitted from the analysis. Standard
errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation across individuals within each state, and are presented in parentheses. All
models control for county and year fixed effects. Sample sizes range from 502,413 to 1,254,682 for measures of
healthy food consumption and from 17,574 to 61,588 for measures of unhealthy food consumption . Asterisks
denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤ 0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤ 0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤ 0.1.
1
  Sample is restricted to individuals who reported that their health is Excellent, Very Good, or Good. Sample sizes
range from 1,041,482 to 1,051,225 for measures of healthy food consumption and from 9,986 to 10,047 for
measures of unhealthy food consumption.




                                                                                                                     42
                                                    Table 8
                           Differential Effects by Propensity of being Unemployed
                                                    BRFSS

Panel A                                                       All Individuals Ages 21-64
Specification                    1                   2                      3                 4                   5
Outcome                        Fruits           Fruit Juice              Carrots         Green Salad         Vegetables
State Unemp. Rate           -0.3358             -2.3551                -1.5497**          0.0403           1.7462
                           (1.3972)            (1.4467)               (0.6330)           (0.9052)           (2.0888)
State Unemp. Rate *        -12.0258***           1.8873**              -1.8562***        -14.5227***       -14.2143***
Propensity Score           (1.2101)            (0.7806)               (0.2907)           (0.5253)           (0.7781)
State Indicators                Yes                 Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes
Year Indicators                 Yes                 Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes
R-Squared                     0.056               0.032                  0.020             0.049           0.055
Observations                 1,195,127           1,195,532              1,186,632         1,197,958           1,192,338

Panel B                                                        All Individuals Ages 21-64
Specification                     1                     2                    3                 4                    5
Outcome                        Fruits              Fruit Juice            Carrots         Green Salad          Vegetables
State Unemp. Rate            1.2531                -1.1043              -1.1502*           1.6415*           1.5358
                            (1.7169)              (1.6476)             (0.6765)           (0.8684)            (2.1945)
State Unemp. Rate *         -12.0738***             1.7932**            -1.9354***        -14.6776***        -14.2617***
Propensity Score            (1.2250)              (0.7977)             (0.2977)           (0.5490)            (0.7792)
State Indicators                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes               Yes                  Yes
Year Indicators                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes               Yes                  Yes
State-specific Trends            Yes                   Yes                  Yes               Yes                  Yes
R-Squared                      0.056                  0.032                0.020             0.050                0.056
Observations                 1,195,127              1,195,532            1,186,632         1,197,958            1,192,338
  Notes: Each cell represents a separate regression model. Retired individuals are omitted from the analysis. The
  propensity score is estimated from a first-stage logit model predicting the probability of being unemployed as a
  function of the state unemployment rate, education, age, age squared, male, race indicators, marital status indicators,
  indicators for self-rated health, interactions between the state unemployment rate and each X, state indicators, and
  year indicators. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation across individuals within each state, and are
  presented in parentheses. All models control for state and year fixed effects, in addition to the covariates noted in
  Table 2. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤ 0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤ 0.05; * 0.05<p-
  value≤ 0.1.




                                                                                                                      43
                                                                  Table 9
                                   Examining the Mechanisms of the Impact of the State Unemployment Rate
                                                      on Healthy Food Consumption

      Specification    Outcome                               Fruits         Fruit Juice          Carrots        Green Salad        Vegetables       Vitamins 1
            1          Baseline                          -12.0258***        1.8873**          -1.8562***        -14.5227***      -14.2143***       -0.0318***
                                                           (1.2101)          (0.7806)           (0.2907)          (0.5253)          (0.7781)         (0.0016)
               2          Baseline with Work             -15.8037***        -1.8510**         -3.5132***        -14.5887***      -17.3251***       -0.0339***
                                                           (1.2746)          (0.7741)           (0.3128)          (0.5526)          (0.8067)         (0.0018)
               3          Baseline with Family            -6.9079***       -3.3799***         -3.4930***        -10.1202***       -6.6464***       -0.0127***
                          Income                           (1.3097)          (0.8150)           (0.3608)          (0.4913)          (0.8122)         (0.0016)
               4          Baseline with Food Prices      -11.8645***        1.8843**          -1.9721***        -14.6343***      -14.1437***       -0.0318***
                                                           (1.2354)          (0.8311)           (0.3019)          (0.5492)          (0.8070)         (0.0016)
               5          Baseline with Mental            -7.9313***        3.4006***         -1.1273***        -13.0942***      -11.8569***       -0.0343***
                          Health                           (1.1708)          (0.8382)           (0.3179)          (0.5240)          (0.8205)         (0.0014)
               6          Baseline with Physical         -11.6873***          -0.0576         -1.9864***        -13.4951***      -16.7739***       -0.0440***
                          Health                           (1.2778)          (0.8613)           (0.3834)          (0.5029)          (0.9214)         (0.0025)
               7          Baseline with Self-            -12.0120***        6.7471***            0.1428         -14.9907***      -20.3740***       -0.0496***
                          Reported General Health          (1.6512)          (1.3178)           (0.5262)          (0.6725)          (1.1337)         (0.0026)
               8          Baseline with Health           -12.0120***        6.7471***            0.1428         -14.9907***      -20.3740***       -0.0295***
                          Insurance Coverage               (1.6512)          (1.3178)           (0.5262)          (0.6725)          (1.1337)         (0.0015)
               9          Baseline with All               -5.7759***       -7.8231***         -4.4945***         -7.7284***       -8.9794***       -0.0263***
                                                           (1.3943)          (0.9347)           (0.4223)          (0.5021)          (0.9969)         (0.0022)
Notes: Each cell represents a separate regression model. Retired individuals are omitted from the analysis. Coefficients from the interaction between the state
unemployment rate and the propensity of being unemployed are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation across individuals within each
state, and are presented in parentheses. All models control for state and year fixed effects, in addition to the covariates noted in Table 2. Asterisks denote
statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤ 0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤ 0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤ 0.1.
1 Outcome represents a dichotomous indicator of whether the respondent currently takes vitamins or supplements. Sample sizes range from 232,407 to 268,596.




                                                                                                                                                             44
                                        Figure 1
Unemployment Rate, Real Expenditures on Food, and Real Price Index for Fruits and Vegetables




Notes: Rfood pertains to personal consumption expenditures on food and beverages purchased for off-premises
consumption. Rfoodserv pertains to personal consumption on food services. F&V PI pertains to the real price index
for fruits and vegetables. Source for expenditures: National Income and Product Accounts, Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA). Source for the national unemployment rate and price index: Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
Food expenditures were divided by the BLS Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers.




                                                                                                              45
