                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE EXTENSIVE MARGIN OF EXPORTING PRODUCTS:
                            A FIRM-LEVEL ANALYSIS

                                       Costas Arkolakis
                                       Sharat Ganapati
                                    Marc-Andreas Muendler

                                      Working Paper 16641
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w16641


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2010




We thank the editor Virgiliu Midrigan and two anonymous referees. We are grateful to Hiau Looi
Kee and Marcelo Olarreaga for sharing augmented UNCTAD TRAINS data on non-tariff
measures and detailed explanations. We benefitted from helpful comments and discussions by
David Atkin, Andrew Bernard, Lorenzo Caliendo, Thomas Chaney, Arnaud Costinot, Don Davis,
Gilles Duranton, Jon Eaton, Elhanan Helpman, Gordon Hanson, Sam Kortum, Giovanni Maggi,
Kalina Manova, Marc Melitz, Peter Neary, Jim Rauch, Veronica Rappaport, Steve Redding, Kim
Ruhl, Peter Schott, Daniel Trefler and Jon Vogel as well as several seminar and conference
participants. Oana Hirakawa, Olga Timoshenko and Bingyu Zhang provided excellent research
assistance. Muendler and Arkolakis acknowledge NSF support (SES-0550699 and SES-0921673)
and support from the Yale University High Performance Computing Center with gratitude. An
Online Supplement is available at econ.ucsd.edu/muendler/papers/abs/braxpmkt. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Costas Arkolakis, Sharat Ganapati, and Marc-Andreas Muendler. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Extensive Margin of Exporting Products: A Firm-level Analysis
Costas Arkolakis, Sharat Ganapati, and Marc-Andreas Muendler
NBER Working Paper No. 16641
December 2010, Revised July 2020
JEL No. F12,F14,L11

                                            ABSTRACT

To quantify trade frictions, we examine multi-product exporters. We build a flexible general
equilibrium model and estimate market entry costs using Brazilian firm-product-destination data
under rich demand and market-access cost shocks. Our estimates show that additional products
farther from a firm’s core competency come at higher production costs, but there are substantive
economies of scope in market-access costs. Market-access costs differ across destinations, falling
more rapidly in scope at nearby regions and at destinations with fewer non-tariff barriers. We
evaluate a counterfactual scenario that harmonizes market-access costs across destinations and
find global welfare gains similar to eliminating all current tariffs.


Costas Arkolakis                                Marc-Andreas Muendler
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics, 0508
Yale University, 28 Hillhouse Avenue            University of California, San Diego
P.O. Box 208268                                 9500 Gilman Drive
New Haven, CT 06520-8268                        La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER                                        and NBER
costas.arkolakis@yale.edu                       muendler@ucsd.edu

Sharat Ganapati
Georgetown University
Edward B. Bunn, S.J. Intercultural Center
37th and O Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20057
and CESifo
sganapati@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16641
     Trade frictions shape the pattern of trade, the transmission of macroeconomic conditions,
and their aggregate consequences in international trade and open-economy macroeconomics.
Research tends to characterize trade frictions with iceberg transport costs and ad-valorem tariffs,
especially when considering aggregate trade data (e.g. Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare
2012). Drawing on firm and firm-destination data, researchers have recently opened up the
black box of market access costs, which deter firms from export market entry (Das, Roberts
and Tybout 2007, Moxnes 2010, Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz 2011, Allen 2014, Chaney 2014).
This literature typically measures the importance of fixed or sunk costs beyond variable trade
costs, focusing on firm entry into exporting and abstracting from policy. We use firm-product-
destination data to uncover the precise nature of these market access costs, focusing on both the
firms’ export market entry and their new product entry. To produce market-access cost estimates
of policy relevance, we tie cost components to non-tariff policy instruments.
     We build a framework of multi-product exporters that generalizes earlier models and offers
a flexible setup to rigorously measure the relevance of market-access costs for exporter-product
presence in foreign markets. We base our framework on novel regularities, using detailed in-
formation on the entry and sales of Brazilian exporters and their individual products by foreign
destination. We structurally estimate the framework and relate market access cost estimates to
observed policy-driven non-tariff measures (NTMs) as well as geography and product-related
barriers, which have proven elusive objects for rigorous quantification to date. NTMs are ar-
guably as important for trade openness as are tariffs, they are prominent in trade negotiations,
and they are instruments in trade conflicts.1 Based on our estimates we evaluate a counterfactual
scenario that harmonizes market-access costs across export destinations to their observed global
minima and find welfare gains similar to eliminating all current tariffs.
     Our framework extends the monopolistic competition model of Melitz (2003) by embedding
a multi-product setup into a conventional constant elasticity of substitution (CES) demand sys-
tem. We model within-firm product heterogeneity with two key mechanisms. First, we assume
    1
      Niu et al. (2018, Table 6) estimate for a sample of 97 countries that in 1997 the ad-valorem equivalent of
NTMs used to weakly exceed import tariffs in about 56 percent of HS-6 product lines but by 2015 NTMs surpassed
tariffs in 73 percent of HS-6 products. For comprehensive policy reports on non-tariff measures see OECD (2005),
UNCTAD (2010), WTO (2012). Recent trade agreements between the EU and other countries, including CETA
with Canada or the EU-Mercosur Association Agreement, prominently address non-tariff barriers such as customs
procedures, technical regulations, and standards. While the most recent trade accord between the United States,
Mexico and Canada (USMCA) does not alter conventional non-tariff measures, it introduces labor standards as a
novel type of NTM. The three prior U.S. agreements from 2012 with Panama, Colombia and South Korea placed
particular importance on the reduction of conventional non-tariff barriers. China frequently uses non-tariff measures
such as safety and environmental standards, at present for example to restrict agricultural exports from Canada and
coal from Australia. While tariffs are a prominent instrument in recent U.S. trade disputes, the United States is also
using crucial non-tariff measures in its disputes with China, such as the so-called Entity List that imposes export
licensing requirements on specific foreign businesses and persons.




                                                          1
as in Eckel and Neary (2010, henceforth EN) that a firm faces declining efficiency in supply-
ing additional products that are farther from its core competency. Second, we introduce local
product appeal shocks, extending firm-destination heterogeneity as in Eaton, Kortum and Kra-
marz (2011) to the product-destination level. Product appeal shocks allow us to nest a version
of the Bernard, Redding and Schott (2011, henceforth BRS) model that attributes within-firm
product heterogeneity to local demand shocks. In our framework, the firm faces two extensive
margins and one intensive margin: it elects its presence at export destinations at one extensive
margin, it chooses its exporter scope (the number of products) in each destination at another ex-
tensive margin, and sets the prices for each individual product in each destination at the intensive
margin.2
    We consider three types of costs. First, there are product-specific production costs at the firm
level similar to EN (core competency). Second, there are variable trade costs (shipping costs in
the form of iceberg trade costs and ad-valorem tariffs), which vary with sales but do not depend
on the exporter’s scope. Both production costs and variable trade costs deter trade at all margins.
Third, to capture the specificities of non-tariff barriers for market access, we consider a flexible
schedule of fixed exporting costs by firm, product, and destination market, generalizing the
firm-destination level exporting costs in Chaney (2008). This market-access cost schedule can
vary by firm-product and accommodates the possible cases of economies and diseconomies of
scope.3 The market-access cost schedule affects only the two extensive margins: a firm’s entry
into a destination with the first product and its exporter scope there. The first exported item to
a particular destination may face higher entry costs than a subsequent item. Examples of such
barriers include the financial cost and time required for both paperwork and border compliance,
sanitary and phytosanitary as well as other technical regulations that can affect approval of a first
export product differently from subsequent products, and price or quantity control measures with
differential importance.
    To quantify this theory, we document individual product sales and exporter scope using firm-
product-destination data from Brazil, a typical exporter country close to the median in exports
per capita in 2000. We then characterize the nature of market-access costs at the microeco-
nomic level, so we can subsequently conduct adequate aggregate simulations. We elicit three
main facts. First, within firms and destinations, we look at sales by product. Wide-scope ex-
porters sell large amounts of their top-selling products. Moreover, they sell considerably smaller
   2
       Our product-level approach thus differs from firm-level research, including Arkolakis (2010), in that we give
substance to market-access costs and directly estimate these costs from product entry and product sales. The
parametrization of our estimation model fully nests the Arkolakis (2010) market penetration costs.
     3
       Seminal references on economies of scope are Panzar and Willig (1977) and (1981). Formally, there are
economies of scope for sales x and y of two products if the cost function satisfies C(x + y) < C(x) + C(y), that
is if the cost function is subadditive.



                                                         2
amounts of their lowest-selling products than do narrow-scope exporters. Second, within des-
tinations and across firms, we look at exporter scope: there are a few dominant exporters with
wide scope but many narrow-scope firms. The median exporter only ships one or two products
per destination. Moreover, the average exporter scope is larger at geographically closer desti-
nations, indicating variation in incremental market-access costs. Third, within destinations and
across firms, firm average product sales and exporter scope exhibit a strong positive covaria-
tion in distant destinations, but no clear relationship in close-by destinations. When it comes to
observed policy measures, more NTMs at a destination strengthen the positive association be-
tween average product sales and exporter scope similar to a destination’s remoteness, and more
NTMs at a destination depress product sales and exporter scope in a similar manner as does a
destination’s remoteness.
    In our model these facts have a number of theoretical implications. For a wide-scope firm
to profitably sell minor amounts of its lowest-selling products, incremental market-access costs
must be low at wide scope. The finding is at odds with models of multi-product firms where
market-access costs are constant for additional products and underlies our flexible market-access
cost schedule that allows for potential economies of scope. For example, market-access costs
are constant in BRS, EN and Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014). Our model’s combination of
scope-dependent production costs and market-access costs delivers variation in average exporter
scope on the one hand and generates the correlation of average product sales and exporter scope
across destinations on the other hand, consistent with our second and third facts. Given common
production costs regardless of a product’s export destination, the destination-dependent correla-
tion between average product sales and exporter scope implies that market-access costs vary in
systematic ways across destinations and affect country-level trade flows.
    For our quantification we adopt a simulated method of moments (SMM) estimator in order to
handle the three stochastic elements of the model. These elements—Pareto distributed firm-level
productivity, a stochastic firm-level market-access cost component, and local product appeal
shocks—are needed to match the empirical regularities in the Brazilian exporting transaction
data.4 We also document, for practical purposes, that results from ordinary least squares under
only one stochastic element (firm-level productivity) provide a useful approximation to the full
SMM estimation. In the main estimation, we target our first two facts, which the estimated
model closely matches. We also illustrate the success of this estimation by showing that the
estimated model fits the third fact (on the destination-specific correlation of average product
sales and exporter scope), which we deliberately do not target in estimation. A decomposition
   4
    In Appendix F we vary the productivity distribution, using a log-normal specification instead of Pareto. While
we lose analytic tractability in the model, the quantitative results under the SMM estimation remain similar.




                                                        3
of the variance in product sales shows that product- and firm-level heterogeneity accounts for
two-fifths of the variation in product sales, while idiosyncratic product appeal shocks abroad
account for the other three-fifths. This finding highlights both the relevance of our extended
multi-product framework and the important interplay of a firm’s core competency with local
demand conditions abroad.
    The estimation shows that additional products farther from a firm’s core competency incur
higher unit production costs, but the estimation also uncovers economies of scope in incremen-
tal market-access costs that fall for additional products at destination-specific rates. We relate
the varying market-access cost schedules to country characteristics, including the prevalence of
NTMs at a destination, and find that NTMs are a salient predictor of incremental market-access
costs. Given this importance of NTMs for market-access cost schedules, we simulate a reduction
in market-access costs for additional products and the effect on global trade. To capture only
components of market-access costs that appear amenable to policy, we hypothetically reduce
market-access costs worldwide to the schedules observed in nearby destinations with low incre-
mental market-access costs. This counterfactual standardization of incremental market-access
costs generates welfare gains similar to eliminating today’s remaining observable tariffs.
    An influential macroeconomic literature connects firms to economy-wide outcomes and
studies how firm shocks translate into consequences for the real exchange rate, the trade bal-
ance, and other variables (e.g. Gopinath and Itskhoki 2010, Amiti, Itskhoki and Konings 2014,
Di Giovanni, Levchenko and Mejean 2014, Almunia et al. 2018). Our paper offers a specific
quantification of the market-specific costs that firms face when they respond to shocks with
varying export-market participation. Trade frictions such as market-access costs determine to
what extent goods and services can be traded and therefore crucially delineate real exchange
rate levels and changes.5
    To measure trade restrictiveness in the aggregate, Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga (2009) and
Niu et al. (2018) propose index numbers in partial equilibrium and relate them to NTMs.6 We
adopt a general-equilibrium framework and allow for rich micro-foundations for the incidence of
   5
      Trade frictions have been proposed as a potential common cause behind major puzzles in international macroe-
conomics (Obstfeld and Rogoff 2001). Fitzgerald (2012) and Eaton, Kortum and Neiman (2016) provide supporting
evidence for the relevance of variable trade costs in international financial anomalies. Others argue that those puz-
zles are better explained with financial frictions (Van Wincoop, Eric and Warnock 2010, Coeurdacier and Rey
2013).
    6
      Earlier indexes of trade restrictiveness ask how harmful protection is to a country itself (for surveys see Feenstra
1995, Anderson and Neary 2005). An index of a country’s trade restrictiveness is akin to a single hypothetical ad-
valorem tariff that would be equivalent either in terms of welfare (Anderson and Neary 1996) or import volumes
(Anderson and Neary 2003) to the country’s overall set of protectionist measures. Baldwin, Evenett and Low
(2009) and Egger et al. (2015) examine the potential impact of new non-tariff commitments in preferential trade
agreements.




                                                            4
market-access costs on firm and product entry. However, our complementary approach foregoes
NTM survey information by source country and tariff line. Examples of incremental market-
access costs among NTMs are product-level health regulations, safety standards, certifications,
and licenses.7
    Most variation in trade flows comes from the extensive margin of exporter entry into for-
eign markets (Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz 2004, Bernard et al. 2009). Researchers have studied
the origins of exporter success in firm capabilities (Bernard et al. 2003, Melitz 2003) and more
recently in the formation of networks and exporter-to-importer links (Chaney 2014, Bernard,
Moxnes and Ulltveit-Moe 2018, Eaton et al. 2016), in particular under the impediment of ad-
valorem tariffs and iceberg transport costs (e.g. Cherkashin et al. 2015). Our paper broadens
the perspective to other forms of trade frictions, including variable trade costs and fixed market-
access costs while accounting for market penetration costs, and retrains the focus from the ag-
gregate to the microeconomic level of individual exporter products.
    Research into multi-product firms has expanded markedly in recent years (see, for example,
BRS, EN, Thomas (2011), Amador and Opromolla (2013), Álvarez, Faruq and López (2013),
Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014), and Eckel et al. (2016), among others).8 That body of
research stresses the significance of multi-product firms either from an empirical perspective or
from a theoretical one. Our work aims to make contact of these two large parts of the literature
by bringing together theory and data. We use facts about multi-product firms to understand the
costs and benefits of expanding product lines. In turn, we use the general-equilibrium structure
of our model to asses the global implications of policies related to removing product expansion
costs.9
    Aggregate consequences differ substantively under varying market entry cost assumptions.
Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012) show for a wide family of models, which in-
cludes ours, that conditional on identical observed trade flows these models predict identical
ex-post welfare gains irrespective of firm turnover and product-market reallocation. Their find-
    7
      Some NTMs are arguably market-access costs that an exporter incurs prior to the shipment of the first unit of a
product and not again (UNCTAD 2010), while other NTMs such as customs procedures may also act like shipping
costs in that they lengthen storage time and the duration of export financing. As the empirical literature on NTMs
starts to make available more precise NTM variables, they can be embedded into our framework’s shipping cost
and market-access cost functions. For now, our market-access cost estimates do not discern individual NTMs from
other lasting trade barriers at the border, such as language. Our counterfactual simulations, however, are designed
to capture policy relevant market entry and behind-the-border costs.
    8
      Nocke and Yeaple (2014) and Dhingra (2013) study multi-product exporters but do not generate a within-firm
sales distribution, which lies at the heart of our analysis.
    9
      Timoshenko (2015) empirically analyzes multi-product firm dynamics. Qiu and Zhou (2013) document the
importance of variety-specific introduction fees, which we call incremental market-access costs. Morales, Sheu
and Zahler (2019) structurally study the path-dependent sequential entry of multi-product firms into additional
export markets.




                                                         5
ings also imply, however, that models in that family differ markedly in their implications for
trade flows and welfare with respect to ex-ante changes in market-access costs. The predictions
as to how trade policy affects global trade crucially vary with the nature of market entry costs.
Our framework provides a market-specific micro-foundation for such market-access costs, and
we use it to compute the impact of the elimination of policy-related entry costs on trade flows
and welfare.
    The paper has six sections. In Section I we describe the model and its firm-level predictions.
Section II presents the data and observed empirical patterns. Section III introduces the SMM es-
timator to identify the model’s parameters. Section IV closes the model and describes aggregate
outcomes in general equilibrium. Counterfactuals involving variations in market-access costs
follow in Section V. We conclude with Section VI.


I    Model
Our model rests on two sources of heterogeneity on the firm side: a firm’s productivity and a
firm’s array of destination-specific entry costs for its first product. Heterogeneity in productivity
at the firm level generates the familiar dispersion in total sales, and in our model also the dis-
persion in exporter scope (the number of products sold). The heterogeneity in entry cost for the
first product at the firm-destination level helps us break the rigidity of deterministic destination
rankings and accommodate the substantive empirical variation across firm presence patterns in
estimation. Moreover, heterogeneity in market access cost allows us to nest Arkolakis (2010)
market penetration costs.
     We introduce a third source of heterogeneity on the consumer side: a stochastic demand com-
ponent at the firm-destination-product level. This added variation allows us to nest a version of
the BRS model as a special case and permits potentially rich variation in a given firm-product’s
sales rank across destinations. Beyond the conceptual benefit of nesting predecessor models, the
three sources of heterogeneity moderate concerns of misspecification in our simulated method
of moments estimation, while parameters of the shock distributions can be disciplined with our
data.
     The remaining parameters for a firm’s product access and local pricing decisions are deter-
ministic. Most important for our generalization of earlier multi-product exporter models, we
introduce a flexible market-access cost function that may exhibit economies or diseconomies of
scope. To generate overall diseconomies of scope (which are necessary for optimal scope to be
finite), and to nest a version of the EN model and Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014), we let
a firm face higher marginal production costs for additional products farther away from its core



                                                 6
competency.10


I.A     Setup
There are N countries. The source country of an export shipment is denoted with s and the
destination market with d. There is a measure of Ld consumers at destination d. Consumers
have symmetric preferences with a constant elasticity of substitution σ over a continuum of
varieties. In this multi-product setting, a “variety” offered by a firm ω from source country s to
destination d is the product composite
                                                                                    σ−σ1
                                              Gsd (ω)
                                                                    1         σ−1
                                               X
                              Xsd (ω) ≡                ξsdg (ω) σ xsdg (ω)    σ            ,
                                               g=1


where Gsd (ω) is the exporter scope (the number of products) that firm ω sells in country d, g
is the running index of a firm’s product at destination d, ξsdg (ω) is an i.i.d. shock to firm ω’s
g-th product’s appeal (with mean E [ξsdg (ω)] = 1, positive support and known realization at the
time of consumer choice), and xsdg (ω) is the quantity of product g that consumers consume. In
marketing terminology, the product composite is often called a firm’s product line or product
mix. We assume that every product line is uniquely offered by a single firm, but a firm may ship
different product lines to different destinations.


I.B     Consumers
A consumer’s utility at destination d is

                                N Z
                                                                    ! σ−σ1
                                                         σ−1
                                X
(1)                                         Xkd (ω)       σ    dω            for σ > 1,
                                k=1    ω∈Ωkd


where Ωkd is the set of firms that ship from source country k to destination d. For simplicity we
assume that the elasticity of substitution across a firm’s products is the same as the elasticity of
substitution between varieties of different firms.11 It is straightforward to generalize the model
  10
      Marginal production costs are constant for a given product in that they do not vary with production volume.
For an appropriately defined market-access cost schedule that depends on the choice of consumers reached through
marketing, we also nest the Arkolakis (2010) model within our (stochastic) market entry components (see the
Online Supplement S2).
   11
      Allanson and Montagna (2005) adopt a similar nested CES form to study the product life-cycle and market
structure, and Atkeson and Burstein (2008) use a similar nested CES form in a heterogeneous-firms model of trade
but do not consider multi-product firms.




                                                           7
to consumer preferences with two nests, where the inner nest holds a firm’s product line with an
elasticity of substitution that differs from the elasticity of substitution between product lines in
the outer nest. If the firm’s products in the inner nest were closer substitutes to each other than
product lines are substitutable across firms, then a firm’s additional products would cannibalize
the sales of its infra-marginal products. We present this nested CES utility in Appendix C and
show why the presence of a cannibalization effect does not alter the estimation relationships for
the parameters that we wish to identify (detailed derivations are in the Online Supplement).
    The representative consumer earns a wage wd from inelastically supplying labor to producers
in country d and receives a per-capita dividend distribution πd equal to her share 1/Ld in total
profits of national firms. We denote total income with Yd = (wd + πd )Ld . The consumer
observes the product appeal shocks ξsdg (ω) prior to her consumption choice so that the first-
order conditions of utility maximization imply a product demand
                                                         −σ
                                               psdg (ω)                    Td
(2)                           xsdg (ω) =                        ξsdg (ω)      ,
                                                 Pd                        Pd

where psdg is the price of product g in destination d and we denote by Td the total expenditure of
consumers in country d. In the calibration, we will allow for the possibility that total consump-
tion expenditure Td is different from country output Yd (allowing for trade imbalances), so we
use different notation for the two terms. We define the corresponding ideal price index Pd as
                                                                                 − σ−11
                           N Z          Gkd (ω)
                          X              X
(3)                 Pd ≡                         ξkdg (ω)pkdg (ω)−(σ−1) dω                .
                             k=1   ω∈Ωkd g=1



I.C    Firms
Following Chaney (2008), we assume that there is a continuum of potential producers of measure
Js in each source country s.
    Firms face three types of costs: variable shipping costs (iceberg trade costs), variable pro-
duction costs (which are constant for a given product but higher for products farther away from a
firm’s core competency), and fixed market-access costs (which depend on a firm’s local exporter
scope but do not vary with sales). Each firm draws a productivity parameter φ(ω) and an array
of destination specific market-access cost shocks cd (ω) ∈ (0, ∞).
    The firm chooses how many products to ship to a given destination and what price to charge
for each product at a destination. Following the firms’ choices, consumers learn the product spe-
cific taste shocks ξsdg (ω) for each firm-product g at its potential destination d. Then production
and sales are realized. We will suppress the ω notation whenever there is no risk of confusion.


                                                    8
I.C.1    Variable transport and product-specific production costs

When exported, products incur standard iceberg trade costs so that τsd > 1 units must be shipped
from s for one unit to arrive at destination d, but τss = 1 for domestic sales. This iceberg trade
cost is common to all firms and firm-products shipping from s to d.
   A firm produces each product g with a linear production technology, employing source-
country labor given a firm-product specific efficiency φg . For convenience, we order each firm’s
products in terms of their efficiency, from most efficient to least efficient: φ1 ≥ φ2 ≥ . . . ≥ φGsd .
We characterize the efficiency of the g-th product of a firm φ as

(4)                         φg ≡ φ/h(g)          with       h(1) = 1 and h0 (g) > 0

for g = 1, 2, . . . , Gsd . The function h(g) is common to all firms. Under the efficiency ordering
of products we call the firm’s core product g = 1.

I.C.2    Fixed market-access costs

The firm faces an array of product-destination specific incremental market-access costs cd fsd (g).
A firm that adopts an exporter scope of Gsd therefore incurs a total market-access cost of
                                                              PGsd
(5)                                   Fsd (Gsd , cd ) = cd      g=1   fsd (g)

at destination d, where its idiosyncratic market-access cost is cd . The firm’s market-access cost
is zero at zero scope and strictly positive otherwise:

                      fsd (0) = 0     and     fsd (g) > 0 for all g = 1, 2, . . . , Gsd ,

where fsd (g) is a continuous function in [1, +∞).12 Similar to Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz
(2011), we assume that the access cost shock cd is i.i.d. across firms and destinations.
    The incremental market-access cost cd fsd (g) can include fixed production costs (e.g. for
0 < fss (g) < fsd (g)). The incremental market-access costs cd fsd (g) may increase or decrease
with exporter scope in a given destination market d. But the firm’s total market-access costs
Fsd (Gsd , cd ) at the destination necessarily increase with exporter scope Gsd because fsd (g) > 0
for g ≥ 1.13 We assume that the incremental market-access costs cd fsd (g) require labor from the
  12
     Brambilla (2009) adopts a similar specification. We explore its implications in a firm-product model.
  13
     This specification accommodates a potentially separate firm-level access cost (sometimes referred to as a one-
time beachhead cost), which can be subsumed in the first product’s market-access cost. The only requirement is
that our later assumptions on the shape of the market-access cost schedule are satisfied. In continuous product
space with nested CES utility, in contrast, market-access costs must be non-zero at zero scope because a firm would



                                                        9
destination country d so that Fsd (Gsd , cd ) is homogeneous of degree one in wd . Combined
with the varying firm-product efficiencies φg , this market-access cost structure allows us to
endogenize the exporter scope choice at each destination. Whereas the incremental market-
access cost is meant to capture the barriers to access that may differ for different exporters
depending on the number of products sold, the idiosyncratic access cost shock implies that there
is no strict hierarchy of destinations across exporters. Some exporters may sell to less popular
destinations but not to the most popular ones.
     In summary, there are two scope-dependent cost components: the marginal cost schedule
h(g) and the incremental market-access cost fsd (g). Suppose for a moment that the incremental
market-access cost is constant in destination d and independent of g with fsd (g) = fsd . Then
a firm in our model faces diseconomies of scope in destination d because the marginal-cost
schedule h(g) strictly increases with the product index g. But, if incremental market-access costs
fsd (g) decrease sufficiently strongly with g, our functional form allows for overall economies of
scope in destination market d.
     Before we proceed to firm optimization, we introduce a parameterized example for these
functions that will later allow us to quantitatively match the patterns observed in the Brazilian
data. For quantification, we will specify

                         fsd (g) = fsd · g δsd for δsd ∈ (−∞, +∞)               and
(6)
                           h(g) = g α          for α ∈ [0, +∞).

The choice of these two functions is guided by the log-linear relationships that we will use in
Section II. Introducing the example at this stage helps us provide intuition for the role that the
parameters δsd and α will play in later estimation. The parameter δsd is the scope elasticity of
market-access cost. The product α(σ − 1) is the scope elasticity of product efficiency and its
estimated value will determine how fast sales drop for additional products farther away from the
firm’s core competency. We define α̃ ≡ α(σ−1) for short. We allow δsd to vary by destination,
but take the production-related α as constant across destinations.
    We show in the Online Supplement that the market-access cost specification (6) is read-
ily reformulated to accommodate the market penetration costs in Arkolakis (2010) for a firm’s
product composite, where fsd may depend on the optimal share of consumers reached. Market
penetration costs do not affect our final estimation model because the relevant marketing cost
parameters get subsumed in the (stochastic) market-access cost component cd fsd (1).
otherwise export to all destinations worldwide (Bernard, Redding and Schott 2011, Arkolakis and Muendler 2011).




                                                      10
I.C.3    Firm optimization

Firms with the same productivity φ and the same access cost shock for a given destination cd
make identical product entry decisions in equilibrium. It is therefore convenient to name firms
selling to a given destination d by their characteristics (φ, cd ).
    Conditional on destination market access, the firm chooses individual product prices given
consumer demand under monopolistic competition. The resulting first-order conditions from the
profit maximizing equation produce identical markups over marginal cost σ̃ ≡ σ/(σ −1) > 1
for σ > 1.14
    A type (φ, cd ) firm chooses an exporter scope Gsd (φ, cd ). Plugging the optimal pricing de-
cision into the firm’s profit function and summing over the firm’s products, we obtain firm-level
profits at a destination d for a firm (φ, cd ) selling Gsd products,

                                                                                         Gsd
                                                                                         X
                                                               −(σ−1)       σ−1
                     πsd (φ, cd ) = max Dsd H(Gsd , ξ)                  φ         − cd         fsd (g),
                                      Gsd
                                                                                         g=1


with the revenue shifter
                                                                  σ−1
                                                           Pd             Td
(7)                                         Dsd ≡
                                                        σ̃τsd ws          σ
  14
    After a firm observes each product g’s appeal shock at a destination ξsdg (ω), its total profit from selling an
optimal number of products Gsd to destination market d is
                            Gsd
                                "                                    −σ           #
                            X                             ws       psdg           Td
         πsd (φ, cd ) = max        max      psdg − τsd                       ξsdg       − Fsd (Gsd , cd ) .
                        Gsd            Gsd
                            g=1 {psdg }g=1
                                                       φ/h(g)       Pd            Pd

Suppose the firm sets every individual price psdg after it observes the appeal shocks. Its first-order conditions with
respect to every individual price psdg imply an optimal product price

                                             psdg (φ) = σ̃ τsd ws h(g)/φ

with an identical markup over marginal cost σ̃ ≡ σ/(σ −1) > 1. Importantly, the optimal product price does not
depend on the appeal shock realization because the shock enters profits multiplicatively; it is therefore not relevant
for the firm’s choice problem whether prices are set before or after the firm observes the product appeal shocks. We
adopt the convention that a firm commits to its price prior to the realization of product appeal shocks, and then ships
the demanded quantities given price. The price commitment is credible because price choice remains optimal ex
post. Firms may face a loss in the market if the demand shock realization implies that sales fail to cover the market
entry costs. Under the common assumption that households receive profits and cover losses in a representative
portfolio of the continuum of domestic firms, they do not suffer an overall loss in equilibrium by the law of large
numbers.




                                                          11
and the firm-level efficiency index

                                                     Gsd
                                                                               !− σ−11
                                                     X
(8)                               H(Gsd , ξ) ≡               ξsdg h(g)−(σ−1)             .
                                                       g=1


The index H(·) measures the harmonic mean efficiency of a firm’s product line offered at a
destination d, with the products’ local appeal shocks as weights (collected in the vector ξ).15 The
firm-level efficiency index H(·) decreases with exporter scope Gsd at the destination because
firms have to add less efficient products, farther from their core competency, when they widen
their scope.
    For profit maximization with respect to exporter scope to be well defined, we make the
following assumption.

Assumption 1 (Strictly increasing combined incremental scope costs). Combined incremental
scope costs zsd (G, cd ) ≡ cd fsd (G) h(G)σ−1 strictly increase in exporter scope G.

Under our parameterization (6), Assumption 1 requires that the sum δsd + α̃ is larger than zero
since zsd (G, cd ) = cd fsd (1) Gδsd +α̃ , where α̃ ≡ α(σ −1). The sum δsd + α̃ is the elasticity of
combined incremental scope costs with respect to scope, or the scope cost elasticity for brevity.
    Given the firm’s pricing decision and this assumption, the firm’s optimal scope choice is the
largest G ∈ {0, 1, . . .} such that operating profits from the last adopted product G equal (or
exceed) its incremental market-access costs:

                      g=1
(9)                  πsd  (φ) = Dsd φσ−1           ≥     cd fsd (G) h(G)σ−1 ≡ zsd (G, cd ),

         g=1
where πsd    (φ) is the operating profit of the core product.
     Figure 1 illustrates the choice of optimal exporter scope under Assumption 1. A firm widens
its exporter scope at a destination as long as its combined incremental scope costs zsd (g) remain
                                                g=1
below the core product’s operating profit π̄sd      (φ). A necessary condition for a well defined
optimum is that combined incremental scope costs strictly increase in scope beyond π g=1 (φ) at
some scope. Assumption 1 adopts a stronger sufficient condition, similar to a global second-
order condition, so that a firm faces overall diseconomies of scope at any scope. One of the
components of combined scope costs—either h(·) or f (·)—may still exhibit economies of scope.
The essence of our quantification approach is to study the slope of the combined incremental
scope cost schedule and the contribution of its components at the micro level, so we can conduct
a precise welfare analysis of non-tariff market-access costs in the aggregate.
  15
       The shocks ξsdg and ξ could be written as ξsdg (ω) and ξ(ω) to emphasize that they are firm specific.



                                                             12
                          Figure 1: Optimal Exporter Scope at a Destination
                                      g=1
                              p(f),
                                       s-1
                              f(g)h(g)




                        combined incremental scope costs
                           Core operating profits and
                                                                g=1
                                                               p (f)                                                       G=5

                                                                                                                                          s-1
                                                                                                                                   f(5)h(5)


                                                                                                                           s-1
                                                                                                                    f(4)h(4)

                                                                                                              s-1
                                                                                                       f(3)h(3)
                                                                                                 s-1
                                                                                         f(2)h(2)
                                                                              f(1)

                                                           0            1            2         3      4                        5              6   g
                                                                                         Exporter scope
Note: Operating profits for the core product at a destination d are π g=1 (φ) and depend on a firm’s productivity
φ. Combined incremental scope costs z(G, cd ) ≡ cd f (G) h(G)σ−1 strictly increase in G by Assumption 1, where
f (0) = 0 and h(1) = 1, and are scaled by a firm’s idiosyncratic market-access cost component cd .


    For a firm to enter a destination, the optimal scope condition (9) must be satisfied at least for
the core product (with h(1) = 1). Reformulating (9) accordingly, we can define the productivity
threshold φ∗sd (cd ) such that a firm from s with φ ≥ φ∗sd exports to d at least the core product:

(10)                                                                  φ∗sd (cd )σ−1 ≡ cd fsd (1)/Dsd .

Similarly, we can define the productivity threshold φ∗,G
                                                      sd (cd ) such that a firm from s with φ ≥
 ∗,G
φsd (cd ) sells at least G products at destination d:

                                                                            zsd (G, cd ) ∗             zsd (G, cd )
(11)                                φ∗,G
                                     sd (cd )
                                             σ−1
                                                 ≡                                      φsd (cd )σ−1 =              ,
                                                                             cd fsd (1)                    Dsd

where we adopt the notational simplification φ∗sd (cd ) ≡ φ∗,1  sd (cd ). If Assumption 1 holds then
              ∗,2         ∗,3
φ∗sd (cd ) < φsd (cd ) < φsd (cd ) < . . . so that more productive firms introduce more products in
a given destination. As a result, Gsd (φ, cd ) is a step-function that weakly increases in φ for any
given cd .
     The firm’s optimal price choice for each product precedes the realization of the appeal shock
ξsdg . Once the vector ξ of appeal shocks for a firm ω is realized, the firm supplies the market-
clearing quantity of each product under the product’s constant marginal cost. Using consumer
demand (2) and the above definitions, we can express each individual product’s sales by a firm



                                                                                            13
of type (φ, cd ) in equilibrium as
                                                                                !σ−1
                                                                      φ
(12)         ysdg (φ, cd , ξsdg ) = σ zsd (Gsd (φ, cd ), cd )       ∗,G
                                                                                       h(g)−(σ−1) ξsdg .
                                                                   φsd (cd )

Summing over g, the firm’s total sales at a destination become
                                                                σ−1
                                                        φ                                   −(σ−1)
(13)            tsd (φ, cd , ξ) = σ cd fsd (1)        ∗
                                                                        H Gsd (φ, cd ), ξ
                                                     φsd (cd )

for the firm-level efficiency index H(·) defined in (8).

Proposition 1 If Assumption 1 holds, then for all s, d ∈ {1, . . . , N }

    • exporter scope Gsd (φ, cd ) is positive and weakly increases in φ for φ ≥ φ∗sd (cd ), and

    • total firm exports tsd (φ, cd , ξ) are positive and strictly increase in φ for φ ≥ φ∗sd (cd ).

Proof. The first statement follows immediately from the discussion above. The second statement
follows because H(Gsd (φ, cd ), ξ) strictly increases in Gsd (φ, cd ) a.s., given the positive support
of ξsdg , but Gsd (φ, cd ) weakly increases in φ, so H(Gsd (φ, cd ), ξ) weakly increases in φ. By (13),
tsd (φ, cd , ξ) also monotonically depends on φ itself, so tsd (φ, cd ) strictly increases in φ.


I.D    Structural equations
To take the firm’s choices of destinations, products, and export production to the data we use
the functional forms (6) together with a firm’s productivity, market access, and product appeal
shocks. We assume that a firm’s productivity φ is drawn from a general distribution A(·), its
market-access costs cd are drawn from distribution B(·), and product appeal shocks are drawn
from distribution C(·). These distributions are unknown to the econometrician; we will specify
plausible families for estimation in Section III.
    The optimal exporter scope for firms with φ ≥ φ∗sd (cd ) is given by (9) and can be written as
                                                                      σ−1
                                                     n                       o
(14)                           Gsd (φ, cd ) = integer [φ/φ∗sd (cd )] δsd +α̃

under the definition α̃ ≡ α(σ − 1). Using this relationship and equation (12) we can express
optimal sales of the g-th product in destination d for a firm (φ, cd ) as a function of the total
number of products that the firm sells in d:
                                                                                                σ−1
(15)        ysdg (φ, cd , ξsdg ) = σcd fsd (1) Gsd (φ, cd )   δsd +α̃ −α̃
                                                                     g          φ/φ∗,G
                                                                                   sd    (cd )          ξsdg .


                                                        14
                                                                                      P
Summing over a firm’s products g, we find its total sales tsd (φ, cd , ξ) =              g ysdg (φ, cd , ξsdg )
and, dividing total sales by exporter scope, we obtain average product sales per firm, or average
exporter scale. Given (15), exporter scale takes the form
(16)                                                                               !σ−1 Gsd (φ,cd )
                    tsd (φ, cd , ξ)                                         φ             X
  asd (φ, cd , ξ) ≡                 = σcd fsd (1) Gsd (φ, cd )δsd +α̃−1                          ξsdg g −α̃ ,
                     Gsd (φ, cd )                                       φ∗,G
                                                                         sd  (cd )         g=1


for the firm-level efficiency index H(Gsd , ξ)−(σ−1) = G          −α̃
                                                      P sd
                                                       g=1 ξsdg g     .
    Given these firm relationships, we now describe the data and empirical analogues to these
equations. We defer the discussion of existence and closed form general-equilibrium results to
Section IV.


II     Data and Regularities
Our Brazilian exporter data originate from the export declarations for the year 2000. From these
customs records we construct a three-dimensional panel of exporters, their destination countries,
and their export products at the Harmonized System (HS) 6-digit level, with sales aggregated
for the year 2000. In terms of exports per capita Brazil is close to the median country in 2000.16
We have two empirical objectives: to systematically investigate regularities about multi-product
firms, and to disentangle potentially policy-driven non-tariff measures.
    We start by reporting a set of novel regularities about multi-product firms as well as aspects
of known facts (Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz 2004, Bernard, Redding and Schott 2011, Arko-
lakis and Muendler 2013). We arrive at the stylized facts guided by two principles. First, it is
not possible to generate the regularities with mere random shocks (balls thrown at bins as in
Armenter and Koren (2014)). Second, the regularities must characterize the extensive margin
of product entry (exporter scope) or the remaining intensive margin of average product sales
(average exporter scale), or both, at varying levels of aggregation. We pay particular atten-
tion to differences between nearby and far-away destinations to discipline market-access costs.
We think of the new regularities as a body of facts that any theory of multi-product firms with
heterogeneous productivity should match.
    In addition, we also aim to disentangle policy-driven non-tariff measures (NTMs) from other
components of market-access barriers. For this purpose, we draw on the NTM data underlying
  16
     By WTF and WDI data for all industries and countries, Brazil ranks at the 48th percentile (top 100th country
out of 192) in terms of exports per capita in 2000. Brazil’s total exports in 2000 are at the 88th percentile worldwide
(top 27th country out of 205). When it comes to established facts, Brazil’s exporters exhibit the typical regularities
(see e.g. Arkolakis and Muendler 2013).




                                                         15
the Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga (2009) estimates of NTM ad-valorem equivalents.


II.A     Data sources and preparations
Products in the original SECEX (Secretaria de Comercio Exterior) exports data for 2000 are
reported using 8-digit codes (under the Mercosur nomenclature), of which the first six digits co-
incide with the 6-digit Harmonized System (HS) codes. We aggregate the data to the HS 6-digit
product and firm level so that the resulting dataset is comparable to data for other countries.17
    We restrict our sample to manufacturing firms and their exports of manufactured products,
removing intermediaries and their commercial resales of manufactures. The restriction makes
our findings closely comparable to BRS and Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011). Using a firm’s
self-declared sector from an annual firm employment census (RAIS), we find that 93 percent of
Brazil’s manufactured product exports are shipped by manufacturing firms themselves, and 7
percent by wholesale trading companies. Our resulting manufacturing firm sample has 10,215
exporters selling 3,717 manufactured products at the 6-digit HS level to 170 foreign destinations,
and a total of 162,570 exporter-destination-product observations. Appendix B describes the
Brazilian data with additional detail.
    For the year 2000, UNCTAD’s TRAINS (Trade Analysis and Information System) data offer
the arguably most comprehensive coverage of NTMs. Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga (2009) augment
these data in two ways. First, for the comparably protective textiles, apparel, and footwear in-
dustries in the EU, they bring in NTM information from the EU Standards Database as prepared
by Shepherd (2007). Second, beginning in 1992 they update TRAINS information globally us-
ing the individual records from the WTO’s Trade Policy Reviews and add accordingly identified
NTMs.18 There is a large number of NTM types. We follow Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga (2009)
and Niu et al. (2018) and consider four core NTMs: price control measures designed to affect
the prices of imported goods including so-called para-tariff measures to raise the import price
(TRAINS two-digit codes 61-63), quantity restrictions intended to limit trade through licences
and import prohibitions other than technical measures (codes 31-33), anti-competitive measures
granting exclusive or special preference to one or more limited groups of economic operators in
trade (code 70), and technical measures including sanitary and phytosanitary measures to pre-
  17
     Our findings are similar at the Mercosur nomenclature 8-digit level (see Online Supplement).
  18
     UNCTAD has meanwhile improved coverage of NTMs and reports additional detail of NTMs using a new
classification by UNCTAD’s MAST (Multi-Agency Support Team), still at the HS 6-digit product level (for an
implementation see Niu et al. 2018). For the year 2000, however, we opt for the augmented coverage that Kee,
Nicita and Olarreaga (2009) provide. The comprehensive Global Trade Alert data by Evenett (2009) include NTMs
but only since 2009. Bown (2011) constructs and documents complementary data on temporary trade safeguards
and antidumping measures, while our emphasis is on longer-term NTMs and their relationship to the extensive
margin of exporting products.



                                                     16
vent the spread of disease as well as standards on technical specifications or quality requirements
to protect human and animal health and the environment (code 81).
    We construct an NTM variable that remains deliberately close to the raw data at the level of
the HS 6-digit product j and destination country d: We first assign NTM information available
only at the more aggregate HS 2- or 4-digit levels to the HS 6-digit level, following Kee, Nicita
and Olarreaga (2009). For lower-level HS 8-digit codes we consider the maximal count of
NTMs within the 6-digit HS code. (For a conversion of HS 1992/H0 and HS 2002/H2 codes
to HS 1996/H1 we use WITS product concordances from the World Bank.) Second, we use
information for the year 2000 to assess whether there is a core NTM or not. When information on
an HS 6-digit product and country is missing, we use information from 2001. For the remaining
missing products and countries, we use the year 1999, so our NTM coverage reflects the best
available information in the period 1999-2001. Third, similar to Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga
(2009), we construct a single indicator variable NTM jd that takes the value 1 when country d
imposes at least one of the four core NTMs in an HS 6-digit product, and zero otherwise. We do
not estimate the ad-valorem equivalent of the NTM jd variable (as do Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga
2009, Niu et al. 2018) and instead use its observed value.
    NTMs and conventional tariffs may be related, as substitutes or complements, in trade pol-
icy. To control for tariffs empirically, we collect average tariff rates for Brazilian exporters by
export destination and product category from the WTO’s Integrated Database. In contrast to
the multilateral NTM data, these tariff rates are available at the bilateral level and therefore
more precisely measured than the NTM jd variable. We define the region Latin America and the
Caribbean (LAC) as does the World Bank (including the North American country Mexico and
Central America).


II.B    Regularities
To characterize firms, we decompose a firm ω’s total exports td (ω) to destination d into the
number of products Gd (ω) sold at d (the exporter scope in d) and average product sales per firm
ad (ω) ≡ td (ω) /Gd (ω) in d (the average exporter scale in d). We elicit three major stylized
facts from the data at three levels of aggregation, ranging from the individual product level
within firms to the exporter scope and exporter scale distributions across firms.

Fact 1 Within firms and destinations,

   1. wide-scope exporters sell large amounts of their top-selling products, with exports con-
      centrated in a few products, and



                                                17
                 Figure 2: Firm-product Sales Distributions by Exporter Scope
                                                                                                           Exporter Scope
                                                                                                                G=1
                                                                                                                G [2,4]
                                               1,000,000
                                                                                                                G [5,8]
                                                                                                                G [9,16]
                                                                                                                G [17,32]




                            Mean Sales (US$)
                                                 10,000




                                                    100




                                                      1
                                                           1   2           4           8           16            32
                                                                   Product Rank within Firm (HS 6-digit)

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level, shipments to Argentina. We group firms by their exporter scope GARG = G
in Argentina (Argentina is the most common export destination). The product rank g refers to the sales rank
of
P an exporter’s product   in Argentina. Mean product sales is the average of individual firm-product sales
                        G          G                                                                    G
   ω∈{ω:GARG (ω)=G} ω ARG g /MARG , computed for all firm-products with individual rank g at the MARG firms
                      y
exporting to Argentina with scope GARG = G.


   2. wide-scope exporters sell small amounts of their lowest-selling products.

    Figure 2 documents this fact. For the figure, we limit our sample to exporters at a single
destination and show only firms that ship at least one product to Argentina (the most common
export destination). We group the exporters by their exporter scope GARG = G in Argentina.
Results at other export destinations are similar.19 For each scope group G and for each product
rank g, we then take the average of the log of product sales ln yωGARG g for those firm-products
in Argentina. The graph plots the average log product sales against the log product rank by
exporter scope group. The figure shows that a firm’s sales within a destination are concentrated
in a few core products consistent with the core competency view of EN. In the model, the degree
of concentration is regulated by how fast fd (g) and h(g) change with g (the elasticities δd and
α̃ ≡ α(σ−1)). Figure 2 also documents that wide-scope exporters sell more of their top-selling
products than firms with few products. The model’s equation (15) matches this aspect under
Assumption 1.
    The product ranking of sales within firms need not be globally deterministic, as fd (g) and
h(g) would suggest, but the local product rankings can differ across destinations in reality, which
we model with product-specific taste shocks similar to BRS. Comparing ranks across destina-
tions, we can assess the relative importance of core competency versus product-specific taste
  19
    We present plots for the United States and Uruguay in Appendix B (Figure B.1). Argentina, the United States
and Uruguay are the top three destinations in terms of presence of Brazilian manufacturing exporters in 2000.




                                                                               18
                                             Table 1: Regularities
                              (1)                  (2)            (3)                 (4)                   (5)
                                      Fact 1.1                  Fact 1.2            Fact 2                Fact 3
                            ln yωd1              ln yωd1        ln yωdG             ln Gωd             ln tωd /Gωd
ln Gωd                      1.300                1.272           -2.065                                    .505
                            (.0429)              (.0397)          (.0289)                                (.0383)
LAC                          -.161               -.105                                .450               -.0874
                            (.0397)              (.0406)                             (.0198)             (.0396)
ln Gωd × LAC                 -.179               -.230                                                    -.226
                            (.0488)              (.0413)                                                 (.0379)
NTMωd                                            .0464                              -.0495                .0334
                                                 (.0367)                             (.0124)             (.0364)
ln Gωd × NTMωd                                    .125                                                     .160
                                                 (.0418)                                                 (.0389)

Fixed effects                Firm                 Firm            Firm               Firm                 Firm
Controls                                         Tariffs                            Tariffs              Tariffs
Observations                46,208            32,486             46,208             36,647               32,488
R2                           .544              .539               .743               .596                 .512
Sources: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products; WTO’s Integrated Database 2000
for import tariff rates; CEPII 2000.
Note: All specifications condition on firm fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the firm level, in parentheses
(: p < .05, : p < .01, : p < .001).


shocks: for each given HS 6-digit product that a Brazilian firm sells in Argentina, we can cor-
relate the firm-product’s rank elsewhere with the firm-product’s Argentinean rank. We find a
correlation coefficient of .785 and a Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient of .860, indicating
an important role for core competency.
     To assess the first statement of Fact 1, we regress the logarithm of the revenues of the best-
selling product yωd1 for firm ω to destination d on log exporter scope Gωd , discerning effects
separately for Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) and non-LAC destinations, conditional on
a firm fixed effect. This regression is a version of equation (15) for a firm’s core product g = 1.
     Table 1 reports the result in column 1. The coefficient estimate on ln Gωd shows that sales of
the best-selling product increase with an elasticity of 1.3 as exporter scope in a market widens.
However, for LAC destinations, the elasticity is only 1.12 (1.30-0.18). In light of the model’s
equation (15) for g = 1, this coefficient can be interpreted as an estimate of the scope cost
elasticity δLAC + α̃ in LAC. The variation between LAC and non-LAC destinations is closely
related to our later finding that there are destination-specific elasticities of incremental market-
access costs with respect to exporter scope. In subsection II.C below, we will assess the first


                                                           19
statement of Fact 1 yet more rigorously and estimate the model’s equation (15) at the individual
product level for all products.
     The regional indicator for LAC destinations is hard to interpret because it arguably captures
differences in market-access costs relative to the rest of the world originating from both policy-
amenable and lasting cultural or geographic entry barriers. To proxy for a policy-related market-
access cost component more directly, we therefore include an NTM variable in the regression.
We aggregate the NTM jd variable over the HS 6-digit products j to the firm level ω: NTM ωd ≡
P
    j∈Jωd ={j:yωdj >0} NTM jd /|Jωd |. This NTM proxy varies between zero and one and reflects the
share of HS-6 product lines with at least one core NTM that an exporter ω faces when shipping
its products to destination d. Import tariffs may be correlated with NTMs, so we also control for
the firm-level mean of the log of one plus the tariff rate ln(1 + τωd ) for an exporter ω, where τωd
is the HS 6-digit average tariff on the products that the firm sells at the destination. We continue
to include firm fixed effects. The NTM variable is only available for a subset of destinations, so
we lose observations.
     Column 2 of Table 1 reports the results. The coefficient estimate on ln Gωd means that the
sales of the best-selling product grow larger with an elasticity of 1.27 as exporter scope widens.
However, at destinations that cover a larger share of an exporter’s products with NTMs, the elas-
ticity becomes 1.40 (1.27+0.13). In other words, more NTMs at a destination depress product
sales in a similar manner as do non-LAC destinations, while the LAC indicator remains a statis-
tically significant predictor at conventional significance levels. An interpretation is that policy-
amenable market-access costs such as NTMs discourage product sales markedly, in addition to
lasting entry barriers reflected in regional indicators. We report in the Online Supplement (S3,
Table S.1) further results, including for a breakdown by NTM types, and robustness checks.
     The second statement in Fact 1 that wide-scope exporters sell their lowest-ranked products
for small amounts is also consistent with our model’s equation (15). The equation implies for a
firm’s least-selling product g = Gωd that its sales fall with a firm’s scope if and only if market-
access costs decline with additional products (δd is negative). The finding is at odds with models
of multi-product firms where access costs are product-invariant or absent, such as in BRS or
Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014), and underlies our choice of product-specific market-access
costs. The second statement in Fact 1 closely relates to our later simulation result that falling
access costs induce more trade mostly through the entry of new exporters with their first product,
whereas falling product entry barriers raise trade by less than similar relative declines in variable
trade costs.
     To assess the second statement in Fact 1 quantitatively, we regress the lowest-ranked prod-
uct’s log sales yωdG on a firm’s log exporter scope Gωd in a destination, conditioning on fixed



                                                 20
                                                                 Figure 3: Exporter Scope Distribution
                                                            50

                                                                      Latin America and Caribbean
                                                            45        Rest of World

                                                            40




                              Exporter Scope (HS 6-digit)
                                                            35


                                                            30


                                                            25


                                                            20


                                                            15


                                                            10


                                                             5


                                                             0
                                                                 0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9   1
                                                                            Percentile of Exporter by Exporter Scope

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. The percentile of exporters by scope is calculated within a given destination.
Exporter scope is the corresponding scope for a given percentile averaged across the five most common destinations
within each of the two regions (LAC, and non-LAC called Rest of World).


effects for firms ω, and obtain an elasticity of roughly −2.1 as shown in column 3 of Table 1.
The coefficient estimate implies that sales of the lowest-selling product fall as exporter scope at
a destination widens. In light of equation (15) for g = Gωd , the coefficient can be interpreted as
an estimate of average δd across the destinations of Brazilian exporters. Taken together with the
coefficient estimate on exporter scope in column 1, the evidence so far would suggest that, on
average across destinations, δd roughly equals −2.1 and the sum δd + α̃ about 1.3, so α̃ equals
around 3.4. These findings are similar to our more precise subsequent results and show how
we are going to use microeconomic evidence from product sales within firms to build towards
aggregate quantification.

Fact 2 At each destination, there are a few wide-scope and many narrow-scope exporters.

    Figure 3 plots average exporter scope in the top five destinations of a region (LAC or non-
LAC) against the percentile of an exporter in terms of scope at the destination. The median
exporter only ships one or two products to any given destination. Within a destination, the
exporter scope distribution exhibits a concentration in the upper tail reminiscent of a Pareto
distribution.
    The exporter scope distribution varies between destinations. Plotted in open dots is the
average exporter scope at top LAC destinations, and with solid dots the exporter scope at top
non-LAC destinations. Brazilian exporters have a wider exporter scope at LAC destinations
than at non-LAC destinations. To quantify the difference in exporter scope across destinations,



                                                                                              21
                            Figure 4: Exporter Scope and Exporter Scale
                                                                 Latin America and Caribbean
                                                                 Rest of World
                                                                 Linear Fit
                                                         6

                                                         5




                             Normalized Exporter Scale
                                                         4


                                                         3




                                                         2




                                                         1



                                                             1   2      3      4      5        6     7     8   9   10
                                                                             Exporter Scope (HS 6-digit)

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. Exporter scope is the number of products exported to a given destination.
Exporter scale is a firm’s total sales at a destination divided by its exporter scope within the destination. We
normalize log exporter scale by the average log total sales of single-product exporters at the destination, so that
the normalized log exporter scale for single-product exporters is one. We report mean exporter scope and mean
exporter scale over the five most common destinations within a region (LAC or non-LAC). The dashed lines depict
the ordinary least-squares fit.


we run a simple regression of log exporter scope Gωd on an indicator for LAC destinations and
condition on firm fixed effects.
    Column 4 of Table 1 shows the regression results, conditional on our measure of NTMs for
the products that an exporter ships to the destination and conditional on the mean log of one plus
the tariff rate ln(1 + τωd ) as well as firm fixed effects. The coefficient of the LAC indicator is
positive. In light of the model’s equation (14), a wider exporter scope in nearby LAC countries
is consistent with a lower scope cost elasticity δLAC + α̃ in absolute value than in the rest of
the world, similar to evidence on the first statement in Fact 1. The coefficient on the NTM
variable suggests that exporter scope is lower at destinations where exporters face more NTMs,
a discouraging impact on exports echoing the effect for non-LAC destinations. Further results
and robustness checks are available in the Online Supplement (S3, Table S.2).

Fact 3 Average product sales (exporter scale) and exporter scope exhibit varying destination-
specific degrees of correlation, with the correlation positive and highest in distant destinations.

    Figure 4 plots the normalized log of average exporter scale ln aωd at the top-five destinations
in a region against the average exporter scope Gωd at the top-five destinations in the region.
We normalize exporter scale by the average log total sales of single-product exporters at the
destination, so that the normalized log exporter scale for single-product exporters is one. An



                                                                                      22
exporter’s average product sales exhibit a strong positive correlation with exporter scope in more
distant non-LAC destinations, but no detectable relationship at close-by LAC destinations.20 In
light of our model’s equation (16), a consistent explanation is that δd is negative and in absolute
magnitude larger in nearby countries, similar to evidence from the previous two facts. Exporters
to a nearby destination experience a rapid decline in market-access costs for additional products,
permitting low-selling products into a nearby market more easily than into remote markets.
    We can relate an exporter’s average product sales and exporter scope across destinations to
a destination’s share of products facing NTMs, in addition to the LAC indicator. Similar to
earlier specifications, we regress the dependent variable, now the log of average product sales
ln aωd , on log exporter scope ln Gωd and its interaction with a LAC dummy and with the variable
N T Mωd ∈ [0, 1], while controlling for the average tariff rate and for firm fixed effects.
    We report the results in column 5 of Table 1. Mirroring the evidence from Figure 4, the
predicted elasticity of exporter scale with respect to exporter scope is significantly higher at
non-LAC destinations and at destinations where products face more core NTMs. Further results
and robustness checks are available in the Online Supplement (S3, Table S.3). These facts are
consistent with the interpretation that exporters to distant countries and to destinations with more
NTMs face higher incremental market-access costs for additional products. Firms therefore
mostly add high-selling products in distant and NTM-protected markets. As a result, wide-
scope exporters at more distant and NTM-protected markets have, on average, higher sales per
product.


II.C     Scale-scope-rank regressions
We conclude our descriptive exploration of the data with an empirical assessment of Fact 1 (Fig-
ure 2) at the product level. For this purpose, we simplify the model and restrict both the market-
access cost and the local product appeal to unity across all firms and destinations: cd = ξdg = 1.
The only structural heterogeneity comes from a firm’s productivity φ, which we consider to be
from a Pareto distribution with shape parameter θ, and we define the resulting Pareto shape pa-
rameter of the firm size distribution θ̃ ≡ θ/(σ−1). Using equation (15), we can express firm ω’s
log sales yωdg of the g-th product in destination d as a function of the firm’s log exporter scope
  20
     The absence of a strong correlation between exporter scale and exporter scope among Brazilian firms exporting
to close-by LAC countries is reminiscent of the finding by BRS that scale and scope hardly correlate among U.S.
exporters to Canada. Montinari, Riccaboni and Schiavo (2017) report similar scale-scope relationships for French
exporters when discerning between EU and non-EU destinations, comparable to our scale-scope relationships for
Brazil and LAC vs. non-LAC destinations.




                                                       23
Gωd and the log local rank of the firm’s product g:

(17) ln yωdg = (δd + α̃) ln Gωd − α̃ ln g −f (1−PrG
                                                  ωd )+ln σ[fd (1)/f (1)]1d∈LAC +χω 1ω +ωdg .


                                                 ∗,G
The function f (1 − PrG  ωd ) = (σ−1) ln(φω /φd ) maps a firm’s sales percentile to its underlying
relative productivity. To measure 1 − PrG  ωd , we compute a Brazilian firm’s local sales percentile
among the Brazilian exporters with minimum exporter scope G. Given the Pareto shape param-
eter of the firm size distribution θ̃ ≡ θ/(σ−1), we adopt as a functional form f (x) = θ̃−1 ln(x)
and include the log percentile as a regressor. We augment the estimation equation with a com-
bined disturbance χω 1ω + ωdg , simply recognizing that the equation will only hold with some
empirical error, and condition out a firm’s worldwide fixed effect χω (with 1ω denoting an indi-
cator for firm ω). The (exhaustive) set of firm effects absorbs the worldwide average log fixed
cost ln σf (1).
     There are concerns using estimation equation (17). The equation is misspecified if local
sales shocks ξdg permutate the global rank order of a firm’s products and turn the order into
different location-specific rankings. This misspecification makes the equation “memoryless” in
that estimation does not register a firm-product’s identity across locations and therefore loses
account of the firm-product’s ranking outside a given location d. Moreover, the estimation
equation suffers an omitted variable bias because unobserved positive firm-destination product
appeal shocks will both tend to raise exporter scope and to systematically permutate the local
rank order of firm products; this omitted variable bias would expectedly distort the estimates of
δd . To mitigate the concerns, we estimate equation (17) in two parts by restricting the estimation
sample: (i) we isolate the intercept of the graphs in Figure 2 by restricting the sample to just the
best selling (or second-best selling) product, g = 1 (or g = 2), and estimate how the intercept
varies with exporter scope for two location groups Gω,d∈LAC (LAC) and Gω,d∈ROW (non-LAC
destinations); (ii) we measure the slope of the graphs in Figure 2 by restricting the sample to
Gω,d∈LAC = Gω,d∈ROW = 2 (or Gω,d = 16). To obtain mutually consistent results from this
two-part estimation, we use the estimated coefficients on 1d∈LAC and ln(1 − PrG     ωd ) from the first
part (i) as constraints on the second part (ii). Given the potential misspecification under any pair
of restrictions, the regressions merely offer a descriptive exploration of the data.
     Table 2 reports results from the two-part regression exercise under three combinations of
restrictions. The baseline specification uses the restrictions g = 1 and Gωd = 2 for a pair of
regressions under firm fixed effects (standard errors clustered at the level of 259 industries).
The first variation uses the restrictions g = 2 and Gωd = 2 for a separate pair of firm fixed
effects regressions and the second variation combines the restrictions g = 1 and Gωd = 16 for
a final pair of firm fixed effects regressions. (Results remain broadly similar when including


                                                  24
                                 Table 2: Fit of Individual Product Sales
                                        δLAC          δROW                α̃         θ̃               δLAC −δROW

Baseline: g = 1; G = 2                 -1.82         -1.61             3.04      2.35                      -.21
                                         (.10)         (.12)           (.09)      (.35)                    (.06)
Variant 1: g = 2; G = 2                -1.24         -1.14             3.04      2.09                      -.10
                                         (.12)         (.14)           (.09)      (.34)                    (.07)
Variant 2: g = 1; G = 16               -1.41         -1.19             2.62      2.35                      -.21
                                         (.12)         (.13)           (.11)      (.35)                    (.06)

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. OLS - FE firm fixed effects estimation of equation (17) for firm ω’s individual
product g sales at destination d in two parts, (i) under a rank restriction such as g = 1 with

    ln yωdg = 1.22 ln Gω,d∈LAC + 1.43 ln Gω,d∈ROW − .43 ln(1 − PrG
                                                                 ωd ) − .32 1d∈LAC + χω 1ω + ωdg ,
               (.04)                  (.07)                    (.06)               (.05)

and (ii) under a scope restriction such as Gωd = 2 with

                    ln yωdg − .43 ln(1 − PrG
                                                           
                                            ωd ) − .321d∈LAC = −3.04 ln gωd + χω 1ω + ωdg .
                                                                        (.08)

Robust standard errors from the delta method, clustered at the HS 2-digit industry level, in parentheses. Estimates
of δLAC measure the scope elasticity of market-access costs for Brazilian firms shipping to other LAC destinations,
δROW for Brazilian firms shipping to destinations outside LAC; χω 1ω denote firm fixed effects.


destination and HS 2-digit industry fixed effects.) As expected from the different relationships
between exporter scope and scale outside LAC and within LAC (Figure 4), δLAC exceeds δROW in
absolute magnitude. Overall δd falls in the range between −1.13 and −1.82 across specifications
and regions, while α̃ lies in the range from 2.62 to 3.04 and θ̃ between 2.10 and 2.35. In the
baseline specification, the magnitudes of the δd estimates imply that incremental market-access
costs drop at an elasticity of −1.61 when manufacturers introduce additional products in markets
outside LAC, and with −1.82 within LAC. But firm-product efficiency drops off even faster with
an elasticity of around 3.04 in the baseline. Adding the two fixed scope cost coefficients suggests
that there are net overall diseconomies of scope with a scope elasticity of 1.22 in LAC and 1.43 in
non-LAC destinations. The coefficient estimates suggest that Assumptions 1 and 2 are satisfied
in our data.
    We now turn from descriptive explorations to an internally consistent estimator and will use
the measured parameter magnitudes to assess the importance of each margin for overall trade.




                                                         25
III      Estimation
We adopt a method of simulated moments for parameter estimation.21 We specify the product
appeal shocks ξdg and the market-access costs shocks cd to be distributed log-normally with
mean zero and respective variances σξ and σc . Firm productivities φ are drawn from a Pareto
distribution with shape parameter θ.22
    We need to identify five parameters Θ = {δ, α̃, θ̃, σξ , σc }, where α̃ ≡ α(σ − 1) and θ̃ ≡
θ/(σ−1). These five parameters fully characterize the relevant shapes of our functional forms and
the dispersion of the three stochastic elements—Pareto distributed firm-level productivity φ, the
random firm-level market-access cost component cd , and local product appeal shocks ξdg . Our
moments are standardized relative to the median firm or top firm-product at a destination. This
convention results in an estimator that is invariant to two deterministic shifters in the firms’ cost
and revenue functions: a destination-specific market-access cost shifter σfd (1) and a destination-
specific revenue shifter Dd , which are both common across exporters at a destination and can
be inferred from the data after estimation.23 Moreover, we specify the domestic access cost
components ξBRA g and cBRA to be deterministic so that every exporter sells in the home market
with certainty. In our ultimate implementation of the SMM estimator, we adopt an extension to
destination-specific scope elasticities of market-access costs with δd varying between LAC and
non-LAC countries.


III.A      Moments
At any iteration of the simulation, we use the candidate parameters Θ̂ to compute a simulated
vector of moments msim (Θ̂), analogous to moments in the data mdata . We use five sets of sim-
ulated moments. Each set captures facts 1 and 2 from Section II, as well as standard firm
heterogeneity facts. We exclude moments related to Fact 3 from our set of targeted moments,
  21
      The presence of overlaying market-access cost and product appeal shocks renders conventional estimators dif-
ficult, as they would involve the numeric evaluation of integrals. Both a firm’s market-access cost shock cωd is
potentially widely dispersed andP a firm-product’s rank gω in production can differ from the firm-product’s observed
                                    G
local rank in sales (ĝωd ≡ 1 + k=1 1[yωdk (ξdk )>yωdg (ξdg ) ), especially if the product appeal shock ξdg is widely
dispersed. The implied stochastic permutations of exporter scopes and product ranks introduce an exacting dimen-
sionality that is hard to handle with a maximum likelihood estimator, while the need for numerical computation of
higher moments makes a general method of moments difficult to implement.
   22
      We relax the Pareto assumption in Appendix F and suppose that firm productivity is drawn from a log-normal
distribution. We find that our parameter estimates are largely unchanged. The log-normal distribution may do a
better job in describing small firm behavior, but we focus on large, productive firms, and the Pareto distribution
allows for the counterfactual simulation in Section 5.
   23
      This choice effectively removes the levels of fixed costs from the estimation, a principal object of interest in
Fernandes et al. (2018). In estimation we do not use moments that aggregate over firms, such as the average firm’s
sales or total export sales.




                                                         26
but use this fact to assess model fit. We now summarize the simulated moments and discuss how
they contribute to parameter identification. Additional details on the moment definitions as well
as the simulation algorithm can be found in Appendix D.

   1. Sales of the top-selling product across firms within destinations. Based on the first state-
      ment of Fact 1, we characterize the top-selling products’ sales across firms with the same
      exporter scope. Among firms exporting three or four products to Argentina, for exam-
      ple, we take the ratio of the top-selling product at the 95th percentile across firms and
      the top-selling product of the median firm. Our restriction to the top product and our
      standardization by the median firm with the same scope isolate the stochastic components
      from equation (15) and therefore help identify the dispersion of product appeal shocks
      (and partly the dispersion of the market-access cost shock).

   2. Within-destination and within-firm product sales concentration. We use the second state-
      ment in Fact 1 and the ratios between the sales of given lower-ranked products and the
      sales of the top product to characterize the concentration of sales within firms. The com-
      parison of sales within firms neutralizes a firm’s global productivity ranking and eliminates
      the role of exporter scope as well as destination-specific determinants from equation (15).
      The within-firm within-destination sales ratios therefore help pin down the scope elasticity
      of product efficiency α̃ and help identify the dispersion of product appeal shocks.

   3. Within-destination exporter scope distribution. We turn to Fact 2 and compute, within des-
      tinations, the shares of exporters with certain exporter scopes. For example, we calculate
      the proportion of exporters to Argentina, shipping three or four products. The frequencies
      of firms with a given exporter scope help identify the shape parameter θ̃ of the Pareto firm
      size distribution (and partly the dispersion of the market-access cost shock) and help pin
      down the scope cost elasticity δ + α̃, which translates productivity into exporter scope by
      equation (14).

   4. Market presence combinations. Mirroring similar regularities documented in Eaton, Ko-
      rtum and Kramarz (2011), we use the frequency of firms shipping to any permutation of
      Brazil’s top five export destinations in LAC and the top five destinations outside of LAC.
      For example, we target the number of exporters that ship to Argentina and Chile, but
      not to Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay. Matching these market presence patterns helps us
      identify the dispersion of market-access cost shocks.

   5. Within-firm export proportions between destination pairs. It is a widely documented fact
      that a firm’s sales are positively correlated across destinations. For each firm, we pair


                                                27
       its total sales to a given destination with its sales to Brazil’s respective top destination in
       LAC or outside LAC. The ratio of a firm’s total sales to two destinations depends on the
       firm’s respective exporter scopes by equation (16) and therefore helps pin down the scope
       cost elasticity δ + α̃. The pairwise sales ratios also help identify the dispersion of product
       appeal shocks and market access shocks.


III.B      Inference
Inference proceeds as follows. To find an estimate of Θ, we first stack the differences between
observed and simulated moments ∆m (Θ) = mdata − msim (Θ̂).
    In the population, the parameter Θ0 satisfies E [∆m (Θ0 )] = 0, so we search for the Θ̂ that
minimizes the weighted sum of squares, ∆m (Θ)0 W∆m (Θ), where W is a positive semi-
definite weighting matrix. In the population, W = V−1 where V is the variance-covariance
matrix of the moments. The population matrix is unknown, so we use the empirical analogue

                                          sample
                                         NX
                                  1                                                      0
                                                   mdata − msample       mdata − msample
                                                                     
                       V̂ =                                 n                     n         ,
                              N sample    n=1


where msample
          n     are the moments from a random sample drawn with replacement of the origi-
nal firms in the dataset and N sample is the number of those draws.24 To search for Θ̂ we use
a derivative-free Nelder-Mead downhill simplex search. We compute standard errors using a
bootstrap method that allows for sampling and simulation error.25


III.C      Results
We simulate one million firms so that we obtain approximately thirty-thousand exporters. The
number of simulated firms is roughly three times as large as the number of 331,528 actual
Brazilian manufacturing firms and 10,215 exporters. We use an excess number of simulated
firms to reduce the noise in our simulation draws and smooth out our simulated moments. Our
bootstrapped standard errors are based on sampling with replacement from the original set of
10,215 exporters.
    To allow for cross-destination variation, we estimate separate scope elasticities of market-
access costs for LAC destinations (δLAC ) and the rest of the world (δROW ).26 Table 3 presents our
  24
      Currently, we use N sample = 1, 000. We cannot invert this matrix V̂ because of adding-up constrains. Instead,
we take a Moore–Penrose pseudo-inverse.
   25
      For the bootstrap we repeat the estimation process 100 times, replacing mdata with mbootstrap sample to generate
standard errors. The bootstrapped standard errors are not centered.
   26
      We observe a concentration of exporter presence at specific pairs of destinations within regions. For example,



                                                         28
                                         Table 3: Estimation Results
                                 δLAC      δROW          α̃         θ̃       σξ       σc          δLAC −δROW

Baseline                        -1.17       -.87     1.77       1.73      1.82       .58               -.30
                                 (.05)      (.07)     (.05)      (.09)     (.04)    (.02)              (.06)
No product appeal               -1.41      -1.18     2.42       1.00                 .99               -.23
  shocks (σξ = 0)                (.03)      (.05)     (.03)    (.001)               (.01)              (.04)
No market access                -1.20       -.91     1.78       1.77      2.00                         -.28
  cost shocks (σc = 0)           (.05)      (.08)     (.03)      (.11)     (.03)                       (.05)

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. Standard errors from 100 bootstraps in parentheses. Estimates of δLAC
measure the scope elasticity of market-access costs for Brazilian firms shipping to other LAC destinations, δROW
for Brazilian firms shipping to destinations outside LAC.


baseline estimates in the first row. The baseline estimates for δLAC and δROW are both negative,
significantly different from zero, and also significantly different from each other. The nega-
tive sign implies that exporting an additional product to a destination is less costly in terms of
market-access costs than any previous product. The difference in the estimated scope elasticities
between LAC and ROW (non-LAC) destinations means that incremental market-access costs to
LAC destinations fall 30 percent faster than incremental market-access costs to the rest of the
world. The scope elasticity of production efficiency α̃ is positive and significantly different from
zero. The estimate of α̃ = 1.76 implies that an additional product has more than proportionally
higher unit production costs than any infra-marginal product. In both the LAC region and the
rest of the world, the scope cost elasticity δd + α̃ is strictly positive and implies strictly increasing
incremental scope costs (Assumption 1 is therefore empirically satisfied). Overall, the estimates
from SMM are similar in broad terms to those from our baseline descriptive data exploration
in the preceding section (Table 2) but all coefficients are smaller in absolute magnitude in the
current baseline specification.
    Our baseline estimate for θ̃ is statistically significantly above 1 and below 2 (at conventional
significance levels).27 The baseline estimate of the variance of firm-product appeal shocks σξ is
approximately 2 and implies that, conditional on market-access cost shocks and firm productiv-
exporters to Paraguay frequently also export to Argentina; exporters to the United Kingdom frequently also ship to
the United States. However, there is no clear association between exporting to the United Kingdom and Paraguay.
In reality, there is a complex set of factors that might connect market-access costs between destinations. For
example, customs unions, common markets, shared destination languages, and unified distribution systems could
link market-access costs between countries. Our model does not explicitly take those potential connections into
account. Instead, we implement a simplification and jointly simulate firms to identify separate moments for LAC
export destinations and the rest of the world (ROW).
   27
      Estimates of θ̃ can also be compared to those from Section II.C and are quantitatively similar.




                                                       29
ity, the ratio of the 75th firm sales percentile to the 25th firm sales percentile is over 10. This
large disparity stands in contrast to our baseline estimates for σc , which imply that the ratio of
the 75th firm sales percentile to the 25th firm sales percentile is only about 2, far less than 10.
In a model with single-product firms and different sources of heterogeneity, Eaton, Kortum and
Kramarz (2011) find θ̃ ≈ 2.5, which is larger than our estimate of 1.73. Their estimate of θ̃
captures the elasticity of substitution between firms, whereas ours reflects the elasticity of sub-
stitution between firm-product varieties. Our estimate of 1.82 for σξ is close to that in Eaton,
Kortum and Kramarz (2011), who find that their firm-specific appeal shock has a variance of
1.69. However, our appeal shock is firm-product specific (not just firm specific), so estimates
are not directly comparable.
     To explore the implications of our baseline estimates for the sources of variation in firm-
product sales more systematically, we apply a log decomposition to equation (15) at the product
level:28

              G
          ln yωdg = ln cωd + (σ−1) ln[φω /φ∗,G
                                           d (cωd )] + (δd + α̃) ln Gωd − α̃ ln gω + ln ξωdg .
                    |             {z               } |              {z           } | {z }
                                         Ap                          Bp                 Cp


    For LAC destinations our estimates imply that component Ap , which reflects the combined
market-access costs shock and productivity for firms with identical exporter product scope, ac-
counts for 17 percent of sales variation at LAC destinations. These shocks are exogenous, but
known to a firm before it chooses its export profile. Component Bp , which accounts for both a
firm-product’s global production rank gω as well as the firm’s local exporter scope Gωd , explains
37 percent of sales variation. Individual firm-product appeal shocks in component Cp account
for 50 percent of sales variations in LAC countries (and a negative covariance between Ap and
Bp accounts for the excess prediction of variation). For non-LAC destimations the breakdown
is slightly different. There component Ap accounts for 19 percent of firm-product sales, com-
ponent Bp for 21 percent, and component Cp for the remaining 60 percent (and covariances
between components are negligibly small). The disparity between LAC and non-LAC destina-
tions is due to the difference between δLAC and δROW , which for LAC destinations augments the
importance of exporter scope and reduces the dependence on individual product appeal shocks.
    An interpretation of component Bp is that it shows firm-level competency (core competency
in a particular firm-product and overall firm capability with regards to exporter scope), whereas
component Ap reflects idiosyncratic firm heterogeneity, and component Cp the randomness of
individual product appeal. In summary, product appeal shocks play a dominant role in firm sales.
while the combination of firm-level competency and firm heterogeneity accounts for a similarly
  28
       We standardize firm-product sales by σfd (1) in estimation.



                                                          30
important part of product sales. Our estimates highlight that a reduction in the scope elasticity of
incremental market-access costs from their magnitude in non-LAC countries to the magnitude
in LAC countries raises the importance of firm-level competency considerably.
    Similarly we can run a firm-level decomposition of total sales by firms to a particular desti-
nation:29

                               ∗,G                                                       PG
        ln tG
            ωd = (σ−1) ln[φω /φd (cωd )] + (δd + α̃) ln Gωd + ln c + ln                     g=1 ξωdg   gω−α̃ .
                 |                 {z                     } | {zωd} |                          {z         }
                                            Af                               Bf                Cf


    Across all destinations, the first component Af , which reflects firm-level heterogeneity,
accounts for 11 percent of variation. The second component Bf , which stems from firm-
destination heterogeneity, accounts for 5 percent of the firm sales variation. The third com-
ponent Cf captures destination-product heterogeneity and accounts for 60 percent of the firm
sales variation (and the remaining firm sales variability, not accounted for by Af , Bf or Cf , is
due to positive covariances between the components). By way of comparison, in their model of
single-product firms Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011) find that nearly 50 percent of the firm
sales variation can be attributed to the destination-specific fixed costs behind Bf . In contrast,
the product channel Cf in our model with firm-product-destination shocks attributes much of
the apparent firm-level variation to product-specific shocks.
    In two departures from our baseline specification, we re-estimate the model dropping one
source of heterogeneity at a time. We first omit product appeal shocks, and then drop market-
access cost shocks. We report the resulting estimates in the second and third rows of Table 3.
When we omit product appeal shocks (setting σξ = 0), the estimated magnitudes of the scope
elasticities δd and α̃ markedly increase. In addition, the estimated dispersion of market-access
costs increases and the estimate of the shape parameter of the Pareto firm size distribution θ̃ hits
the lower bound, implying maximal dispersion in firm sizes. Intuitively, the estimator attempts
to compensate for the lacking product-level heterogeneity by raising the cross-firm dispersion
with a possibly low Pareto shape parameter and by raising the cross-destination variation through
market-access cost dispersion. Those salient changes in parameter estimates underscore the im-
portance of specifying product appeal shocks.30 Interestingly, however, the regional difference
in the scope elasticity of market-access costs δ̂LAC − δ̂ROW remains similar to that under our
  29
    We again standardize firm-product sales by σfd (1) in estimation.
  30
    In the Online Supplement S6 we adopt a limiting parametrization that forces all firms to become single-product
exporters, approximating Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011). The limit case results in an estimate of the Pareto
shape parameter of 3.8 and a market-access cost variance below that in the baseline. In light of that limit case, the
evidence from the multi-product case with no appeal shocks suggests that firm-product-destination data necessitate
firm-product-destination heterogeneity for estimation.




                                                        31
baseline estimation. When we omit market-access cost shocks (setting σc = 0), coefficient esti-
mates are affected only in minor ways (and not statistically different from previous estimates),
except for the estimated variance of product appeal shocks that now takes on some of the varia-
tion that otherwise the market access cost shocks would absorb.31
    Relating our results back to the findings from Table 2, which were based on simple log
linear estimators dropping both sources of heterogeneity (product appeal shocks and market-
access cost shocks), we find qualitatively similar results. This broad similarity across estimators
suggests that both SMM and its simpler counterparts identify comparable principal variation
in the data but the quantitative differences indicate the importance of heterogeneity in product
appeal and, to some extent, market-access costs.
    To assess the sensitivity of our results to potential heterogeneity in product types and hetero-
geneity in destinations, we repeat estimation for numerous alternative specifications: we demean
firm-product sales at the HS 6-digit level by average Brazilian exports at the HS 2-digit level, we
restrict the sample to firms in high-tech manufacturing industries, we separate Mercosur mem-
ber countries from other LAC destinations, and we drop both Argentina and the United States
from the sample. We find our estimates broadly confirmed and report the details of the sensitiv-
ity exercises in the Online Supplement (S7). To document the properties of our SMM, we also
report results from Monte Carlo simulations of our estimator in the Online Supplement S5.


III.D      Model fit
To gauge the fit of our estimates, we plot simulated data using the baseline parameter estimates
(from the first row of Table 3) alongside the actual data. We first assess how well we capture
features of the data that our simulated moments target directly. Figure 5 shows our targeted
moments and illustrates the close fit of our simulated data. The simulated data are depicted
with (solid and dashed) lines in Figures 5A and 5B. The simulated data match our Facts 1 and 2
closely as shown with the data plots in individual dots (the data plots replicate those in Figures 2
and 3). Figure 5A presents the within-firm distribution of product sales in Argentina for firms
with different exporter scopes. Figure 5B shows the exporter scope distributions, averaging over
the five most common destinations in the LAC and ROW (non-LAC) regions.
  31
     We cannot compare the goodness of fit in meaningful ways across specifications because the moments used
under the restrictions differ from the baseline estimation. For σξ = 0, we have to limit the set of moments 2 to
the median because there is no variation by percentile in the simulation. For σc = 0, we have to exclude the
set of moments 4 and 5. Those caveats notwithstanding, we find an almost hundred-fold increase in the SMM
criterion function when setting σξ = 0, and a ten-fold increase when setting σc = 0. The markedly worse fit of the
model, especially when omitting product-destination appeal shocks, speaks to the importance of those sources of
heterogeneity for the empirical specification.




                                                       32
                                                                                         Figure 5: Fit of Targeted Moments
                                      (A) Firm-product Sales Distribution                                                                                                  (B) Exporter Scope Distribution
                                                                                                                                                             50

                                                                                                                                                                             Latin America and Caribbean - Data
                                                                                                        Exporter Scope                                       45              Latin America and Caribbean - Simulated
                                                                                                             G [2,4]                                                         Rest of World - Data
                                                                                                             G [5,8]
                              1,000,000
                                                                                                             G [9,16]
                                                                                                                                                             40              Rest of World - Simulated
                                                                                                             G [17,32]




                                                                                                                               Exporter Scope (HS 6-digit)
                                                                                                             Simulated
                                                                                                                                                             35
  Mean Sales (US$)




                                                                                                                                                             30

                                  10,000
                                                                                                                                                             25


                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                             15
                                      100

                                                                                                                                                             10


                                                                                                                                                              5


                                       1                                                                                                                      0
                                            1              2           4             8         16             32                                                  0         0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4   0.5     0.6    0.7   0.8      0.9      1
                                                               Product Rank within Firm (HS 6-digit)                                                                                Percentile of Exporter by Exporter Scope

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. Panel A replicates Figure 2 and panel B Figure 3. Predicted curves based
on simulations in Section D.A, using the baseline parameter estimates in Table 3. Panel A shows shipments to
Argentina, grouping firms by their local exporter scope and firm-products by their local sales rank. Panel B shows
the exporter scope by percentile, averaged across the five most common destinations within each of the two regions
LAC and Rest of World (non-LAC).



                                                                                 Figure 6: Fit of Non-Targeted Moments
                                                (A) Exporter Scope and Scale                                                                                                (B) Export Sales Distribution
                                                                                                                                                             10 4
                                                Latin America and Caribbean - Data
                                                Latin America and Caribbean - Simulated
                                                                                                                                                             10 3
                                                Rest of World - Data
                              6                 Rest of World - Simulated
                                                                                                                                                             10 2
                              5
  Normalized Exporter Scale




                                                                                                                               Normalized Exporter Sales




                              4                                                                                                                              10 1


                              3                                                                                                                              10 0


                                                                                                                                                             10 -1
                              2

                                                                                                                                                             10 -2


                                                                                                                                                                  -3
                                                                                                                                                             10


                              1                                                                                                                              10 -4                                                                Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Simulated
                                                                                                                                                             10 -5
                                  1             2      3         4         5     6         7        8        9           10                                            0     0.1    0.2    0.3   0.4    0.5    0.6    0.7   0.8      0.9      1
                                                               Exporter Scope (HS 6-digit)                                                                                                Percentile of Exporter by Sales

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. Panel A replicates Figure 4 and shows exporter scale (a firm’s total sales at a
destination divided by its exporter scope at the destination) on a log scale plotted against exporter scope, averaging a
variable over the five most common destinations within each of the two regions LAC and Rest of World (non-LAC)
and normalizing scale by the average total sales of single-product exporters at the destination. Predicted curves
based on simulations in Appendix D.A, using the baseline parameter estimates in Table 3. Panel B shows total firm
exports by percentile, averaging a firm’s total exports over the five most common destinations within each of the
two regions and normalizing total sales by the median firm’s total at the destination.




                                                                                                                              33
    We now turn to regularities in the data that our simulated moments in the estimation routine
did not target. We deliberately excluded from our estimation any moments that relate to Fact 3.
As Figure 6A documents, our simulated firms (shown with dashed and solid lines) nevertheless
line up with the observed data (shown with dots that replicate Figure 4). Our estimates pinpoint
clearly different scale-scope relationships between LAC destinations and ROW (non-LAC) des-
tinations. Figure 6B plots the distribution of total sales by percentile within destinations. Our
estimation routine includes simulated moments that relate to the distribution of sales across
firm-products (within firms), to the distribution of exporter scope (within destinations), and to
the proportion of total sales between pairs of destinations (within firms). None of those moments
fully captures the distribution of total sales across firms (within destinations) because sales de-
pend on all three sources of stochastic variation in the model: firm productivity, market-access
cost draws and product appeal shocks. Even though our SMM estimator did consequently not
fully target the total sales distribution, Figure 6B documents that we find a close fit between our
simulated firms and the data.


III.E    Policy relevance
In our model, fixed costs of exporting G products to destination d take the form of equation (5),
which depends on both the fixed cost of introducing the first product at an export market fd (1)
and the elasticity of additional products’ fixed costs with respect to exporter scope δd . We take
our estimates for σ, θ, and α and minimize deviations between the model and data to find the set
of δd that best match our empirical moments for each destination country reached by 60 or more
Brazilian exporters. This procedure yields δd estimates for 74 countries.
    To evaluate the policy relevance of the fd (1) and δd estimates, we study the extent to which
they are correlated with policy variables or lasting geographic and economic factors. For this
purpose, we revisit our measures of the share of HS 6-digit product lines covered by a core
NTM from Section II and take the unweighted country-level mean at destination d: NTM d ≡
P
   j∈J NTM jd /|J|. This NTM proxy varies between zero and one and reflects the share of HS-6
product lines with at least one core NTM that any exporter to the destination faces on average.
Similarly for the tariff controls, we use the arithmetic mean of the log of one plus the import
tariffs at the destination country level for Brazil as the source country. From the CEPII gravity
database we use further bilateral and multilateral variables for Brazil as the source country in
the year 2000: the destination’s distance to Brazil, as well as destination population, destination
gross domestic product (GDP), and destination area. To capture policy relevant regional char-
acteristics more closely than a geographic dummy such as for LAC can, we use an indicator for
Mercosur countries. Mercosur is Brazil’s main preferential trade agreement in 2000. We define


                                                34
                       Table 4: Market-access Costs, NTMs, and Geography
                                    fd (1)       fd (1)        fd (1)          δd            δd            δd
mean NTMd                           -.528        -1.110        .0345         -.480         -.486         -.418
                                    ( .964)      ( .943)       ( .339)       ( .160)       ( .176)       ( .188)
mean Log (1+Tariff)BRA,d                         -.250        -.0720                      -.0155        .00749
                                                 ( .0684)     ( .0762)                    ( .0105)      ( .0129)
Mercosurd                                                     -.0427                                    -.0763
                                                               ( .384)                                  ( .0584)
Log DistanceBRA,d                                              -.276                                     -.101
                                                               ( .146)                                  ( .0730)
Log Populationd                                                 .265                                    .00383
                                                               ( .132)                                  ( .0420)
Log GDPd                                                        .346                                     .0495
                                                              ( .0793)                                  ( .0234)
Log Aread                                                      -.123                                    -.0360
                                                              ( .0618)                                  ( .0296)
Constant                            13.50        14.02         12.36        -1.003         -.998         -.278
                                    ( .384)      ( .410)       (1.670)      ( .0635)      ( .0739)       ( .765)

Observations                          54           54            53            46           46            45
R2                                   .009         .187          .836          .143         .143          .240
Sources: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products (estimates of fd (1) and δd ); UNC-
TAD TRAINS 1999-2001 as augmented by Kee, Nicita and Olarreaga (2009) for NTM proxy; WTO’s Integrated
Database 2000 for import tariff rates; CEPII 2000.
Notes: Destination-country aggregates over products at the HS 6-digit level. Standard errors in parentheses
(: p < .05, : p < .01, : p < .001).


Mercosur to include only the original members Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay (and Brazil)
from 1994.32
    Table 4 reports results from regressions of fd (1) and δd on the NTM proxy, on the mean of
the log of one plus the tariff rate, and on geography controls. The NTM proxy is not a statis-
tically significant predictor of firms’ destination-specific market-access cost fd (1) for their first
product (their initial entry cost), regardless of regression specification. In a short regression,
with only the NTM proxy and import tariffs as regressors, lower tariffs at the destination predict
higher initial entry cost fd (1), but that association is potentially spurious given omitted geo-
graphic variables. In a long regression that also controls for destination-country characteristics,
import tariffs are no longer statistically significant predictors, while higher GDP predicts higher
  32
     We exclude the Mercosur associates Chile from 1996 and Bolivia from 1997 because those countries were not
full members in 2000. Bolivia is in an accession process since 2012, while Chile never requested membership.
Brazil is also part of ALADI (Asociación Latinoamericana de Integración), which seeks to foster trade throughout
Latin America since 1980, but there was no substantive progress in harmonizing NTMs by 2000.



                                                       35
initial market-entry cost fd (1). An interpretation is that Brazil’s exporters face higher market-
access cost for their first product in more industrialized countries (where import tariffs tend to
be relatively low).
    There is little prior evidence on predictors of firm-level market access cost, and the little
evidence is mixed. Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011) infer from French data patterns that
entry cost rise systematically but less than proportionally with market size, reminiscent of the
positive association between GDP and fd (1) in our Brazilian data. For one particular market
access cost component, the cost of reaching consumers through advertising, Arkolakis (2010,
online data appendix) reports that the cost of reaching additional consumers in a market falls
with the population of the market. Conditional on GDP, we cannot find a statistically significant
relation between population and fd (1). Irarrazabal, Moxnes and Opromolla (2015) fail to find a
significant association between variable transport cost and destination GDP, whereas the WTO
(2012) reports that the relative contribution of trade barriers to the overall level of protection
tends to increase with GDP per capita. For our subsequent analysis and simulations we infer
from our evidence, and mixed prior results, that initial entry cost fd (1) are not clearly associated
with policy-related variables.
    In contrast, the scope-elasticity of market-access costs δd is strongly and statistically signif-
icantly related to the NTM proxy (at conventional significance levels). Even after controlling
for a destination country’s import tariffs (which are not statistically significant at conventional
levels) and GDP (which is a statistically significant predictor), there is a salient and significant
negative relationship between the prevalence of NTMs in a destination country and the scope-
elasticity of Brazilian exporter’s market-access cost. The negative sign is consistent with the in-
terpretation that, in a destination with many NTMs, exporters face a more convex market-access
cost schedule that discourages the entry of additional products more strongly than at a destina-
tion with few NTMs. Strikingly, the scope-elasticity of market-access costs is not significantly
related to import tariffs conditional on the presence of NTMs (even though bilateral Brazil-
specific import tariffs abroad are arguably more precisely measured than the destination-level
NTM proxies). We take these findings as evidence that policy-related foreign market conditions,
beyond conventional tariffs, shape the differences between market-access cost schedules across
destinations and proceed to study the impact of reducing market-access barriers.


IV      Aggregation and Equilibrium
To aggregate the model we specify a Pareto distribution of firm productivity following Helpman,
Melitz and Yeaple (2004) and Chaney (2008). This assumption yields convenient functional



                                                 36
forms that are independent of our other assumptions on the specific functional forms of market-
access costs and the marginal cost schedule in equation (6), and the distribution of cost shocks
and product appeal shocks. We specify the cumulative distribution function Pr = 1 − (bs )θ /φθ
over the support [bs , +∞), where θ is the Pareto shape parameter, common across all source
countries, and more advanced countries are thought to have a higher location parameter bs . The
shape parameter of the Pareto firm size distribution is θ̃ ≡ θ/(σ − 1). In Appendix F (and in
Online Supplement S8) we discuss an alternative setup where firm productivity is drawn from a
log-normal distribution.
    The resulting conditional probability density function of the distribution of entrants is then
                                                      (
                                                          θ(φ∗sd )θ /φθ+1 if φ ≥ φ∗sd ,
(18)                              µ(φ|φ∗sd , θ)   =
                                                                 0        otherwise.

We use the shorthand φ∗sd for the productivity cutoff but note that φ∗sd (cd ) depends on a firm’s ac-
cess cost realization by (10). Integrating over the density of the market-access cost distribution,
we obtain Msd , the measure of firms that sell to destination d from source country s

                                                                         Js bθs
(19)                                           Msd = κ
                                                                [fsd (1)/Dsd ]θ̃

by (10). The parameter                                    Z
                                                  κ≡                cd−θ̃ dF (cd )
                                                               cd

reflects the expected access deterring effect of the firm-destination specific market-access cost
component cd on the mass of active exporters at a destination.
    We denote aggregate bilateral sales from country s to d with Tsd . The corresponding average
expected sales per firm are defined as T̄sd , so that Tsd = Msd T̄sd and
                                                      Z
(20)                                         T̄sd ≡            T̄sd (cd ) dF (cd ),
                                                          cd


where T̄sd (cd ) is the mean expected sales per firm for a given market-access cost draw cd . Sim-
ilarly, we define average market-access costs as
                                                      Z
(21)                                         F̄sd ≡            F̄sd (cd ) dF (cd ),
                                                          cd


where F̄sd (cd ) is the mean market-access cost for a given draw cd .33
  33
       T̄sd (cd ) and F̄sd (cd ) follow from integrating over firm productivity conditional on exporting.



                                                                    37
   For aggregation we require the following two assumptions to hold, so that sales per firm are
positive and finite.

Assumption 2 (Pareto probability mass in low tail). The Pareto shape parameter satisfies θ̃ >
1.

Assumption 3 (Bounded market-access costs and product efficiency). Incremental market-
access costs and product efficiency satisfy ∞           −(θ̃−1)
                                                                h(G)−θ ∈ (0, +∞).
                                           P
                                            G=1 fsd (G)


Lemma 1 Suppose Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 hold. Then for all s, d ∈ {1, . . . , N }, average sales
per firm are a constant multiple of average market-access costs:

                                                           θ̃ σ
(22)                                             T̄sd =         F̄sd .
                                                          θ̃−1

Proof. See Appendix A.A.
    Despite our rich micro-foundations at the firm-product level and idiosyncratic shocks by
destination, in the aggregate the share of market-access costs in bilateral exports F̄sd /T̄sd only
depends on parameters θ and σ, while mean market-access costs F̄sd vary by source and destina-
tion country. Bilateral average sales can be summarized with a function only of the parameters
θ and σ and the properties of mean market-access costs F̄sd .
    Finally, we can use the measure of exporters Msd from equation (19), expression (22) for
average sales and the definition of the revenue shifter Dsd in (7) to derive the share of products
from country s in country d’s expenditure:

                              Msd T̄sd      Js (bs )θ (ws τsd )−θ fsd (1)−θ̃ F̄sd
(23)                   λsd = P            =P                                         ,
                               k Mkd T̄kd      J  (b  )θ (w τ )−θ f (1)−θ̃ F̄
                                             k  k   k      k  kd      kd          kd

                        P∞
where fsd (1)−θ̃ F̄sd =    G=1 fsd (G)
                                       −(θ̃−1)
                                               h(G)−θ by Lemma 1 (see equation (A.3) in Appen-
dix A.A). Our framework generates a bilateral gravity equation. As in Eaton and Kortum (2002)
and Chaney (2008), the elasticity of trade with respect to variable trade costs is −θ.34 The dif-
ference between our model, in terms of bilateral trade flows, and the framework of Eaton and
Kortum (2002) is that market-access costs influence bilateral trade similar to Chaney (2008) in
the aggregate. At the firm-product level, however, our framework provides rigorously quantifi-
able foundations for the relevant market-access costs. The gravity relationship (23) clarifies how
those micro-founded market-access cost components relate to aggregate bilateral trade through
  34
    In our model, as in Chaney (2008), the elasticity of trade with respect to trade costs is the negative Pareto shape
parameter, whereas it is the negative Fréchet shape parameter in Eaton and Kortum (2002).



                                                          38
the weighted sum ∞                 −(θ̃−1)
                                           h(G)−θ . We thus offer a tool to evaluate the responsiveness
                   P
                      G=1 fsd (G)
of overall trade to changes in individual market-access cost components.
    The partial elasticity ηλ,f (g) of trade with respect to a product g’s access cost component is
−(θ̃−1) times the product’s share h(g)−θ in the weighted sum. To assess the relative importance
of the extensive margin of product entry, relative to firm entry with the core product, we can
compare elasticities using the ratio

                                           ηλ,f (g)   fsd (g)−(θ̃−1) h(g)−θ
(24)                                                =                       .
                                           ηλ,f (1)       fsd (1)−(θ̃−1)

This ratio simplifies to the function g −δsd (θ̃−1)−αθ in our parametrization. The power is strictly
negative if and only if δsd + α̃ > δsd /θ̃. It therefore depends on the sign and magnitude of δsd
whether the elasticity of trade with respect to an additional product’s incremental market-access
cost is higher or lower than the elasticity of firm entry.
   We can also compute mean exporter scope in a destination. For the average number of
products to be finite we will need the following necessary assumption.

Assumption 4 (Strongly increasing combined incremental scope costs). Combined incremental
scope costs satisfy ∞                −θ̃
                   P
                     G=1 zsd (G, cd )    ∈ (0, +∞).

    This assumption is in general more restrictive than Assumption 1. It requires that combined
incremental scope costs Z(G) increase in G at a rate asymptotically faster than 1/θ̃ (a result that
follows from the ratio rule, see Rudin 1976, ch. 3). Mean exporter scope in a destination is35
                                                                   ∞
                                                                   X
(25)                                    Ḡsd = κfsd (1)       θ̃
                                                                         zsd (G)−θ̃ .
                                                                   G=1


For our parameterized example, the expression implies that mean exporter scope is invariant to
destination market size.36
  35
       The expression is derived (omitting firm access cost fsd (1) and integration over cd for brevity) using
                                                            "Z ∗,2               Z φ∗,3                     #
                                           θ                   φsd
                                   (φ∗sd )
                   Z                                                                 sd
                                                         θ
            Ḡsd =       Gsd (φ) θ     θ+1
                                             dφ = (φ∗sd ) θ        φ−(θ+1) dφ +         2 φ−(θ+1) dφ + . . . .
                    φ∗sd
                                   (φ)                        φ ∗
                                                                sd                φ ∗,2
                                                                                    sd


Completing the integration, rearranging terms and using equation (11), we obtain (25), where we use the shorthand
zsd (G) ≡ zsd (G, cd )/cd = fsd (G) h(G)σ−1 .
   36
      To directly test that mean exporter scope is largely unresponsive to destination market size we present this
relationship in Figure B.2 (Appendix B.A). This implication as well as the robust scope and sales distributions are
related to the Pareto assumption. Another implication of the Pareto assumption is that the relationship between
the number of exporters shipping to a destination and the destination market size becomes linear in logs—a salient
feature of both our Brazilian and French exporter data (Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz 2004).



                                                           39
                                 Table 5: Parametric Functional Forms
Assumption                                                                       Parameter values
1.   Strictly increasing combined incremental scope costs                        δsd + α̃ > 0
2.   Pareto probability mass in low tail                                         θ̃ > 1
3.   Bounded market-access costs                                                 δsd + α̃ > (δsd +1)/θ̃
4.   Strongly increasing combined incremental scope costs                        δsd + α̃ > 1/θ̃
Note: Functional forms fsd (g) = fsd · g δsd and h(g) = g α by (6); definitions α̃ ≡ α(σ−1) and θ̃ ≡ θ/(σ−1).


   We turn to the model’s equilibrium. Total sales of a country s equal its total sales across all
destinations (including domestic sales):
                                                     PN
(26)                                          Ys =      k=1   λsk Tk ,

where Tk is consumer expenditure at destination k. Additionally, Lemma 1 implies that a coun-
try’s total expense for market-access costs is a constant (source country invariant) share of bilat-
eral exports. This result implies that the share of wages and profits in total income is constant
(source country invariant) and given by

                                           θ̃σ−1                             1
(27)                            ws Ls =          Ys      and     πs L s =       Ys .
                                             θ̃σ                            θ̃σ

See Appendix A.B for a derivation.
    Assumptions 1 through 4 guarantee that the quantitative predictions in equations (14)-(15)
are well defined. Table 5 reports the equivalent parameter restrictions of those necessary as-
sumptions under our functional forms (6).37 We relate these predictions to empirical regularities
in Section II and to the structural equations for estimation in Section III. As above, we define
α̃ ≡ α(σ−1) and θ̃ ≡ θ/(σ−1) to simplify notation.
    This summary concludes the presentation of equilibrium conditions when trade is balanced
(Yd = Td ). We relax the assumption of balanced trade in our calibration and defer the discussion
of the full solution to Appendix E.
  37
     Assumption 4 implies Assumption 1 but it depends on the sign of δsd whether Assumption 3 implies As-
sumption 1 (or Assumption 4). The necessary conditions for equilibrium existence can be summarized compactly
with                               n                 o
                               min δsd (θ̃−1), δsd θ̃ + αθ > 1 and θ̃ > 1.
                                                                                                     P∞
By parametrization (6), the combined market-access cost function fsd (1)−θ̃ F̄sd (ν) ≡ fsd (1)θ̃−1    G=1   G−ν con-
                                     P∞
tains a Riemann zeta function ζ(ν) ≡ G=1 G−ν for a real parameter ν ≡ θ̃[δsd + α̃] + δsd .




                                                        40
V     General-equilibrium Counterfactuals
We counterfactually bring down destination-specific market-access costs and conduct simula-
tions to quantify the implied impact on bilateral trade under our baseline estimates (first row
of Table 3). As mentioned before, Brazil is close to the world median in terms of exports per
capita, so we consider our baseline parameter estimates as informative for global trade. Our
main counterfactual exercise harmonizes market-access cost schedules across destinations. We
reduce the market-access cost for an additional product (not counting a firm’s first product) at
distant destinations to the level at nearby destinations. In a broad sense, this exercise helps ap-
prise the importance of multi-product exporters when it comes to the reduction of market-access
costs for additional products. Examples of relevant market-access costs for additional products
are health regulations and safety standards, certifications and licenses.
    To perform the counterfactual experiments, we add three elements to our model, similar
to Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011). (i) We introduce intermediate inputs as in Eaton and
Kortum (2002). In particular, we assume that the production of each product uses a Cobb-
Douglas aggregate of labor and a composite of all other manufactured products with cost Pd .
The labor share in manufacturing production is β, and the share of intermediate inputs 1 − β.
The total input cost is therefore wd = Wdβ Pd1−β , where we now think of wd as the input cost
and Wd as the wage. (ii) There is a non-manufacturing sector in each country as in Alvarez and
Lucas (2007) that combines manufactures with labor, in a Cobb-Douglas production function,
where manufactures have a share γ in GDP. The price of final output in country d is proportional
to Pdγ Wd1−γ . We state the resulting equations in Appendix A. (iii) We allow for a manufacturing
trade deficit Bd , and for an overall trade deficit BdT in goods and services. Both deficits are set
to their observed levels in 2000.
    We compute the share of manufacturing in GDP for each country using data on GDP, man-
ufacturing production and trade (as described in Appendix B.B). We set the labor share in
manufacturing production to β = .330, the sample average for countries with available infor-
mation (Appendix B.B). To compute the impact of a counterfactual change in market-access
costs, we use the Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2007a) methodology (details in Appendix E). The
merit of this method is that it requires no information on the initial level of technology, iceberg
trade costs, and market-access costs. Instead, we can compute the changes in all equilibrium
variables using the percentage change in the underlying parameter of interest (market-access
cost parameters in our case).
    For our primary results we consider a baseline value of θ = 2.59 from Crozet and Koenig




                                                41
                       Table 6: Percentage Change in Simulated Welfare (θ = 2.59)

                                   Counterfactual                                                              Counterfactual
                      (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)                                  (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)
Country              ∆f (g)       ∆f (g)C       ∆δ          ∆δC              Country             ∆f (g)       ∆f (g)C       ∆δ          ∆δC

Armenia               0.75          0.51         0.84       0.57             Kuwait               2.68           1.52        2.99       1.69
Australia             1.29          0.76         1.44       0.85             Kyrgyzstan           1.46           0.88        1.63       0.98
Austria               2.72          0.71         3.03       0.80             Latvia               2.14           0.43        2.38       0.49
Azerbaijan            1.31          0.69         1.47       0.77             Lithuania            2.12           0.46        2.37       0.52
BelgmLuxNthl          3.82          1.37         4.26       1.53             Malta                5.30           2.27        5.92       2.54
Bolivia               1.09          0.58         1.22       0.64             Mexico               2.62           0.54        2.91       0.60
Brazil                0.68          0.64         0.76       0.71             Morocco              1.61           1.50        1.80       1.67
Bulgaria              1.95          0.68         2.17       0.76             Norway               1.88           0.59        2.10       0.66
Canada                2.83          0.49         3.16       0.55             Oman                 2.74           2.80        3.06       3.12
Chile                 1.52          1.39         1.70       1.56             Poland               1.91           0.57        2.13       0.64
ChinaHKG              1.78          1.06         1.99       1.19             Portugal             2.13           0.50        2.38       0.56
Colombia              0.88          0.80         0.98       0.89             Romania              2.15           0.64        2.40       0.71
CostaRica             0.66          0.43         0.74       0.48             RussianFed           2.20           1.15        2.45       1.28
Cyprus                2.95          1.38         3.29       1.54             Senegal              1.52           1.16        1.70       1.29
Ethiopia              0.81          0.60         0.90       0.67             Slovenia             3.50           0.93        3.90       1.04
Finland               2.21          0.76         2.46       0.85             SouthKorea           1.89           1.02        2.11       1.14
FranceMonaco          1.77          0.61         1.97       0.68             Spain                1.73           0.50        1.93       0.56
Germany               1.93          0.79         2.15       0.88             SriLanka             0.76           0.26        0.85       0.30
Hungary               4.68          1.32         5.22       1.47             Sweden               2.02           0.71        2.26       0.80
IndMalSgThai          5.10          2.98         5.68       3.32             TrinidadTbg          0.67           0.32        0.75       0.36
India                 2.09          1.35         2.34       1.51             Tunisia              2.73           2.60        3.05       2.90
Iran                  0.15          0.06         0.17       0.07             Turkey               1.23           1.02        1.37       1.14
Ireland               5.03          1.99         5.60       2.23             UK                   1.62           0.76        1.81       0.85
Israel                1.64          1.35         1.83       1.51             USA                  0.89           0.59        0.99       0.66
Italy                 1.49          0.52         1.66       0.58             Ukraine              1.68           0.46        1.87       0.51
Japan                 0.50          0.32         0.56       0.35             Uruguay              0.97           0.68        1.09       0.75
Jordan                1.80          1.17         2.01       1.30             VietNam              2.58           0.79        2.88       0.88
Kazakhstan            2.04          1.46         2.27       1.63             Yemen                1.05           0.57        1.17       0.64
Kenya                 1.31          1.02         1.46       1.13             RestOfWorld          4.73           4.94        5.28       5.51
                                                                             Mean                 2.02           1.02        2.26       1.13


Note: Counterfactual experiments (1) and (2) reduce f (g) by 15 percent, and experiments (3) and (4) reduce δ by thirty percent. Counterfactual
experiments (1) and (3) reduce market-access costs everywhere, experiments (2) and (4) reduce market-access costs only at destinations outside
a source country’s own continent, with ROW treated as a different continent. Experiments use baseline parameter estimates of Θ = {δ, α̃, θ̃} =
{−1.16, 1.76, 1.72} from Table 3. Pareto shape parameter θ = 2.59 imputed from Crozet and Koenig (2010) and estimates in Table 3. See
Appendix B.B for data construction. Following Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2007a), we collapse (i) Hong Kong, Macao and mainland China, (ii)
Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, (iii) Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand and (iv) France and Monaco into single markets.




                                                                     42
(2010), which we obtain by averaging across 34 industries.38 For all other starting parameter
values, we use our baseline estimates from row 1 in Table 3.


V.A      Changes in total market-access costs
We initially decrease all market-access costs for all products (fd ) by 15 percent to all interna-
tional destinations. In this and all following experiments, we do not change any domestic trade
costs and set the change in total domestic access costs to F̂ss = 1. Table 6 shows the results of
the counterfactual exercise in terms of changes in welfare (see Appendix E for derivations). The
results of the first experiment are labeled as counterfactual (1) in Table 6.
    In a second experiment, we reduce market-access costs only to countries not on the same
continent by 15 percent. The results are shown as counterfactual (2) in Table 6. This experiment,
while crude, highlights changes in market-access costs to distant locations.39 In both exercises,
we see significant increases in welfare. Considering a simple average across all 58 countries in
our sample, welfare increases by 2.0 percent in the first counterfactual experiment and by 1.0
percent in the second counterfactual experiment.


V.B      Changes in incremental market-access costs
In our third and fourth counterfactual experiments we evaluate scenarios under which market-
access costs only for incremental products are brought down. This counterfactual stands in
for eliminating various non-tariff measures and directly utilizes our baseline results from Ta-
ble 3. Those baseline results show that the incremental market-access costs of shipping addi-
tional products to LAC destination drop nearly 30 percent faster with exporter scope than the
incremental market-access costs elsewhere. We conduct a counterfactual experiment with a 30-
percent drop in the scope elasticity of market-access costs. Since δ is negative, the experiment
amounts to a 30-percent increase in the absolute value of δ. Note that we do not alter the cost
of a firm’s initial market entry with its first product. This 30-percent increase in the absolute
value of δ is applied to all destinations in counterfactual (3) but only to destinations in other
continents, which proxy for distant countries, in counterfactual (4).
    In both counterfactual experiments (3) and (4) we see results broadly in line with those
from dropping overall market-access costs. Dropping the incremental export costs to all foreign
  38
      Crozet and Koenig (2010) obtain results for σ, we obtain θ using our estimated value for θ̃. Eaton, Kortum and
Kramarz (2011) find an estimate of θ = 4.87. In a related set of models, Eaton and Kortum (2002), Bernard et al.
(2003) and Simonovska and Waugh (2014) find estimates of θ between 3.60 and 8.28.
   39
      While lumping countries by continents is an admittedly imprecise way of classifying nearby and distant loca-
tions, most preferential trade agreements in 2000 link countries within continents (78 percent of the country pairs
within a preferential trade agreement) or World Bank regions (82 percent of the country pairs).



                                                        43
destinations increases average welfare by 2.3 percent and to destinations on different continents
by 1.1 percent. While these increases in welfare may seem small, they operate only through
multi-product firms and are unrelated to the entry costs of exporting the first product. A 30-
percent drop in the scope elasticity of incremental market-access costs for multi-product firms
has an effect that is broadly similar to reducing market-access costs for all firms by 15 percent.


V.C      Changes in tariffs
Finally, to compare changes in market-access costs to changes in conventional variable trade
costs, we evaluate the welfare gains from the elimination of all tariffs. Under the assumption
that remaining tariffs today represent around 4 percent of the value of exports, we experiment
with a counterfactual decline of 4 percentage points in variable trade costs to mimic the elimina-
tion of tariffs.40 Using our parameter estimates, we find an average welfare gain across markets
of approximately 1.8 percent; this is broadly comparable to the gains from reductions in incre-
mental market-access costs.
    Our estimate of θ = 2.59 comes from French firm level data used by Crozet and Koenig
(2010). Alternatively, we can use Simonovska and Waugh (2014), who aggregate trade flows
from 123 countries. Their various estimates of θ range from 2.79 to 4.46, with their preferred
specification producing θ = 4.41. Using that latter estimate, our counterfactual experiment (4),
in which we reduce only incdremental market-access costs to distant destinations, results in an
average welfare increase of 0.8 percent across destinations. Similarly, eliminating all tariffs
increases welfare by 1.7 percent. In summary, our counterfactual experiments with plausible re-
ductions of market-access costs result in welfare gains of a similar magnitude as the elimination
of remaining tariffs.


VI       Conclusion
We develop a model that accounts for pertinent facts on multi-product exporters, which we doc-
ument using detailed Brazilian data. The model allows us to estimate market-access costs under
rigorous microfoundations that regulate the entry of exporters and their products. Trade fric-
tions such as market-access costs are vital elements in trade theories with heterogeneous firms,
and they are important objects of study for aggregate outcomes in international trade and open-
economy macroeconomics. Our estimates indicate that additional products farther from a firm’s
  40
     Novy (2013) finds that the average total variable trade costs for a set of OECD countries in terms of tariff
equivalents is 94 percent in 2000; the same countries have ad-valorem tariff rates of approximately 4 percent
(Anderson and Neary 2005).



                                                       44
core competency incur higher unit production costs but also that there are economies of scope in
market-access costs for additional products. The elasticity of market-access costs with respect to
additional products is almost one-third lower in nearby destinations. We conduct counterfactual
exercises that accordingly reduce the scope elasticity of market-access costs by one-third and
find welfare gains similar in magnitude to a complete elimination of currently remaining tar-
iffs. Results of these counterfactual exercises are reminiscent of surveys for numerous countries
(OECD 2005, Ch. 1) and evidence on product trade (Reyes 2011), which suggest that non-tariff
measures deter the market access of small and narrow-scope firms more heavily.
     While we have incorporated many available dimensions of the trade data, more can be done.
Our approach leaves unexplored recently available information on unit prices and export behav-
ior over time, for example. Such additional information may prove valuable in understanding
more precisely the patterns of product market access and exporter expansions. Similarly, we
leave specific mechanisms that may shape determinants of market-access cost open for further
investigation.




                                               45
References
Allanson, Paul, and Catia Montagna. 2005. “Multiproduct Firms and Market Structure: An Explorative
  Application to the Product Life Cycle.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 23(7-8): 587–
  597.

Allen, Treb. 2014. “Information Frictions in Trade.” Econometrica, 82(6): 2041–83.

Almunia, Miguel, Pol Antràs, David Lopez-Rodriguez, and Eduardo Morales. 2018. “Venting Out:
  Exports During a Domestic Slump.” NBER Working Paper, 25372.

Alvarez, Fernando E., and Robert E. Jr. Lucas. 2007. “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-
  Kortum Model of International Trade.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6): 1726–68.

Álvarez, Roberto, Hasan Faruq, and Ricardo A. López. 2013. “Is Previous Export Experience Impor-
   tant for New Exports?” Journal of Development Studies, 49(3): 426–41.

Amador, João, and Luca David Opromolla. 2013. “Product and Destination Mix in Export Markets.”
 Review of World Economics/Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 149(1): 23–53.

Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2014. “Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate
 Disconnect.” American Economic Review, 104(7): 1942–78.

Anderson, James E., and J. Peter Neary. 1996. “A New Approach to Evaluating Trade Policy.” Review
  of Economic Studies, 63(1): 107–25.

Anderson, James E., and J. Peter Neary. 2003. “The Mercantilist Index of Trade Policy.” International
  Economic Review, 44(2): 627–49.

Anderson, James E., and J. Peter Neary. 2005. Measuring the restrictiveness of international trade
  policy. Cambridge and London: MIT Press.

Arkolakis, Costas. 2010. “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International
  Trade.” Journal of Political Economy, 118(6): 1151–1199.

Arkolakis, Costas, and Marc-Andreas Muendler. 2011. “The Extensive Margin of Exporting Products:
  The Continuum Case.” University of California, San Diego, unpublished manuscript.

Arkolakis, Costas, and Marc-Andreas Muendler. 2013. “Exporters and Their Products: A Collection
  of Empirical Regularities.” CESifo Economic Studies, 59(2): 223–248.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare. 2012. “New Trade Models, Same
  Old Gains?” American Economic Review, 102(1): 94–130.

Armenter, Roc, and Miklos Koren. 2014. “A Balls-and-Bins Model of Trade.” American Economic
  Review, 104(7): 2127–51.

Atkeson, Andrew, and Ariel T. Burstein. 2008. “Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and International
  Relative Prices.” American Economic Review, 98(5): 1998–2031.




                                                   46
Baldwin, Richard, Simon Evenett, and Patrick Low. 2009. “Beyond Tariffs: Multilateralizing Non-
  tariff RTA Commitments.” In Multilateralizing Regionalism: Challenges for the Global Trading Sys-
  tem. , ed. Richard Baldwin and Patrick Low, Chapter 3, 79–141. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
  University Press.

Bernard, Andrew B., Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe. 2018. “Two-sided Hetero-
  geneity and Trade.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(3): 424–439.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2009. “The
  Margins of U.S. Trade.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 99(2): 487–493.

Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum. 2003. “Plants and
  Productivity in International Trade.” American Economic Review, 93(4): 1268–90.

Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2011. “Multiproduct Firms and Trade
  Liberalization.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3): 1271–1318.

Bown, Chad P. 2011. “Taking Stock of Antidumping, Safeguards, and Countervailing Duties, 1990-
  2009.” World Economy, 34(12): 1995–1998.

Brambilla, Irene. 2009. “Multinationals, Technology, and the Introduction of Varieties of Goods.” Jour-
  nal of International Economics, 79(1): 89–101.

Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2006. “Globalization and the Gains from Variety.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121(2): 541–85.

Chaney, Thomas. 2008. “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
  Trade.” American Economic Review, 98(4): 1707–21.

Chaney, Thomas. 2014. “The Network Structure of International Trade.” American Economic Review,
  104(11): 3600–3634.

Cherkashin, Ivan, Svetlana Demidova, Hiau Loo Kee, and Kala Krishna. 2015. “Firm Heterogene-
  ity and Costly Trade: A New Estimation Strategy and Policy Experiments.” Journal of International
  Economics, 96(1): 18–36.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas, and Hélène Rey. 2013. “Home Bias in Open Economy Financial Macroeco-
  nomics.” Journal of Economic Literature, 51(1): 63–115.

Crozet, Matthieu, and Pamina Koenig. 2010. “Structural Gravity Equations with Intensive and Exten-
  sive Margins.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 43(1): 41–62.

Das, Sanghamitra, Mark J. Roberts, and James R. Tybout. 2007. “Market Entry Costs, Producer
  Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics.” Econometrica, 75(3): 837–873.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum. 2007a. “Unbalanced Trade.” American Eco-
  nomic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 97(2): 351–55.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum. 2007b. “Unbalanced trade.” American Economic
  Review, 97(2): 351–355.




                                                  47
Dhingra, Swati. 2013. “Trading Away Wide Brands for Cheap Brands.” American Economic Review,
  103(6): 2554–84.

Di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean. 2014. “Firms, Destinations, and
  Aggregate Fluctuations.” Econometrica, 82(4): 1303–40.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econometrica,
  70(5): 1741–79.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2010. “Technology in the Global Economy: A Framework for
  Quantitative Analysis.” University of Chicago, unpublished manuscript.

Eaton, Jonathan, David Jinkins, James Tybout, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2016. “Two-sided Search in Inter-
  national Markets.” Society for Economic Dynamics 2016 Meeting Papers.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Brent Neiman. 2016. “Obstfeld and Rogoff’s International
  Macro Puzzles: A Quantitative Assessment.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 72(0): 5–
  23.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz. 2004. “Dissecting Trade: Firms, Industries,
  and Export Destinations.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 94(2): 150–54.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz. 2011. “An Anatomy of International Trade:
  Evidence from French Firms.” Econometrica, 79(5): 1453–98.

Eckel, Carsten, and J. Peter Neary. 2010. “Multi-Product Firms and Flexible Manufacturing in the
  Global Economy.” Review of Economic Studies, 77(1): 188–217.

Eckel, Carsten, Leonardo Iacovone, Beata Javorcik, and J. Peter Neary. 2016. “Testing the Core-
  Competency Model of Multi-product Exporters.” Review of International Economics, 24(4): 699–716.

Egger, Peter, Joseph Francois, Miriam Manchin, and Douglas Nelson. 2015. “Non-tariff Barriers,
  Integration and the Transatlantic Economy.” Economic Policy, 0(83): 539–73.

Eurostat. 2008. “NACE Rev. 2.” Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.

Evenett, Simon J. 2009. “Global Trade Alert: Motivation and Launch.” World Trade Review, 8(4): 607–
  09.

Feenstra, Robert C. 1995. “Estimating the Effects of Trade Policy.” In Handbook of international eco-
  nomics. Vol. 3 of Handbooks in Economics, , ed. Gene M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, Chapter 30,
  1553–95. Amsterdam, New York and Oxford: Elsevier, North-Holland.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Hong Ma. 2008. “Optimal Choice of Product Scope for Multiproduct Firms
  under Monopolistic Competition.” In The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy. , ed. Elhanan
  Helpman, Dalia Marin and Thierry Verdier, Chapter 6, 173–199. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
  sity Press.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Hengyong Mo. 2005.
  “World Trade Flows: 1962-2000.” NBER Working Paper, 11040.




                                                 48
Fernandes, Ana M., Peter J. Klenow, Sergii Meleshchuk, Martha D. Pierola, and Andrés
  Rodrı́guez-Clare. 2018. “The Intensive Margin in Trade.” NBER Working Paper, 25195.

Fitzgerald, Doireann. 2012. “Trade Costs, Asset Market Frictions, and Risk Sharing.” American Eco-
   nomic Review, 102(6): 2700–2733.

Gopinath, Gita, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2010. “Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-Through.” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 125(2): 675–727.

Haveman, Jon. 2017. “Industry Concordances.” www.macalester.edu/research/economics/page/haveman/
  trade.resources/tradeconcordances.html, Macalester College, Saint Paul.

Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, et al. 2013. “Gravity equations: Toolkit, cookbook, workhorse.” Hand-
  book of international economics, 4: 131–195.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple. 2004. “Export versus FDI with Heteroge-
  neous Firms.” American Economic Review, 94(1): 300–316.

Hottman, Colin J., Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein. 2016. “Quantifying the Sources of
  Firm Heterogeneity.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(3): 1291–1364.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
  India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1403–1448.

Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatı́stica. 2000. “Combined SECEX-RAIS Data.”

Irarrazabal, Alfonso, Andreas Moxnes, and Luca David Opromolla. 2015. “The Tip of the Iceberg: A
  Quantitative Framework for Estimating Trade Costs.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(4): 777–
  92.

Kee, Hiau Looi, Alessandro Nicita, and Marcelo Olarreaga. 2009. “Estimating Trade Restrictiveness
  Indices.” Economic Journal, 119(534): 172–99.

Mayer, Thierry, and Soledad Zignago. 2011. “Notes on CEPII’s distances measures: The GeoDist
 database.”

Mayer, Thierry, Marc J. Melitz, and Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano. 2014. “Market Size, Competition,
 and the Product Mix of Exporters.” American Economic Review, 104(2): 495–536.

McKenzie, Lionel W. 1960. “Matrices with Dominant Diagonal in Economic Theory.” In Mathematical
 Methods in the Social Sciences. Proceedings of the first Stanford symposium 1959, , ed. Kenneth J.
 Arrow, Samuel Karlin and Patrick Suppes, Chapter 2, 47–62. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University
 Press.

Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
 Productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6): 1695–1725.

Montinari, Letizia, Massimo Riccaboni, and Stefano Schiavo. 2017. “Innovation, Trade and Multi-
 product Firms.” University of Trento, unpublished manuscript.

Morales, Eduardo, Gloria Sheu, and Andrés Zahler. 2019. “Extended Gravity.” Review of Economic
 Studies, 86(6): 2668–2712.


                                                 49
Moxnes, Andreas. 2010. “Are Sunk Costs in Exporting Country Specific?” Canadian Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 43(2): 467–493.

Niu, Zhaohui, Chang Liu, Saileshsingh Gunessee, and Chris Milner. 2018. “Non-tariff
  and Overall Protection: Evidence across Countries and over Time.” Review of World Eco-
  nomics/Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 154(4): 675–703.

Nocke, Volker, and Stephen Yeaple. 2014. “Globalization and Multiproduct Firms.” International Eco-
  nomic Review, 55(4): 993–1018.

Novy, Dennis. 2013. “Gravity Redux: Measuring International Trade Costs with Panel Data.” Economic
  Inquiry, 51(1): 101–21.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2001. “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeco-
  nomics: Is There a Common Cause?” In NBER macroeconomics annual 2000. Vol. 15, , ed. Ben S.
  Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, Chapter 6, 339–90. Cambridge and London: MIT Press.

OECD. 2005. Looking beyond Tariffs: The Role of Non-tariff Barriers in World Trade. OECD Trade
 Policy Studies, Paris and Washington, D.C.: OECD.

Panzar, John C., and Robert D. Willig. 1977. “Economies of Scale in Multi-Output Production.” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 91(3): 481–493.

Panzar, John C., and Robert D. Willig. 1981. “Economies of Scope.” American Economic Review,
  71(2): 268–272.

Qiu, Larry D., and Wen Zhou. 2013. “Multiproduct Firms and Scope Adjustment in Globalization.”
  Journal of International Economics, 91(1): 142–53.

Reyes, José-Daniel. 2011. “International Harmonization of Product Standards and Firm Heterogeneity
  in International Trade.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 5677.

Rudin, Walter. 1976. Principles of mathematical analysis. . 3rd ed., New York, New York: McGraw and
  Hill.

Shepherd, Ben. 2007. “Product Standards, Harmonization, and Trade: Evidence from the Extensive
  Margin.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 4390.

Simonovska, Ina, and Michael E. Waugh. 2014. “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence.”
  Journal of International Economics, 92(1): 34–50.

Thomas, Catherine. 2011. “Too Many Products: Decentralized Decision Making in Multinational
  Firms.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(1): 280–306.

Timoshenko, Olga A. 2015. “Product Switching in a Model of Learning.” Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, 95(2): 233–49.

UNCTAD. 2010. Non-tariff Measures: Evidence from Selected Developing Countries and Future Re-
 search Agenda. New York and Geneva: United Nations.

UNIDO. 2005. “INDSTAT3 2005 ISIC Rev. 2 User’s Guide.” unido.org/doc/3531, Vienna.



                                                50
United Nations. 2000. “UN Comtrade Database.” comtrade.un.org, New York.

UNStats. 2017. “HS Code Crosswalks.” United Nations Statistics Division, Trade Statistics Branch
 (TSB),.

Van Wincoop, Eric, and Francis E. Warnock. 2010. “Can Trade Costs in Goods Explain Home Bias in
  Assets?” Journal of International Money and Finance, 29(6): 1108–23.

World Bank. 2009. World Development Indicators 2009. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

WTO. 2012. Trade and public policies: A closer look at non-tariff measures in the 21st century. World
 Trade Report, Geneva: World Trade Organization.

WTO. 2016. “Tariff Analysis Online.” World Trade Organization.




                                                 51
Appendix
A       Proofs
A.A        Proof of Lemma 1
We will show that, conditional on a market-access cost draw cd , average sales are proportional
to average market-access costs:

                                                                       θ̃−1
(A.1)                                                F̄sd (cd ) =            T̄sd (cd ) .
                                                                        θ̃ σ
With this result, we can then integrate (A.1) over the market-access cost distribution to establish
Lemma 1 after aggregation across firms:
                              Z                                    Z
                                                                       θ̃−1                        θ̃−1
                     F̄sd =        F̄sd (cd ) dF (cd ) =                     T̄sd (cd ) dF (cd ) =       T̄sd .
                                                                        θ̃ σ                        θ̃ σ
    We now prove (A.1). We drop the argument cd for brevity. Expected total sales per firm in s
shipping to d are
                    Z
             T̄sd =     E [tsd (φ, ξ)] µ(φ|φ∗sd , θ) dφ
                                  φ∗sd
                                                                σ−1 GX
                                                                      sd (φ)
                                                                                                             (φ∗sd )θ
                              Z                      
                                                          φ                           −(σ−1)
                        =                σ fsd (1)                             h(g)            E [ξsdg ] · θ          dφ
                                  φ∗sd                   φ∗sd          g=1
                                                                                                             (φ)θ+1
                                                                σ−1 GX
                                                                      sd (φ)
                                                                                                  (φ∗sd )θ
                              Z                      
                                                          φ                           −(σ−1)
                        =                σ fsd (1)                             h(g)            ·θ          dφ
                                  φ∗sd                   φ∗sd          g=1
                                                                                                  (φ)θ+1

by optimal total exports (13) and the independence of product appeal ξsdg and firm productivity
φ. Consider the term φ∗ φσ−1−(θ+1) G
                                       P sd (φ)
                                                h(g)−(σ−1) dφ. Rewrite the term as a piecewise
                        R
                          sd
                                         g=1
integral
           Gsd (φ)
            X φσ−1−(θ+1)      Z φ∗,2 X  1                   Z φ∗,3 X  2
                                           φσ−1−(θ+1)                     φσ−1−(θ+1)
    Z
                                  sd                             sd
                         dφ =                         dφ  +                          dφ + . . .
    φ∗sd    g=1
                h(g)σ−1        φ∗sd g=1 h(g)
                                                 σ−1
                                                              φ∗,2
                                                               sd    g=1
                                                                           h(g)σ−1
                                         Z ∞                              Z ∞
                                  1            σ−1−(θ+1)            1
                            =                φ           dφ +                   φσ−1−(θ+1) dφ + . . .
                              h(1)σ−1 φ∗sd                     h(2)σ−1 φ∗,2  sd

                                           ∗ (σ−1)−θ                  ∗,2 (σ−1)−θ
                                                                         
                                  1 (φsd )                  1       φsd
                            =       σ−1
                                                      +       σ−1
                                                                                  + ...
                              h(1) θ − (σ−1)             h(2)       θ − (σ−1)




                                                                       52
for θ > σ − 1. Using the definitions of φ∗sd , φ∗,2
                                                sd , etc. from (11), we have

                        Gsd (φ)
                                                                                !θ̃−1   ∞
                         X φσ−1−(θ+1)                                                     fsd (G)−(θ̃−1)
             Z
                                                1                   fsd (1)             X
(A.2)                                 dφ =
                 φ∗sd    g=1
                             h(g)σ−1       θ − (σ−1)               (φ∗sd )σ−1           G=1
                                                                                                  h(G)θ

with θ̃ ≡ θ/(σ−1). Therefore
                                                            ∞
                                            θ̃ σ           X
                                  T̄sd =         fsd (1)θ̃     fsd (G)−(θ̃−1) h(G)−θ ,
                                           θ̃−1            G=1

proving the first equality in (22). The expression is finite by Assumption 3.
   Average market-access costs paid by firms in s selling to d are
                 φ∗,2                 Z φ∗,3
                             (φ∗sd )θ                 (φ∗ )θ
             Z
                  sd                      sd
   F̄sd   =        Fsd (1) θ θ+1 dφ +        Fsd (2) θ sdθ+1
                                                              dφ +
             φ∗sd             φ        φ∗,2
                                         sd
                                                       φ
                           h              i                    h                 i
                                      ∗,2 −θ
                               ∗ −θ
                                                                      −θ     ∗,3 −θ
                      ∗ θ
          = Fsd (1) (φsd ) (φsd ) − φsd       + Fsd (2) (φ∗sd )θ φ∗,2
                                                                   sd     − φ sd     + ... .

                                                       fsd (g) and collecting terms with a common φ∗,G
                                           PGsd
Using the definition Fsd (Gsd ) =                g=1                                               sd we can
rewrite the above expression as
                                            −θ                              −θ
                 F̄sd = fsd (1) + φ∗,2
                                   sd             (φ∗sd )θ fsd (2) + φ∗,3
                                                                      sd           (φ∗sd )θ fsd (3) + . . . .

Using the definition of φ∗,G
                         sd from equation (11) in the above equation we get

                                                                       −θ
                                                 fsd (2)1/(σ−1) h(2)
                                             
                        F̄sd = fsd (1) +                              fsd (2) + . . .
                                                 fsd (1)1/(σ−1) h(1)
                               h                                          −θ                 i
                             = fsd (1) + fsd (1)θ̃ fsd (2)1/(σ−1) h(2)        fsd (2) + . . .
                                         h                                             i
                                      θ̃       −(θ̃−1)           −(θ̃−1)      −θ
                             = fsd (1) fsd (1)         + fsd (2)         h(2) + . . .
                             = fsd (1)θ̃ ∞             −(θ̃−1)
                                                               h(G)−θ
                                         P
(A.3)                                      G=1 fsd (G)
                                  θ̃−1
                              =         T̄sd .
                                   θ̃ σ
This proves the second equality in (22). The ratio F̄sd /T̄sd is a destination invariant constant.

A.B       Share of wages and profits
We show that the share of wages and profits in total income is constant (source country invari-
ant). Note that the share of net profits from bilateral sales is the share of gross variable profits
in total sales 1/σ, less the market-access costs paid, divided by total sales (θ̃ − 1)/θ̃ σ. Thus,
using the result of Lemma 1, πsd Ld /Tsd = 1/σ − (θ̃−1)/(θ̃σ) = 1/(θ̃ σ). Total profits for



                                                             53
                      P                         P
country s are πs Ls = k λsk Tk /(θ̃σ), where k λsk Tk is the country’s total income by (26)
and Tk is consumer expenditure at destination k. Profit income and wage income can therefore
be expressed as constant shares of total income, as in the main text, equation (27).


B      Data
B.A      Brazilian exporter-product-destination data
We identify an exporter’s sector from the firm’s reported CNAE four-digit industry (for 654
industries across all sectors of the economy) in the administrative RAIS records (Relação Anual
de Informações Sociais) from the Brazilian labor ministry in 2000. The level of detail in CNAE
is comparable to the NAICS 2007 five-digit level. To map from the HS 6-digit codes to ISIC
revision 2 at the two-digit level we use an extended SITC-to-ISIC concordance, augmenting an
OECD concordance for select manufacturing industries to all industries.41
    As Table B.1 shows in columns 5 and 6, our Brazilian manufacturer sample for the year
2000 includes 10,215 firms with shipments of 3,717 manufactured products at the 6-digit Har-
monized System level to 170 destinations, and a total of 162,570 exporter-destination-product
observations.42 Exporters shipping multiple products dominate. They ship more than 90 percent
of all exports from Brazil, and their global top-selling product accounts for 60 percent of Brazil-
ian exports worldwide. We report the top exporting products of Brazilian firms in the Online
Supplement S4.43
    To compute medians and means for regional aggregates and the world as a whole in Table B.1
(columns 3 to 6), we treat each aggregate as if it were a single destination and collapse all
product shipments to different countries within the aggregate into a single product shipment.
In most data treatments in the text, in contrast, we analyze these variables country by country,
consistent with our main hypothesis that market-access determinants of trade matter repeatedly
destination by destination.
    The median exporter is relatively small, with sales to the rest of the world totaling around
US$ 89,000. The mean exporter, in contrast, sells around US$ 3.7 million abroad, more than 40
times as much as the median exporter. Exporter scope and exporter scale exhibit similarly stark
differences between mean and median. The median Brazilian manufacturer sells two products
worldwide, but the mean scope per firm is 5.3 products. The median Brazilian exporter has a
product scale of around US$ 37,000 per product, but the mean exporter scale per exporter is
US$ 705,000, or around 20 times as high as that for the median firm.
    The importance of the top-selling product at multi-product exporters and the mean-median
ratios are similar across destinations. To investigate the robustness across countries, we select
Brazil’s top two export destinations in terms of presence of Brazilian manufacturing exporters
  41
      Our SITC-to-ISIC concordance is available at URL econ.ucsd.edu/muendler/resource.
  42
      We remove export records with zero value from the Brazilian data, which include shipments of commercial
samples but also potential reporting errors, and lose 408 of initially 162,978 exporter-destination-product observa-
tions. Our results on exporter scope do not materially change when including or excluding zero-shipment products
from the product count.
   43
      The top-5 selling products of Brazilian exporters at the 6-digit level are: 1. Airplanes heavier than 2 tons, 2.
Chemical woodpulp, 3. Soybean oilcake, 4. Passenger vehicles with engines above 1,500 cc, 5. Transmissions.



                                                         54
                          Table B.1: Sample Characteristics by Destination
                                                                      From Brazil
to destination d                         Argentina          USA        non-OECD            OECD           World
                                              (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)

# of Firms (M )                               4,590        3,083            8,485          5,391        10,215
# of Destinations (N )                            1            1              141             29           170
# of HS-6 products (G)                        2,814        2,144            3,516          2,887         3,717
# of Observations                            21,623       10,775          119,872         42,698       162,570
Destination share in Tot. exp.                0.144        0.257            0.384          0.616             1
Firm shares in Total exports
 Single-prod. firms                            0.086        0.123            0.076          0.132         0.090
 Multi-prod. firms’ top prod.                  0.555        0.662            0.560          0.630         0.597
 Multi-prod. firms’ other prod.                0.359        0.215            0.364          0.239         0.313
Median Total exp. (Td (m))                     0.068        0.120            0.063          0.137         0.089
Median Exp. scope (Gd (m))                         2            1                2              2             2
Median Exp. scale (ad (m))                     0.031        0.068            0.026          0.068         0.037
Mean Total exports (t̄d )                      1.192        3.170            1.718          4.344         3.720
Mean Exp. scope (Ḡd )                         4.711        3.494            5.151          4.146         5.277
Mean Exp. scale (ād )                         0.251        0.806            0.325          1.082         0.706
Source: SECEX 2000 manufacturing firms and their manufactured products at the HS 6-digit level, destinations
linked to WTF (Feenstra et al. 2005) and Unido Industrial Statistics (UNIDO 2005).
Note: Each aggregate region (World, OECD, non-OECD) treated as a single destination, collapsing product ship-
ments to different countries into single product shipment. Products at the HS 6-digit level. Exports in US$ million
fob. Firms’ exporter scale (US$ million fob) is the scope-weighted arithmetic mean of exporter scales. OECD
includes all OECD members in 1990. Argentina is Brazil’s top export destination in terms of presence of Brazilian
manufacturing exporters in 2000, the United States second to top.


(Argentina and United States), as well as the non-OECD and OECD aggregates. Our theory
emphasizes the importance of exporting behavior within destinations. Within single countries,
the mean manufacturer’s exports exceed the median manufacturer’s exports by similarly large
factors as in the aggregate, between 14 (in Argentina, column 1) and 26 (in the United States,
column 2). In the non-OECD aggregate (column 3), exports of the mean firm exceed the exports
of the median firm by a factor of about 30. The same mean-median ratio of about 30 prevails in
the OECD aggregate.
    Figure B.1 documents Fact 1 for the United States and Uruguay, complementing Figure 2 for
Argentina in the text. Argentina, the United States and Uruguay are the top three destinations
in terms of presence of Brazilian manufacturing exporters in 2000. In each plot, we limit our
sample to exporters and their shipments to the respective destination and group the exporters by
their local exporter scope G. For each scope group G and for each product rank g, we then take
                                            G
the average of the log of product sales ln yωdg for those firm-products over all destinations. The
graphs for the United States and Uruguay confirm Fact 1 in that a few core products dominate
local sales and in that the least-selling products sell for smaller amounts the wider the firm’s



                                                       55
                                         Figure B.1: U.S. and Uruguayan Within-firm Sales Distributions
                                               United States                                                                                            Uruguay
                                                                                                                                1,000,000
                                                                                       Exporter Scope                                                                                       Exporter Scope
                                                                                            G=1                                                                                                  G=1
                         1,000,000                                                          G [2,4]                                                                                              G [2,4]
                                                                                            G [5,8]                                                                                              G [5,8]
                                                                                            G [9,16]                                                                                             G [9,16]
                                                                                            G [17,32]                                                                                            G [17,32]

                                                                                                                                  10,000
      Mean Sales (US$)




                                                                                                             Mean Sales (US$)
                           10,000




                                                                                                                                     100
                              100




                                                                                                                                       1
                                1




                                     1     2           4           8           16            32                                             1   2           4           8           16            32
                                               Product Rank within Firm (HS 6-digit)                                                                Product Rank within Firm (HS 6-digit)

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level, shipments to the United States and Uruguay. We group firms by their
exporter scope Gd = G at a destination d (United States or Uruguay). The product rank g refers to the sales rank
of
P an exporter’s product   in that destination. Mean product sales is the average of individual firm-product sales
                     G      G                                                                 G
                   y
   ω∈{ω:Gd (ω)=G} ω d g /M  d , computed for all firm-products with individual rank g at the Md firms exporting to
the destination with scope Gd = G.


exporter scope.
     We further investigate the striking similarity of firm scope choices across destinations by
relating the mean number of products to destination market size. Figure B.2 shows a scatter plot
of the log mean exporter scope Ḡsd against the log of total GDP at the destination. The depicted
fitted line, from an ordinary least squares regression, has a slope that is not significantly different
from zero at conventional levels. In other words, most of the variation in firms’ exports to
destinations of different size is due to variation in the firms’ mean scale per product. At the firm
level, the Brazilian data exhibit destination-presence patterns that resemble those in the French
and U.S. firm-destination data. Similar to Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011), for instance, the
elasticity of the number of firms with respect to the number of export destinations is about -2.5,
just as for French exporters.

B.B                        Data for counterfactual analysis
For bilateral trade and trade balances in manufactured products, we use World Trade Flow
(WTF) data in U.S. dollars for the year 2000 (Feenstra et al. 2005). To mitigate the effect
of entrepot trade, we follow Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2007a) and collapse (i) Hong Kong,
Macao and mainland China, (ii) Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, and (iii) Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand into single entities. In 2000, import information for India
is missing from WTF. We obtain information for India in 2000 from UN Comtrade . We keep
only manufactured products from the WTF data, using a concordance from the OECD at the
SITC revision-2 4-digit level to determine manufactured products, and exclude agricultural and
mining merchandise. By our construction, the world’s trade balance is zero.
    For information on GDP, manufacturing value added and the overall trade balances in goods



                                                                                                        56
                 Figure B.2: Mean Exporter Scope and GDP by Destination


                                         16




                                          8
                   Mean Exporter Scope


                                          4




                                          2


                                                                                             Log Exp. Scope (HS)
                                                                                             at destination
                                                                                             Fitted Values
                                          1
                                              .1   1     10         100     1,000   10,000
                                                       GDP (US $ Billion)



            Source: SECEX 2000 manufacturing firms and their manufactured products at the HS
            6-digit level, destinations linked to CEPII Statistics


and services in 2000 we use the World Bank’s World Development Indicators 2009 (WDI). India
included, our initial WTF sample has 132 countries that can be matched to the WDI data, and
we collapse bilateral trade for the rest of the world by trade partner into a 133rd observation.
We compute GDP and manufacturing value added for the rest of the world as the WDI reported
world total less the sample total of our 132 matched countries. We set the overall trade balances
in goods and services for the rest of the world so that the world total is zero.
    We obtain the labor share in manufacturing production β from UNIDO (2005) at the ISIC
rev. 2 level. UNIDO offers both manufacturing value added and manufacturing gross production
for 51 of our sample countries and the rest of the world. Averaging the ratio of manufacturing
value added to manufacturing output in 2000 over these countries yields β = .330. This world-
wide β estimate enters our computation of γd by (E.8).
    We need information on manufacturing absorption. Following Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz
(2011), we infer manufacturing absorption as manufacturing output (from UNIDO 2005) plus
the trade deficit (from WTF). The UNIDO data for manufacturing output are considerably less
complete than either WTF or WDI. We obtain manufacturing output for Brazil from the Brazilian
statistical agency IBGE (2010). Our final country sample for which we have manufacturing
absorption contains 57 countries. By the model in Appendix E, γd is given by (E.8). We use our
WTF-WDI-UNIDO data to calculate γd for 57 countries. For the rest of the world, we set γd to
the average of our sample (γ = .244) and back out manufacturing absorption from (E.8).




                                                                      57
C     Nested Utility
We can generalize the model to consumer preferences with different elasticities of substitution
within and between nests
                               ! σ−σ1                                                 ε−ε1
         N  Z                                          Gkd (ω)
                         σ−1                                            1         ε−1
        X                                               X
                 Xkd (ω) σ dω         with Xkd (ω) ≡          ξkdg (ω) ε xkdg (ω) ε 
         k=1   ω∈Ωkd                                              g=1


for ε, σ > 1 and ε 6= σ. Under this generalization, a firm’s individual products can be less
substitutable among themselves than with outside products (if ε < σ) or more substitutable
(ε > σ). In the latter case, a firm’s additional products cannibalize sales of its infra-marginal
products.
    To see the cannibalization effect, consider the consumer’s first-order conditions by which
demand for the g-th product of firm ω in market d is
                                                                                      Gsd (ω)
                                  ε−σ                                    −(ε−1)
                                                                                       X
                   −ε
xsdg (ω) = psdg (ω) Psd (ω; Gsd )       Pdσ−1 ξsdg Td   with Psd (ω; Gsd )        ≡             psdg (ω)−(ε−1) ,
                                                                                       g=1


where psdg (ω) is the price of that product. A cannibalization effect results if ε > σ because
Psd (ω; Gsd ) strictly decreases in exporter scope for ε > 1, so wider exporter scope diminishes
infra-marginal sales and reduces xsdg (ω) for ε > σ. (For the converse case with σ > ε, wider
exporter scope would boost infra-marginal sales and raise xsdg (ω).) The cannibalization effect is
symmetric for all products, so relative sales of a firm’s existing products are not affected by the
introduction of additional products. This constancy of relative sales in our model does not carry
over to models with CES-preferences and a countable number of firms such as Feenstra and
Ma (2008) or to models with non-CES preferences such as Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014)
and Dhingra (2013). Hottman, Redding and Weinstein (2016) study the cannibalization effect
using data on overall expenditure shares and prices; they compute both intra-firm and inter-firm
elasticities of substitution separately.
    We show for nested utility in the Online Supplement that markups would still depend on the
outer-nest elasticity only and remain constant. In the presence of cannibalization, the interpreta-
tion of some composite parameters would change and reflect elasticities in the inner nest while
other composite parameters would reflect elasticities of the outer nest. Under cannibalization,
we can redefine the product efficiency index and the combined incremental scope costs as:
(C.4)
                                   − ε−11
                 Gsd (ω)
                  X                                                         cd fsd (Gsd )
  H(Gsd ) ≡             h(g)−(ε−1)        and zsd (Gsd , cd ) ≡        −(σ−1)                −(σ−1)
                                                                                                      .
                  g=1
                                                                  H(Gsd )       − H(G   sd −1)

With these new definitions, the expressions for firm product sales (12) and for aggregate bilateral
trade (22) in Lemma 1 remain unaltered. For remaining details on the generalized model see the
Online Supplement S1.




                                                   58
D      Simulation Algorithm and Moments
D.A      Simulation algorithm
Given a candidate estimate Θ, we simulate the export behavior for J sim = 1, 000, 000 hypo-
thetical Brazilian firms ω = 1, . . . , J sim shipping to destinations d = 1, ..., N using our model
(N is the observed number of destinations). In order to maintain the stochastic components
unchanged as we search over Θ, prior to the simulation routine we draw (i) J sim independent
realizations of the firm’s productivity percentile (φω /φ∗ ) from the standard uniform distribu-
tion, (ii) J sim × N independent realizations of the firm-specific market-access costs cωd from the
standard log-normal distribution, and (iii) J sim × N × Ḡ independent realizations of individual
product appeal shocks ξωdg from the standard log-normal distribution (where Ḡ is the maximum
observed exporter scope of any firm at any destination).
    A given iteration of the model simulation requires a set of candidate parameters Θ and the
number of Brazilian firms selling to each destination Md . An iteration of the simulation proceeds
in the following steps.

  (i). Scale the J sim × N standard log-normal market-access cost draws by the current candidate
       dispersion parameter σc . Then, for each Brazilian firm ω and any destination d, compute
       the entry-relevant adjusted firm productivity parameter
                                                               ∗ −1/θ̃
                                             φωd ≡ c−1
                                                    ωd · (φω /φ )      ,

       using the standard uniform firm productivity percentile (φω /φ∗ ).

 (ii). Back out the local entry threshold φ∗d at destination d using the observed number Md of
       Brazilian exporters at the destination and the known number of Brazilian firms MBRA ,

                                                   J        sim
                                         Md    1 X
                                             = sim   1 {φωd > φ∗d } .
                                        MBRA  J ω=1

       The local entry cutoff φ∗d depends on the mean of the cωd realizations. The cutoff is lower
       when the market-access cost draws are lower on average.
       To obtain MBRA we merge the RAIS database of the formal-sector universe of Brazilian
       firms in 2000 with the SECEX export database. We find that 3.1 percent of Brazilian
       manufacturing firms export a manufactured product.44
  44
    The exporter share of 3.1 percent may seem low, but the Brazilian RAIS database includes all formal-sector
firms and establishments with at least one employee. In contrast, censuses and surveys in most developing and some
industrialized countries truncate their target population of firms from below with thresholds up to 20 employees.
Truncation of the Brazilian manufacturing firm sample at a threshold of at least 10 employees would raise the
exporter share to 10.7 percent. Truncation at a 20-employee threshold would raise the exporter share to 17.9
percent. The estimates in Table 3 are not sensitive to this convention. Using the alternative assumption that 10
percent of Brazilian firms export does not alter the reported results appreciably.




                                                       59
(iii). Generate a firm-product-destination indicator 1ωdg for each firm ω that exports its g-th
       product to destination d. For this purpose, compute the local product-level entry cutoffs

                                               φ∗,G
                                                d   ≡ Gδ+α̃ φ∗d .

      Given the cutoffs, the firm-product-destination indicators are 1ωdg = 1 {φωd > φ∗,g
                                                                                      d }.
      Compute the exporter scope for each firm ω at a destination d,
                                                        PḠ
                                              Gωd =        g=1   1ωdg .

(iv). Scale the J sim ×N × Ḡ standard log-normal product appeal draws by the current candidate
      dispersion parameter σξ . Then generate the sales of a firm ω’s g-th ranked product at
      destination d, where the firm has an exporter scope Gωd :
                                                                                 ∗ −1/θ̃
                                              φωd                     −α̃ (φω /φ )
               G
              yωdg           δ+α̃
                   = 1ωdg · Gωd   · gω−α̃ ·        · ξωdg = 1 ωdg · gω   ·               · ξωdg .
                                              φ∗,G
                                               d
                                                                            φ∗d /cωd
                                            G
      This expression for product revenue yωdg  omits the destination-specific market-access cost
      shifter σfd (1) and the destination-specific revenue shifter Dd (which does not enter φ∗d
      in the simulation). Both shifters are common across exporters at a destination and firm
      invariant in our simulation, because we normalize relevant moments by the according
      destination-specific median or extremum. See the following subsection for the definition
      of moments.

 (v). At each destination d and for every firm ω, rank order the firm’s products by their local
             G
      sales yωdg and compute the local rank for each firm-product g as

                                              Gωd
                                              X
                              ĝωd ≡ 1 +            1{yωdk (ξdk ) > yωdg (ξdg )} .
                                              k=1

      In general, the local rank will differ from the firm-level rank in production ĝωd 6= gω due
      to the product appeal shock ξωdg .

D.B     Moments
We now define and discuss the moments used in the simulated method of moments algorithm. To
isolate the parameters that are relevant for the shapes of our functional forms and the dispersion
of the stochastic components, we adopt moments that are comparable across destinations by
neutralizing destination-specific shifters with adequate factors of proportionality, based on the
destination median or a destination extremum. To separately identify δLAC and δROW , we use sets
of moments for both LAC and ROW (non-LAC) destinations.




                                                     60
D.B.1    Within-destination sales of top-selling products across firms
                                                 G
Our first set of moments compares the sales yωd1     of the firms’ top-selling products ĝωd = 1
across firms within a destination d. We compute these moments for groups of firms that share
the same exporter scope Gωd ∈ G. Within each destination, we start with single-product firms
(firms with an exporter scope Gωd = 1) and rank order the firms by their single product’s sales
from largest to smallest within the destination d. From the rank order of product sales we pick
firms at select percentiles P (ω) = p, overusing higher percentiles to match mostly upper-tail
behavior (however still retaining some moments as low as the 25th percentile). Then we repeat
the computations for the group of firms with an exporter scope of two or three products sold
(Gωd ∈ {2, 3}), and again rank only their top-selling products by sales across firms within
destination, and so forth. Normalizing with the sales of the top-product at the median firm
P (ω) = .5 within an exporter-scope group Gωd = G, we obtain a first set of moments
                               G
                                          !
                             y P (ω)=p,d1
              M 1Gpd ≡ ln                   , p ∈ {.95, .90, .85, .80, .70, .60, .25} ,
                            yPG(ω)=.5,d1
                                              G ∈ {{1} {2, 3} {4, 5, 6} {7, . . .}} .

This procedure would provide us with 7 × 4 × N moments for N destinations. For simplicity,
we use the weighted geometric average across LAC and non-LAC destinations and obtain just
7 × 4 × 2 moments M 1G  pd .
    The sales dispersion across the firms’ top-selling products is driven by the product appeal
realization and partly by a firm’s market-access cost draw because product sales are larger on
average in markets with higher access costs (see step (iv) of the algorithm).

D.B.2    Within-destination and within-firm product sales concentration
                                                       G
The second set of moments compares the sales yωd1          of a firm’s top-selling product and the sales
  G
yωdĝ of the same firm’s ĝωd -th ranked product within a destination d. We compute these moments
for groups of firms that share the same global scope maxd {Gωd } ∈ G across all destinations.
For all firms that have a global scope of maxd {Gωd } ∈ G, within each destination we compute
                            max G     max G
the firm ω’s sales ratio yωdĝ     /yωd1    for the following three groups of lower-ranked products
ĝ ∈ {{2, 3} {4, 5, 6} {7, . . .}}. For each group of lower-ranked products, we then pool over all
                                                                                        max G   max G
destinations within a region and pool over all scope groups the sales ratios yωdĝ            /yωd1   , rank
                         max G     max G
order the sales ratios yωdĝ /yωd1 from highest to lowest and pick firm observations at select
percentiles P (ω) = p. We obtain the second set of moments
                                                !
                      ĝ
                                   yPG(ω)=p,dĝ
                  M 2pd ≡ ln                      ,   p ∈ {.90, .75, .50, .25, .10} ,
                                   yPG(ω)=p,d1
                                                      ĝ ∈ {{2, 3} {4, 5, 6} {7, . . .}} .

We compute the moments separately for LAC and non-LAC destinations, so this procedure
generates 5 × 3 × 2 moments M 2ĝpd .
    The comparison of sales within firms of a given global scope implicitly conditions on the
firm’s global productivity percentile (φω /φ∗ ), and the comparison within destinations removes


                                                    61
                          Table D.1: Firm Counts of Destination Strings

   Latin America and Caribbean (LAC)                                  Rest of World (non-LAC)
Destination String                      # Firms              Destination String                    # Firms
ARG                                       1,683              USA                                     1,651
ARG–URY                                     499              USA–DEU                                   236
ARG–URY–CHL                                 307              USA–DEU–ITA                                52
ARG–URY–CHL–PRY                             214              USA–DEU–ITA–GBR                            87
ARG–URY–CHL–PRY–BOL                         585              USA–DEU–ITA–GBR-ESP                       138
Other                                     4,817              Other                                   3,322
Total                                     8,105              Total                                   5,486
Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Strings denote Argentina (ARG), Uruguay (URY), Chile (CHL), Paraguay (PRY) and Bolivia (BOL); United
States (USA), Germany (DEU), Italy (ITA), the United Kingdom (GBR) and Spain (ESP). Those are the top five
destinations within LAC and within non-LAC in terms of Brazilian manufacturing firm presence with manufactured
product exports.


destination specific variation including a firm’s market access shock at a destination (see step (iv)
                                                                            max G   max G
of the algorithm). The within-firm and within-destination sales ratio yωdĝ       /yωd1    therefore
varies with α̃ and captures the product appeal shock dispersion.

D.B.3    Within-destination exporter scope distribution
The third set of moments characterizes the exporter scope distribution by destination. We count
the exporters with an exporter scope of at least Gωd ≥ G at every destination and compute their
share in the total number of exporters at the destination. We obtain a third set of moments
                           P
                              ω∈Ωd 1 {Gωd ≥ G}
                    M 3G
                       d ≡ P                       ,    G ∈ {2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16} .
                              ω∈Ωd 1 {Gωd ≥ 1}

This procedure would provide us with 6 × N moments for N destinations. For simplicity, we
use the weighted geometric average separately across LAC and non-LAC destinations and obtain
just 6 × 2 moments M 3G   d.
     The within-destination share of firms with a given exporter scope addresses the parameter
θ̃ of the firm productivity distribution and also the scope cost elasticity δ + α̃, which translates
productivity into exporter scope (see steps (ii) and (iii) of the algorithm). The share of firms with
a given exporter scope captures the dispersion of market-access cost draws in addition because
exporter scope is larger on average in markets with lower access costs.

D.B.4    Market presence combinations
For the fourth set of moments, we take the top five export destinations within LAC and within
non-LAC in terms of the presence of Brazilian manufacturing exporters. We calculate the shares



                                                     62
of exporters that sell to any of the permutations of those five destinations. The top five most com-
mon destinations within LAC are Argentina (ARG), Uruguay (URY), Chile (CHL), Paraguay
(PRY) and Bolivia (BOL), within non-LAC they are the United States (USA), Germany (DEU),
Italy (ITA), the United Kingdom (GBR) and Spain (ESP). We summarize the possible permu-
tations with strings of up to five destinations. For example, the single-destination string ARG
means selling to Argentina but to no other among the top five destinations in LAC; the string
ARG–URY means selling to Argentina and Uruguay but not to Chile, Paraguay or Bolivia. See
Table D.1 for frequencies of select permutations. This collection of destination combinations
produces a total of 2 × 25 = 64 moments, denoted M 4{d}-COMB .
    These moments reflect every firm ω’s exact destination combination and therefore help as-
sess the dispersion of market-access cost draws.

D.B.5    Within-firm export proportions between destination pairs
The fifth set of moments compares a firm ω’s total exports tωd to a destination d and its total
exports to Argentina for LAC (tω ARG ) or the United States for non-LAC (tω USA ). We compute the
total export ratios tωd /tω ARG and tωd /tω USA by destination d and firm ω for the four destinations
Uruguay, Chile, Paraguay and Bolivia in LAC (which together with Argentina are the top five
LAC destinations in terms of presence of Brazilian manufacturing exporters) and for the four
destinations Germany, Italy, United Kingdom and Spain in non-LAC (which together with the
United are the five most common non-LAC destinations). Within each region LAC and non-
LAC we then rank order the firms by their export ratios tωd /tω ARG and tωd /tω USD from largest
to smallest for each of the four close-to-top destinations. From the rank order of product sales
we pick firms at select percentiles P (ω) = p. Normalizing with the exports ratio at the median
firm P (ω) = .5, we obtain the fifth set of moments
                                                     
                            tP (ω)=p,d /tP (ω)=p,ARG
        M 5pdLAC ≡ ln                                   , p ∈ {.95, .90, .85, .70, .60, .25} ,
                           tP (ω)=.5,d /tP (ω)=.5,ARG
                                                          dLAC ∈ {URY, CHL, PRY, BOL} .

and
                                                          
                               tP (ω)=p,d /tP (ω)=p,USA
      M 5pdnon-LAC ≡ ln                                        ,   p ∈ {.95, .90, .85, .70, .60, .25} ,
                              tP (ω)=.5,d /tP (ω)=.5,USA
                                                                   dnon-LAC ∈ {DEU, ITA, GBR, ESP} .

This procedure generates 6 × 4 × 2 moments M 5pdLAC and M 5pdnon-LAC .
    The exports ratio between destination pairs captures the dispersion of market-access cost
draws, which alter exporter scope and therefore total sales, and the ratio captures the dispersion
of product appeal shocks, which change product sales directly. A firm’s total sales ratio depends
on the firm’s respective scope cost elasticity δ + α̃ by equation (16).




                                                           63
E       Counterfactuals and Calibration
We follow a procedure similar to Alvarez and Lucas (2007), Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2007a)
and Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011), and extend our framework to a setting with:

     • immobile labor between countries, but mobile labor between sectors, so there is a single
       wage Ws in country s;

     • an input bundle that consists of labor and intermediate goods, so such an input costs

                                               ws = Wsβ Ps1−β ;

     • a non manufacturing, non-traded final-product sector that only requires labor input and
       produces with a Cobb-Douglas combination of the non-manufacturing and manufacturing
       sectors, so final good prices are
                                          Psf = Piγ Wi1−γ ;

     • market-access costs that require labor at the export destination and are homogeneous of
       degree 1 − θ̃ in foreign wages, so we can rewrite

                                           fsd (1)F̄sd = Wd1−θ̃ F̃sd ,

        where F̃sd denotes mean market-access cost costs in terms of labor units;

     • unchanging trade deficits in manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors;

     • technological parameters and labor endowments that are time invariant.

     Using equation (23) for current trade shares λsd , we can express counterfactual trade shares
as
                                                      −θ
                                                             −θ c̃
                                       λsd Ŵsβ P̂s1−β     τ̂sd  Fsd
(E.5)                         λ0sd   =P                −θ             .
                                                 β 1−β          −θ b̃
                                       k λkd Ŵk P̂k          τ̂kd F kd




                                                   64
   The price index (3) can be derived as
                                                                                  
                               Gkd (φ)                     1−σ         ∗       θ
        XZ        Z
                                               wk                  θ (φkd (cd )) dφ dF (cd )
                                X
Pd1−σ =                                σ̃             τkd
         k    cd   φ∗kd (cd )   g=1
                                            φ/h(g)                       φθ+1
                                                                          
                                    Z       Z             Gkd (φ)      1−σ
        X                                                  X      h(g)  
      =     (σ̃wk τkd )1−σ Jk bθk θ                                         dφ dF (cd )
         k                            cd     φ∗kd (cd )    g=1
                                                                   φ2−σ+θ
                                                                     !θ̃−1 ∞                  
                                                                                        −(θ̃−1) Z
        X                                    1              fsd (1)        X    fsd (G)
      =     (σ̃wk τkd )1−σ Js bθs θ                              σ−1                     θ
                                                                                                     c− θ̃
                                                                                                       d dF (cd )
         k
                                      θ − (σ−1) (φsd )        ∗
                                                                           G=1
                                                                                    h(G)          cd
                                                                                                     
                                                                     σ−1 !θ̃−1
        X                                    1                  Pd          Td
      =     (σ̃wk τkd )1−σ Js bθs θ                                                  F̄kd fkd (1)−θ̃  κ.
         k
                                      θ − (σ−1)              σ̃τsd ws        σ

The second step uses equation (19). The third step uses Lemma 1 to replace the integral term.
The fourth step uses the log-normal distribution of cd as well as equations (10) and (19). Finally,
collecting terms and solving for Pd−θ yields

                                    θ̃−1    σ −(θ̃−1) σ̃ −θ X       
                                                                      β 1−β
                                                                            −θ
                                                                                     −(θ̃−1)
(E.6)             Pd−θ   = κ (Td )                                θ
                                                              Jk bk Wk Pk        −θ
                                                                                τkd Wd       F̃kd ,
                                             1 − 1/θ̃ k

which can be restated in terms of relative changes as45
                              "                                                     #−1/θ               !1/θ−1/(σ−1)
                               X                                 −θ                             T̂d
(E.7)                 P̂d =          λkd Ŵkβ P̂k1−β                      −θ b̃
                                                                        τ̂kd F kd                                      .
                                k
                                                                                              Ŵd

    As regards notation, x̂ denotes a gross relative change: x̂ ≡ x0 /x, where x0 is the new value.
The above result is a system of equations that determines relative changes of prices as a function
of relative changes in wages. To complete the procedure, we follow Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz
  45
       We can use expression (E.6) together with equation (23) to obtain
                                                                                         −θ
                                                                                               −(θ̃−1)
                                                  (σ)   −(θ̃−1)
                                                             (σ̃)
                                                                    −θ   Jd bθd Wdβ Pd1−β     Wd       F̃dd
                                           θ̃−1
                         Pd−θ = (Td )                                                                            .
                                                        1 − 1/θ̃                            λdd

Thus changes in real wage are
                                                                      1−θθ̃
                                             \  
                                              Wd       −1/θ   T
                                                              cd /Wcd
                                                 = λ
                                                   ddd               −1/θ
                                                                              .
                                              Pd                  
                                                               Fdd
                                                               d̃


We consider Fd̃ = 1 in our counterfactual exercise, so this expression differs for domestic access costs from a
               dd
similar one in Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012) inasmuch as changes in the ratio Tcd /W
                                                                                                     cd reflect
changes in the ratio of total absorption to wages (which is not one due to non-zero deficits).




                                                                        65
(2011, Appendix E). Total manufacturing absorption is
                                                                                σ−1
                                γd · YdT + BdT
                                               
                  Td    =                                  +       (1−β) ·           Yd ,
                                    |    {z    }                                | σ{z }
                                   final demand                 demand for intermediates
                              (labor income + profits)           by manufacturing sector

where YdT is total GDP of country d, including labor income and profits, BdT is the current ac-
count deficit and Yd output of the manufacturing sector. We allow the share γd of manufacturing
value added in GDP to be country specific. Manufacturing expenditure equals Td = Yd + Bd ,
where Bd is the trade deficit in the manufacturing sector. We can therefore solve for Td and Yd
and obtain
                                               
                                  γd YdT + BdT − (1−β)(1−1/σ)Bd
                         Td =                                          ,
                                           1/σ + β(1−1/σ)
                                               
                                  γd YdT + BdT − Bd
(E.8)                    Yd =                         .
                                    1/σ + β(1−1/σ)

We assume γd is time invariant, so we solve equation (E.8) for γd using 2000 baseline data.
    To summarize, using the Dekle, Eaton and Kortum (2007a) algorithm, we can compute how
given relative changes in market-access costs F
                                              b̃ lead to λ̂ , P̂ , Ŵ . Denoting future variables
                                                    kd                 sd   d     d
with a prime, we find Td0 , Yd0 by inspecting equations (E.5), (E.6) and imposing the market
clearing condition
                                                    N
                                                    X
(E.9)                                  Ys0 Ls   =         λ0sk Tk0 .
                                                    k=1



F       Varying the Productivity Distribution
While we can allow for flexible forms of the firm-destination market-access cost distribution
and the firm-product-destination appeal shock distribution, a critical assumption for closed-form
general equilibrium (in Section IV) and counterfactuals (in Section V) is that the firm-specific
productivity shock is Pareto distributed. For our SMM estimation routine, however, the Pareto
assumption can be easily relaxed to allow for a different and more general distribution of pro-
ductivity. We show in this Appendix that using the empirically plausible log-normal distribution
(Fernandes et al. 2018) in our SMM estimator yields similar parameter estimates for firm scope
and scale. In addition, aggregate trade patterns remain similar, arguably because the bulk of
trade is conducted by the largest firms.
    We first present our computation strategy using a general distribution for firm productivity,
and then show the results of our estimation routine using a log-normal distribution. In the
Online Supplement S8 we discuss implications for aggregates and counterfactual simulations
when changing the firm productivity distribution to a non-Pareto distribution such as the log-
normal distribution of productivity.



                                                    66
F.A    Computation strategy
Consider firms in a common source country s. Each firm gets a productivity draw φ, destination
cost shock cd and a destination-product product demand shock ξdg .
   Firms export to destination d only if φ > φ∗d (cd ), where

                                                          fd (1)
                                      φ∗d (cd )σ−1 = cd          .
                                                            Dd
                                                          | {z }
                                                               D̄d


We compute D̄d to match the number of observed exporters at destination d. The productivity
cutoff for market entry with at least G products is
                                         σ−1
                                 φ∗G
                                  d (cd )    = φ∗d (cd )σ−1 Gδd Gα̃ ,

where α̃ ≡ α(σ−1).
     We then compute sales ydg (φ, cd , ξdg ) of a product of rank g to destination d (for a firm with
productivity draw φ, destination cost shock cd and a destination-product product demand shock
ξdg ). Following similar derivations as for our main analysis, we find that a firm that sells G
products to destination d has product-level sales
                                                                            σ−1
                                                                     φ
                                                  δd
                   ydg (φ, cd , ξdg ) = σcd fd (1) G G   α̃
                                                                   ∗G
                                                                                    g −α̃ ξdg .
                                                                  φd (cd )

Our SMM estimation procedure only uses relative comparisons in sales, so σcd fd (1) drops from
all computations.
    As before we can therefore express product sales as:
                                                                             σ−1
                                                                      φ
                 ydg (φ, cd , ξdg ) = σcd fd (1) G Gδd    α̃
                                                                    ∗G
                                                                                     g −α̃ ξdg
                                                                   φd (cd )
                                                          (φ)σ−1
                                                    δd
                                   = σcd fd (1) G G ∗     α̃
                                                                        g −α̃ ξdg
                                                    φd (cd )σ−1 Gδd Gα̃
                                                (φ)σ−1 −α̃
                                   = σcd fd (1) ∗          g ξdg .
                                               φd (cd )σ−1

F.B    Comparison of results
For computation we assume that all random variables are drawn from    independent log-normal
distributions with the following parameters: φ ∼ logN −σφ2 /2, σφ2 , cd ∼ logN (−σc2 /2, σc2 ),
                      
and ξ ∼ logN 0, σξ2 . Note that if φ is log-normal then φσ−1 is distributed log-normal with
                              
φσ−1 ∼ logN 0, σφ2 (σ − 1)2 . We define the variance σ̃φ ≡ σφ2 (σ − 1)2 and estimate it in lieu
of σ and σφ before.
    Table F.1 shows a comparison of the estimates under Pareto distribued and log-normally
distributed firm productivity. The results are relatively similar in general, and the difference



                                                 67
                   Table F.1: Estimation Results for Log-normal Productivity
                                    δLAC      δROW          α̃   θ̃/σ̃φ     σξ       σc         δLAC −δROW

Baseline                            -1.17     -.87      1.77     1.73     1.82      .58              -.30
  Pareto productivity               (.05)     (.07)     (.05)    (.09)     (.04)    (.02)            (.06)
Baseline                           –1.20      -.90      1.90     1.90     1.73      .69              -.30
  Log-normal productivity           ( .04)    ( .06)   ( .04)    ( .04)   ( .03)   ( .02)            ( .07)
Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. Standard errors from 30 bootstraps in parentheses. Estimates of δLAC
measure the scope elasticity of market-access costs for Brazilian firms shipping to other LAC destinations, δROW
for Brazilian firms shipping to destinations outside LAC.


between δLAC and δROW in particular is virtually unchanged between specifications.
    Figures F.1 and F.2 compare the targeted moments between Pareto and log-normally dis-
tributed firm productivity. The SMM estimators under either specification of the productivity
distribution do a reasonably similar job. Figures F.3 and F.4 compare the non-targeted mo-
ments between using Pareto and log-normally distributed firm productivity. Again, both SMM
estimators appear to do a reasonably similar job, but SMM for Pareto productivity performs
better in matching the relationship between exporter scope and scale for non-LAC countries.
The superior performance of SMM under Pareto appears to be driven by the fact that the Pareto
distribution can do a better job at explaining extremes, which heavily influence the means.




                                                       68
                                       Figure F.1: Fit of Targeted Moments under Pareto Productivity
                        (A) Firm-product Sales Distribution                                                                                    (B) Exporter Scope Distribution
                                                                                                                                      50

                                                                                                                                                 Latin America and Caribbean - Data
                                                                                   Exporter Scope                                     45         Latin America and Caribbean - Simulated
                                                                                        G [2,4]                                                  Rest of World - Data
                                                                                        G [5,8]
                     1,000,000
                                                                                        G [9,16]
                                                                                                                                      40         Rest of World - Simulated
                                                                                        G [17,32]




                                                                                                        Exporter Scope (HS 6-digit)
                                                                                        Simulated
                                                                                                                                      35
  Mean Sales (US$)




                                                                                                                                      30

                       10,000
                                                                                                                                      25


                                                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                                      15
                          100

                                                                                                                                      10


                                                                                                                                       5


                            1                                                                                                          0
                                 1     2           4           8           16            32                                                0    0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9   1
                                           Product Rank within Firm (HS 6-digit)                                                                       Percentile of Exporter by Exporter Scope



                                     Figure F.2: Fit of Targeted Moments under Log-normal Productivity
                        (A) Firm-product Sales Distribution                                                                                    (B) Exporter Scope Distribution
                                                                                                                                      50

                                                                                                                                                 Latin America and Caribbean - Data
                                                                                   Exporter Scope                                     45         Latin America and Caribbean - Simulated
                                                                                         G    [1,4]                                              Rest of World - Data
                                                                                         G    [1,8]
                     1,000,000
                                                                                         G    [1,16]
                                                                                                                                      40         Rest of World - Simulated
                                                                                         G    [1,32]
                                                                                                        Exporter Scope (HS 6-digit)




                                                                                                                                      35
  Mean Sales (US$)




                                                                                                                                      30

                       10,000
                                                                                                                                      25


                                                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                                      15
                          100

                                                                                                                                      10


                                                                                                                                       5


                            1                                                                                                          0
                                 1     2           4           8           16            32                                                0    0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9   1
                                           Product Rank within Firm (HS 6-digit)                                                                       Percentile of Exporter by Exporter Scope

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. The upper two panels for Pareto productivity are the same as in Figure 5, and
data plots replicate those in Figures 2 and 3. Panel A shows shipments to Argentina, grouping firms by their local
exporter scope and firm-products by their local sales rank. Panel B shows the exporter scope by percentile, averaged
across the five most common destinations within each of the two regions LAC and Rest of World (non-LAC)




                                                                                                       69
                                                       Figure F.3: Fit of Non-Targeted Moments under Pareto Productivity
                                               (A) Exporter Scope and Scale                                                                                                  (B) Export Sales Distribution
                                                                                                                                                           10 4
                                               Latin America and Caribbean - Data
                                               Latin America and Caribbean - Simulated
                                                                                                                                                           10 3
                                               Rest of World - Data
                              6                Rest of World - Simulated
                                                                                                                                                           10 2
                              5
 Normalized Exporter Scale




                                                                                                                         Normalized Exporter Sales
                              4                                                                                                                            10 1


                              3                                                                                                                            10 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                     10 -1
                              2
                                                                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                                                     10


                                                                                                                                                     10 -3


                              1                                                                                                                                 -4
                                                                                                                                                     10                                                                             Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Simulated
                                                                                                                                                     10 -5
                                       1       2         3        4       5       6       7       8       9       10                                                 0       0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6    0.7    0.8      0.9       1
                                                                 Exporter Scope (HS 6-digit)                                                                                               Percentile of Exporter by Sales



                                               Figure F.4: Fit of Non-Targeted Moments under Log-normal Productivity
                                               (A) Exporter Scope and Scale                                                                                                  (B) Export Sales Distribution
                                                                                                                                                               10 4
                                                   Latin America and Caribbean - Data
                                                   Latin America and Caribbean - Simulated
                                                   Rest of World - Data                                                                                        10 3
                                       6           Rest of World - Simulated
                                       5                                                                                                                       10 2
           Normalized Exporter Scale




                                                                                                                                   Normalized Exporter Sales




                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                               10

                                       3
                                                                                                                                                               10 0


                                       2
                                                                                                                                                               10 -1



                                                                                                                                                               10 -2



                                       1                                                                                                                       10 -3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Simulated
                                                                                                                                                                    -4
                                                                                                                                                               10
                                           1       2         3        4       5       6       7       8       9    10                                                    0    0.1    0.2    0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6    0.7    0.8      0.9          1
                                                                 Exporter Scope (HS 6-digit)                                                                                               Percentile of Exporter by Sales

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. The upper two panels for Pareto productivity are the same as in Figure 6,
and data plots in the left panels A replicate the data plot in Figure 4. Predicted curves based on simulations in
Section D.A, using the baseline parameter estimates in Table 3. Panels A show exporter scale (a firm’s total sales at
a destination divided by its exporter scope at the destination) on a log scale plotted against exporter scope, averaging
a variable over the five most common destinations within each of the two regions LAC and Rest of World (non-
LAC) and normalizing scale by the average total sales of single-product exporters at the destination. Panels B show
total firm exports by percentile, averaging a firm’s total exports over the five most common destinations within each
of the two regions and normalizing total sales by the median firm’s total at the destination.




                                                                                                                        70
Online Supplement to
The Extensive Margin of Exporting Products:
A Firm-level Analysis
Costas Arkolakis, Yale University, CESifo and NBER                                    July 8, 2020
Sharat Ganapati, Georgetown University and CESifo
Marc-Andreas Muendler, UC San Diego, CESifo and NBER

This Online Supplement is organized in seven sections. Section S1 generalizes the model of
the main paper (henceforth AGM) to nested consumer preferences (as previewed in Appendix C
to AGM). Each inner nest holds the products in a firm’s product line with an elasticity of sub-
stitution that differs from that of the outer nest over product lines of different firms. In Sec-
tion S2, we accommodate market penetration costs as in Arkolakis (2010) and show that our
simulated methods of moments estimator is invariant to marketing costs at the level of product
lines. Section S3 presents detailed reduced form evidence covering non-tariff measures (NTMs).
Section S4 presents tabulations of the underlying Brazilian export data for 2000. In Section S5
we report Monte Carlo simulations that assess identification under our estimation routine. We
turn to special cases of our model in Section S6, where we consider in particular a limit case
that approximates the single-product benchmark model by Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011).
Section S7 offers a variety of robustness checks for our main estimates, using alternative as-
sumptions and restricted samples. Section S8 summarizes conceptual challenges that would
arise in counterfactual exercises with log-normally distributed firm productivity.


S1     Nested Preferences with Different Elasticities
We analyze a generalized version of the AGM model of multi-product firms that allows for
within-firm cannibalization effects. The main result is that the qualitative properties of the AGM
model are retained: the size distribution of firm sales and the distribution of the firms’ numbers
of products is consistent with regularities in Brazilian exporter data as well as other data sets.
More importantly, the general equilibrium properties of the model do not depend on the inner
nests’ elasticity (the elasticity across the products of a given firm’s product composite) so that
the general equilibrium of the model can be easily characterized using the tools of Dekle, Eaton
and Kortum (2007a).
    While the model is highly tractable, the introduction of one more demand elasticity adds
a further degree of freedom. This degree of freedom can be disciplined using independent
estimates for the outer and inner nests’ elasticities, such as those of Broda and Weinstein (2006).
Under an according parametrization, the model can be used for counterfactual exercises that
simulate the impact of changes in trade costs on the firm size distribution and the distribution of
the firms’ numbers of products.
    In the following subsection we present and solve the generalized model. We derive its ag-
gregate properties in subsection S1.2. Subsection S1.3 concludes the presentation of the model
with nested preferences.


                                               S.1
S1.1      Model
There is a countable number of countries. We label the source country of an export shipment
with s and the export destination with d.
    We adopt a two-tier nested CES utility function for consumer preferences.46 Each inner
nest of consumer preferences aggregates a firm’s products with a CES utility function and an
elasticity of substitution ε. Using marketing terminology, the product composite of the inner
nest can be called a firm’s product line or product mix. The product lines of different firms are
then aggregated using an outer CES utility nest with an elasticity σ. Each firm offers a countable
number of products but there is a continuum of firms in the world. We assume that every product
line is uniquely offered by a single firm, but a firm may ship different product lines to different
destinations. Formally, the representative consumer’s utility function at destination d is given by
                                                                                  σ−σ1 ε−ε1      σ−σ1
                                                        Gsd (ω)
                                      XZ                 X                   ε−1
                           Ud =                                  qsdg (ω)                       dω 
                                                                            ε                    
                                      s       Ωsd        g=1


where qsdg (ω) is the quantity consumed of the g-th product of firm ω, producing in country s.
Ωsd is the set of firms from source country s selling to country d.
    The representative consumer’s first-order conditions imply that demand for the g-th product
of firm ω in market d is

                               qsdg (ω) = psdg (ω)−ε Psd (ω; Gsd )ε−σ Pdσ−1 Td ,

where psdg (ω) is the price of that product,
                                                                                        −1/(ε−1)
                                                         Gsd (ω)
                                                          X
                               Psd (ω; Gsd ) ≡                    psdg (ω)−(ε−1) 
                                                           g=1


is the ideal price index for the product line of firm ω selling Gsd (ω) products in market d, and
                                      "                                                  #−1/(σ−1)
                                          XZ                           −(σ−1)
                               Pd ≡                 Psd (ω; Gsd )                   dω
                                          s     Ωsd


is the ideal consumer price index in market d. Td is total consumption expenditure.
  46
     Atkeson and Burstein (2008) use a similar nested CES form in a heterogeneous-firms model of trade but their
outer nest refers to different industries and the inner nests to different firms within the industry. Eaton and Kortum
(2010) present a stochastic model with nested CES preferences to characterize the firm size distribution and their
products under Cournot competition. In our model, firms do not strategically interact with other firms. This property
of the model allows us to characterize general equilibrium beyond the behavior of individual firms.




                                                               S.2
S1.1.1    Firm optimization
We assume that the firm has a linear production function for each product. A firm with overall
productivity φ faces an efficiency φ/h(g) in producing its g’th product, where h(g) is an in-
creasing function with h(1) = 1. We call the firm’s total number of products Gsd at destination
d its exporter scope at d. Productivity is the only source of firm heterogeneity so that, under the
model assumptions below, firms of the same type φ from country s face an identical optimization
problem in every destination d. Since all firms with productivity φ will make identical decisions
in equilibrium, it is convenient to name them by their common characteristic φ from now on.47
    The firm also incurs local entry costs to sell its g-th product in market d: fsd (g) > 0 for
g > 1, with fsd (0) = 0. These incremental product-specific fixed costs may increaseP   or decrease
with exporter scope. The overall entry cost for market d is denoted by Fsd (G) ≡ G       g=1 fsd (g)
and strictly increases in exporter scope by definition.
    Profits of a firm with productivity φ from country s that sells products g = 1, ..., Gsd in d at
prices psdg are
                       Gsd                       
                       X                  ws
(S.1)        πsd (φ) =      psdg −             τsd p−ε
                                                    sdg · Psd (φ; Gsd )
                                                                       ε−σ σ−1
                                                                          Pd Td − Fsd (Gsd ).
                         g=1
                                        φ/h(g)

We consider the first-order conditions with respect to the prices psdg of each product g, consistent
with an optimal product-line price Psd (φ; Gsd ), and also with respect to exporter scope Gsd . As
shown in Appendix S-A to this Online Supplement, the first-order conditions with respect to
prices imply a constant markup over marginal cost for all products equal to σ̃ ≡ σ/ (σ−1).
    Using the constant markup rule in demand for the g-th product of a firm with exporter scope
Gsd yields optimal sales of the product
                                                         −(ε−1)
                                                 ws τsd
(S.2)               psdg (φ)qsdg (φ) =       σ̃                     Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−σ Pdσ−1 Td .
                                                φ/h(g)

Using this result and the definition of Psd (φ; Gsd ), we can rewrite profits that a firm generates at
destination d selling Gsd products as

                                                   Pdσ−1 Td
              πsd (φ; Gsd ) = Psd (φ; Gsd )−(σ−1)            − Fsd (Gsd )
                                                      σ
                                                                 φσ−1 Pdσ−1 Td
(S.3)                          = H(Gsd )−(σ−1) (σ̃ws τsd )−(σ−1)               − Fsd (Gsd ),
                                                                      σ
where                                            "G                    #−1/(ε−1)
                                                  X sd
                                                              −(ε−1)
                                   H(Gsd ) ≡              h(g)
                                                   g=1

  47
    To simplify the exposition, we assume here that firms face no other idiosyncratic cost components, whereas
the AGM model also allows for a destination specific market-access cost shock cd so that a firm in that model is
characterized by a pair of shocks (φ, cd ). The derivations here can be readily generalized to such idiosyncratic
market-access costs.



                                                      S.3
is the firm’s product efficiency index.
     Similar to Assumption 1 in AGM, we impose the following assumption, which is necessary
for optimal exporter scope to be well defined.

Assumption S.1 Parameters are such that Zsd (G) = fsd (G)/[H(G)−(σ−1) − H(G − 1)−(σ−1) ]
strictly increases in G.

The expression for Zsd (G) reduces to Zsd (G) = fsd (G)h(G)σ−1 when ε = σ. In that case,
Assumption S.1 is identical to the one considered in AGM.
     For a firm to enter a destination market, its productivity has to exceed a threshold φ∗sd , where
φ∗sd is implicitly defined by zero profits for the first product:

                                    Pdσ−1 Td [Psd (φ∗sd ; 1)]−(σ−1) = σfsd (1).

Using the convention h(1) = 1 for G = 1 in (S.3) yields

                                                                (σ̃ws τsd )σ−1
(S.4)                                 (φ∗sd )σ−1 = σfsd (1)                    .
                                                                   Pdσ−1 Td

    Similarly, we can define the threshold productivity of selling G products in market d. The
firm is indifferent between introducing a G-th product or stopping with an exporter scope of
G − 1 at the product-entry threshold φ∗,G
                                       sd if
                                                              
(S.5)                      πsd φ∗,G
                                  sd ; G   − π sd   φ ∗,G
                                                      sd  ; G − 1  = 0.

Using equations (S.3) and (S.4) in this profit equivalence condition, we can solve out for the
implicitly defined product-entry threshold φ∗,G
                                            sd , at which the firm sells Gsd or more products,

                    σ−1                    (φ∗sd )σ−1        fsd (Gsd )   (φ∗sd )σ−1
(S.6)         φ∗,G
               sd           =                                             =            Zsd (Gsd ),
                              H(Gsd )−(σ−1) − H (Gsd − 1)−(σ−1) fsd (1)      fsd (1)

where we define φ∗,1       ∗
                    sd ≡ φsd . So, under Assumption S.1, the profit equivalence condition (S.5)
implies that the product-entry thresholds φ∗,G
                                           sd strictly increase with G and more productive firms
will weakly raise exporter scope compared to less productive firms.
    Export sales can be written succinctly as
                                     1−ε           Gsd
                               ws τsd                X
                 tsd (φ) =  σ̃              Pdσ−1 Td     h (g)1−ε [Pd (Gsd (φ))]ε−σ
                                 φ                   g=1
                                          σ−1
                                       φ
(S.7)                    = σfsd (1)             H (Gsd (φ))−(σ−1)
                                      φ∗sd

using equation (S.4). This sales relationship is similar in both models with ε 6= σ and models
with ε = σ. The only difference between the two types of models is that H(Gsd ) depends on ε
by (S.3). If the term H(Gsd ) converges to a constant for Gsd → ∞, then export sales are Pareto



                                                          S.4
distributed in the upper tail if φ is Pareto distributed. Similar to Proposition 1 in the main text,
we can state

Proposition S.1 Suppose Assumption S.1 holds. Then for all s, d:

    • exporter scope Gsd (φ) is positive and weakly increases in φ for φ ≥ φ∗sd ;

    • total firm exports tsd (φ) are positive and strictly increase in φ for φ ≥ φ∗sd .

Proof. The first statement follows directly from the discussion above. The second statement
follows because H(Gsd (φ))−(σ−1) strictly increases in Gsd (φ) and Gsd (φ) weakly increases in φ
so that tsd (φ) strictly increases in φ by (S.7).
    Similar to AGM, we define exporter scale (an exporter’s mean sales) in market d as
                                                           σ−1
                                                                  H (Gsd (φ))1−σ
                                                
                                                     φ
                           asd (φ) = σfsd (1)
                                                    φ∗sd             Gsd (φ)

    Under a mild condition, exporter scale asd (φ) increases with φ and thus with a firm’s total
sales tsd (φ). The following sufficient condition ensures that exporter scale increases with total
sales.

Case C1 The function Zsd (g) strictly increases in g with an elasticity

                                          ∂ ln Zsd (g)
                                                       > 1.
                                             ∂ ln g
    Case C1 is more restrictive than Assumption S.1 in that the condition not only requires Zsd
to increase with g but that the increase be more than proportional. We can formally state the
following result.

Proposition S.2 If Zsd (g) satisfies Case C1, then sales per export product asd (φ) strictly in-
crease at the discrete points φ = φ∗sd , φ∗,2   ∗,3
                                          sd , φsd ,. . . .

Proof. Compared to AGM, Zsd (g) is defined in more general terms, but it enters the relevant
relationships in the same way as in AGM before. Case C1 therefore also suffices in the nested-
utility model, and the proposition holds (see the Appendix in AGM for details of the proof for
non-nested utility).

S1.1.2   Within-firm sales distribution
We revisit optimal sales per product and their relationship to exporter scope and the product’s
rank in a firm’s sales distribution. The relationship lends itself to estimation in micro data. Using
the productivity thresholds for firm entry (S.4) and product entry (S.6) in optimal sales (S.2) and




                                                    S.5
simplifying yields
                                                                !σ−1
                                                          φ
(S.8)psdg (φ)xsdg (φ) = σ Zsd (Gsd )H(Gsd )ε−σ                         h(g)−(ε−1)
                                                         φ∗,G
                                                          sd
                                                                                           !σ−1
                                        fsd (Gsd )H(Gsd )ε−1                         φ
                      = σ                                                                         h(g)−(ε−1) .
                                                                                    φ∗,G
                                                                           σ−1
                            1 − [1 −   h(Gsd )−(ε−1) /H(Gsd )−(ε−1) ] ε−1            sd


Note that H(G)ε−σ strictly falls in G if ε > σ. Under Case C1, the term Zsd (Gsd )H(Gsd )ε−σ
must strictly increase in G, however, because individual product sales strictly drop as the product
index g increases and h(g)−(ε−1) falls. So, if Zsd (Gsd )H(Gsd )ε−σ did not strictly increase in G,
average product sales would not strictly increase, contrary to Proposition S.2.
    Compared to AGM, the relationship (S.8) is not log-linear if ε 6= σ and requires a non-linear
estimator, similar to the general case in continuous product space (Arkolakis and Muendler
2011). One possibility is a Simulated Method of Moments estimator, extending the one in
AGM.

S1.2    Aggregation
To derive clear predictions for equilibrium we specify a Pareto distribution of firm productivity
following Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004) and Chaney (2008). A firm’s productivity φ is
drawn from a Pareto distribution with a source-country dependent location parameter bs and a
shape parameter θ over the support [bs , +∞) for all destinations s. The cumulative distribution
function of φ is Pr = 1 − (bs )θ /φθ and the probability density function is θ(bs )θ /φθ+1 , where
more advanced countries are thought to have a higher location parameter bs . Therefore the
measure of firms selling to country d, that is the measure of firms with productivity above the
threshold φ∗sd , is

                                                         bθs
(S.9)                                    Msd = Js               .
                                                     (φ∗sd )θ

    As a result, the probability density function of the conditional productivity distribution for
entrants is given by

                                          θ(φ∗sd )θ /φθ+1 if φ ≥ φ∗sd
                                       
(S.10)                      µsd (φ) =
                                                  0       otherwise.

We define the resulting Pareto shape parameter of the total sales distribution as θ̃ ≡ θ/(σ−1).
    With these distributional assumptions we can compute a number of aggregate statistics from
the model. We denote aggregate bilateral sales of firms from s to country d as Tsd . The corre-
sponding average sales are defined as T̄sd , so that Tsd = Msd T̄sd and
                                         Z
(S.11)                            T̄sd ≡       tsd (φ) µsd (φ) dφ.
                                            φ∗sd




                                                   S.6
Similarly, we define average local entry costs as
                                      Z
                               F̄sd ≡     Fsd (Gsd (φ)) µsd (φ) dφ.
                                                   φ∗sd


  To compute T̄sd , we impose two additional assumptions mirroring Assumptions 2 and 3 in
AGM.
Assumption S.2 Parameters are such that θ > σ−1 .
Assumption S.3 Parameters are such that the mean market-access cost
                                   ∞
                                   X                                         θ̃
                                         fsd (G)1−θ̃ H (G)1−σ − H (G − 1)1−σ
                                                    
                        F̃sd ≡
                                   G=1

is strictly positive and finite.
Then we can make the following statement.
Proposition S.3 Suppose Assumptions S.1, S.2 and S.3 hold. Then average sales T̄sd per firm
are a constant multiple of average local entry costs F̄sd

                                                     θ̃σ
                                        T̄sd =            F̄sd = fsd (1)θ̃ F̃sd .
                                                   θ̃ − 1
Proof. See Appendix S-C to this Online Supplement.
   As a result, bilateral expenditure trade shares can be expressed as

                            Msd T̄sd      Js (bs )θ (ws τsd )−θ fsd (1)−θ̃ F̄sd
(S.12)               λsd = P            =P                                         ,
                             k Mkd T̄kd
                                                     θ         −θ f (1)−θ̃ F̄
                                           k Jk (bk ) (wk τkd )     kd          kd


an expression that depends on the values of ε and σ only insofar as these parameters affect F̄sd
through H(G).
    We can also compute mean exporter scope at a destination:
                          Z
                 Ḡsd =        Gsd (φ)µsd (φ)dφ
                                 φ∗sd
                                                   φ∗,2                     φ∗,3
                                              "Z                        Z                              #
                                                    sd                       sd
                                        θ
                         = (φ∗sd ) θ                      φ−θ−1 dφ +               2φ−θ−1 dφ + . . .
                                                 φ∗sd                      φ∗,2
                                                                            sd
                                        −θ                               −θ            −θ
                                 φ∗,2
                                  sd           − (φ∗sd )−θ         φ∗,3
                                                                    sd          − φ∗,2
                                                                                   sd
                         =                                   +                                 + ... .
                                         (φ∗sd )−θ                         (φ∗sd )−θ

Completing the integration, rearranging terms and using equation (S.6), we obtain
                                                               ∞
                                                               X
(S.13)                                      Ḡsd = fsd (1)θ̃         Zsd (g)−θ̃ .
                                                               g=1



                                                             S.7
   For the average number of products to be well defined and finite we require one more as-
sumption:

Assumption S.4 Parameters are such that ∞             −θ̃
                                         P
                                           g=1 Zsd (g)    is strictly positive and finite.

   In Appendix S-C to this Online Supplement we show that the firms’ fixed cost expense is
a constant share of their total sales (where we denote means using a bar), as summarized in
Proposition S.3:
                                           F̄sd   θ̃ − 1
                                                =        .
                                           T̄sd     θ̃σ
We derive aggregate welfare in Appendix S-D to this Online Supplement and demonstrate in
Appendix S-E to this Supplement that wage income and profit income can be expressed as a
constant share of total output ys per capita:

                                  πs = ηys ,   ws = (1 − η) ys ,

where η ≡ 1/(θ̃σ). Since aggregates of the model do not depend on ε, the equilibrium definition
is the same as in AGM.

S1.3    Summary
We have characterized an extension of the AGM model, in which the elasticity of substitution
between a firm’s individual products does not equal the elasticity of substitution across prod-
uct lines of different firms. The extended model retains the main qualitative implications of
the baseline AGM model, in which the two elasticities are the same. Future work using the
structure of the generalized model to obtain estimates of the two elasticities may lead to a better
understanding of the substitution effects within and across firms.


S2     Combination of Market Access and Market Penetration
       Cost Definitions
We turn to a generalization of AGM to nest both market-access costs (as in AGM) and market
penetration costs (as in Costas Arkolakis 2010) as special cases.

S2.1    Restatement of AGM market-access costs
We retain from AGM the specification that a firm draws not only a productivity parameter φ but
also a destination specific market-access cost shock cd with well defined moments (and possibly
a non-unitary mean). Suppose any two firms from source country s happen to draw identical
productivity φ and happen to draw an identical market-access cost parameter cd ∈ (0, ∞); those
two firms face an identical optimization problem in every destination d at the time of their
product access decision. The pair of shocks (φ, cd ) therefore completely characterizes a firm’s
market access decision.



                                               S.8
    To accommodate market penetration costs as in Arkolakis (2010), we extend the market-
access cost definition (from AGM) and postulate that a firm’s incremental market-access cost
also depends on its optimal choice of market penetration: a firm from country s decides the frac-
tion nsd of the Ld consumers who the firms wants to reach with its product composite (product
line or mix) shipped to destination d. Consistent with the treatment of a firm in Arkolakis (2010)
as the seller of a single product line (brand), we adopt the convention that a firm picks a common
penetration rate for all its g = 1, . . . , Gsd products shipped to a destination (nsdg = nsd for all
g).48
    As in AGM, a firm (φ, cd ) faces a product-destination specific incremental market-access
cost cd f¯sd (g; nsd ), where cd ∈ (0, ∞) is a stochastic firm-specific market-access cost shock. A
firm that adopts an exporter scope of Gsd at destination d therefore incurs a total market-access
cost of
                                                       P sd ¯
(S.14)                          Fsd (Gsd , cd ; nsd ) = G
                                                        g=1 cd fsd (g; nsd ).

For any positive market penetration choice nsd > 0, the firm’s market-access cost is zero at zero
scope and strictly positive otherwise:

                  f¯sd (0; nsd ) = 0 and f¯sd (g; nsd ) > 0 for all g = 1, 2, . . . , Gsd ,

where f¯sd (g; nsd ) is a continuous function in [1, +∞) × [0, +∞).
   Arkolakis (2010) uses specific functional forms for market penetration costs, derived from
primitives on consumer demand and product marketing. We discuss the generalized market
access and market penetration cost definition also in terms of those specific functional forms.
Extending (6) in AGM, we specify

                     f¯sd (g; nsd ) = fsd (nsd ) · g δsd for δsd ∈ (−∞, +∞)                and
(S.15)
                             h(g) = g α                  for ρ ∈ [0, +∞).

The market-access cost parameter fsd (nsd ) is zero at zero penetration and strictly positive oth-
erwise:
                     fsd (0) = 0 and fsd (nsd ) > 0 for all nsd > 0
where fsd (nsd ) is a continuous function in [0, +∞).
    Recall from AGM that a firm also faces a multiplicative i.i.d. shock ξsdg to its g-th product’s
appeal at a destination d (with mean E [ξsdg (ω)] = 1, positive support and known realization at
the time of consumer choice). Under CES consumer demand, it is irrelevant whether the firm
sets optimal price before or after the firm observes the product’s appeal realization (see foot-
note 14 in AGM); price is a proportional markup over the firm-product’s marginal production
cost irrespective of the size of demand.
    However, consistent with AGM and the deterministic setup of Arkolakis (2010), the firm has
  48
    A further generalization that allows for firm-product specific optimal choices of nsdg would result in interesting
novel relations between core competency in production and market penetration choices: a firm’s efficiency schedule
φg ≡ φ/h(g) would interact with product-specific market penetration costs in the product adoption decisions. We
leave this generalization for future work.




                                                        S.9
to take both the product entry (exporter scope Gsd ) and the market penetration decision (con-
sumer fraction nsd ) prior to observing any product appeal shock. It follows that, for a firm with
an optimal and strictly positive market penetration at a destination d (nsd > 0), the first-order
conditions for a firm (φ, cd ) and therefore its optimal exporter scope Gsd and individual product
sales are identical to those presented in AGM—with only two differences in interpretation:49 we
replace the product-invariant part of incremental market-access costs with fsd ≡ fsd (nsd ) and
we replace the revenue shifter (equation (7) in AGM) with Dsd = Dsd (nsd ) using
                                                                                               σ−1
                                                                                        Pd             Td
(S.16)                   Dsd (nsd ) ≡ nsd · D̄sd            for D̄sd ≡
                                                                                     σ̃τsd ws          σ

under a given (optimal) market penetration rate nsd ∈ (0, 1]. Our original AGM model is the
special case with nsd = 1.

S2.2      Generalization of market penetration costs from Arkolakis (2010)
We now show that a specific functional form for fsd (nsd ) accommodates Arkolakis (2010) mar-
ket penetration costs as a special case and preserves a firm’s relevant optimality conditions from
Arkolakis (2010). The wage bill required to reach nsd consumers in a market of size Ld is
Fsd (·, ·; nsd ), where Ld is a parameter for the firm and nsd is a decision variable.50 For a firm
with given optimal exporter scope Gsd and market-access cost draw cd , define the firm’s market
penetration cost function Fsd (·, ·; nsd ) to be equal to its total market-access cost from (S.14)
with
(S.17)
                      Gsd
                      X                        (Ld )ρ 1 − (1 − nsd )1−β
   Fsd (·, ·; nsd ) ≡     cd f¯sd (g; nsd ) =                           for β ∈ (0, 1) ∪ (1, +∞),
                      g=1
                                              ψ sd (·, ·)  1 − β

where
                                                             ψ̄                       1
                                ψsd (Gsd , cd ) ≡                                    PGsd
                                                     (ws   )γ (w   d   )1−γ   cd ·      g=1   g δsd
and ψ̄ is a positive scalar (similar to the original ψ from Costas Arkolakis 2010). Importantly,
the generalization of the market penetration cost from Arkolakis (2010) to Fsd (·, ·; nsd ) in equa-
tion (S.17) preserves the four relevant properties of the market penetration cost function: (i) the
market penetration cost vanishes at zero penetration since Fsd (·, ·; 0) = 0, (ii) it strictly increases
in n since ∂Fsd (·, ·; n)/∂n > 0 for n ∈ [0, 1], (iii) it is convex in n since ∂ 2 Fsd (·, ·; n)/(∂n)2 > 0
for n ∈ [0, 1], and (iv) it is unbounded since limn→∞ Fsd (·, ·; n) = +∞.
    Equivalently, for consistency with AGM and cd f¯sd (g; nsd ) = cd fsd (nsd ) · g δsd by equa-
  49
     In AGM, fsd is sometimes also stated as fsd (1) for the first product.
  50
     Arkolakis (2010) includes market size Ld as an argument in the market penetration cost function and formally
states a functional form for Fsd (·, ·; nsd ) ≡ f (nsd ; Ld ) in equation (2). Arkolakis (2010) treats f (nsd ; Ld ) as the
labor requirement needed to reach nsd Ld consumers and uses a factor of proportionality ψ to standardize the re-
quirement given the composite wage payment (ws )γ (wd )1−γ . For comparability to AGM, we think of Fsd (·, ·; nsd )
in wage bill equivalents and standardize with an accordingly scaled factor of proportionality ψsd .




                                                           S.10
tion (S.15), we define

                               (ws )γ (wd )1−γ (Ld )ρ 1 − (1 − nsd )1−β
(S.18)          fsd (nsd ) ≡                                                     for β ∈ (0, 1) ∪ (1, +∞).
                                        ψ̄                 1−β
     These mutually consistent but alternative fixed cost definitions allow us to now switch per-
spective between a firm’s optimality conditions for the market penetration rate nsd (given the
optimal exporter scope Gsd and the market-access cost draw cd ) on the one hand side, and a
firm’s optimality conditions for exporter scope Gsd (given the optimal market penetration rate
nsd and the market-access cost draw cd ) on the other hand side. Both the optimal exporter
scope Gsd and the market penetration rate nsd decisions need to be made prior to observing the
products’ appeal shocks (ξsdg ), so a firm takes the two decisions simultaneously.
     We already pointed out above that the optimality conditions on exporter scope Gsd are the
same as those in AGM, merely replacing fsd ≡ fsd (nsd ) and Dsd ≡ Dsd (nsd ) for given optimal
nsd . We now turn to showing that the new optimality conditions for the market penetration rate
nsd , given optimal exporter scope Gsd and the market-access cost draw cd , are a straightforward
restatement of the related optimality conditions from Arkolakis (2010), simply generalizing
the cost scalar to ψsd (Gsd , cd ). The original Arkolakis (2010) model is the special case with
Gsd = cd = 1. The original Melitz (2003) model is a special case with both Gsd = cd = 1 and
β = 0.

S2.3        Optimal market penetration costs given optimal exporter scope
Given the simultaneous choice of exporter scope and the market penetration rate, we can solve
without loss of generality for the market penetration rate nsd presuming that exporter scope
Gsd is optimal. Suppose, conditional on destination market access, a type (φ, cd ) firm is setting
optimal individual product prices (facing a fraction nsd of consumer demand under monopolistic
competition) and optimal exporter scope (given market penetration nsd ). The resulting first-
order conditions from the profit maximizing equation imply identical markups over marginal
cost σ̃ ≡ σ/(σ − 1) > 1 for each firm-product under σ > 1.51 Given optimal exporter scope
Gsd (φ, cd ), and using the optimal pricing decision in the firm’s profit function, we obtain the
firm’s expected profits (prior to product appeal shock realizations) at destination d:
                                                                   −(σ−1)
                   πsd (φ, cd ) = max Dsd (nsd ) φσ−1 H̄ Gsd                 − Fsd (Gsd , cd ; nsd ) ,
                                    nsd

  51
       A firm selling an optimal number of products Gsd to destination market d has an expected profit of
                            Gsd
                                  "                                    −σ         #
                            X                                ws      psdg          Td
        πsd (φ, cd ) = max      E    max        psdg − τsd                    ξsdg      − Fsd (Gsd , cd ; nsd ) .
                       Gsd
                            g=1
                                          Gsd
                                   {psdg }g=1              φ/h(g)     Pd           Pd

The firm’s first-order conditions with respect to every individual price psdg imply an optimal product price

                                              psdg (φ) = σ̃ τsd ws h(g)/φ

with an identical markup over marginal cost σ̃ ≡ σ/(σ −1) > 1 for σ > 1. Product price does not depend on the
appeal shock realization because the shock enters profits multiplicatively, so it is irrelevant whether a firm is setting
price before or after the appeal shock is observed.



                                                         S.11
with Fsd (Gsd , cd ; nsd ) given by (S.17), the penetration dependent revenue shifter given by
                                                                                   σ−1
                                                                            Pd             Td
                     Dsd (nsd ) ≡ nsd · D̄sd            for D̄sd ≡                            ,
                                                                         σ̃τsd ws          σ

and the average product efficiency index in destination d for a firm with exporter scope Gsd
                  −(σ−1) PGsd
given by H̄ Gsd           ≡ g=1 h(g)−(σ−1) .
    The first-order condition for maximizing profit πsd (φ, cd ) with respect to the market pene-
tration rate nsd is equivalent to

                  D̄sd σ−1                             1                 1
(S.19)                φ    H̄(Gsd )−(σ−1) =                      1−ρ
                                                                                 ,
                   Ld                       ψsd (Gsd , cd ) (Ld )    (1 − nsd )β

given β ∈ (0, 1) ∪ (1, +∞) for a type (φ, cd ) firm with optimal exporter scope Gsd (φ, cd ).
Similar to the first-order condition in Arkolakis (2010, equation (8)), the left-hand side of the
condition shows the marginal revenue of a firm’s product line (net of labor production cost) per
consumer and the right-hand side the marginal cost per consumer of bringing the product line to
destination d.
    The zero-consumer threshold of minimal productivity for a firm to start penetrating a market
can be found by setting nsd = 0 in (S.19) and solving out for productivity. The zero-consumer
threshold for productivity is

                                                       (Ld )ρ−1 H̄(Gsd )σ−1
(S.20)                      φ∗,n=0
                             sd      (cd )   σ−1
                                                   ≡                          .
                                                     ψsd (Gsd , cd ) D̄sd /Ld

A firm compares the marginal per-consumer revenue from reaching an infinitesimally small
mass of consumers (the left-hand side of (S.19)) to the marginal per-consumer cost of reaching
that infinitesimally small mass (the right-hand side of (S.19)). Given elastic CES demand, more
productive firms extract higher marginal per-consumer revenue, so they choose higher rates of
market penetration. Similar to Arkolakis (2010, Proposition 1), for β > 0, a type (φ, cd ) firm
will choose to stay out of destination d and set nsd (φ, cd ) = 0 if φ < φ∗,n=0sd    (cd ). Conversely,
two firms of types (φ1 , cd ) and (φ2 , cd ) will enter and set nsd (φ2 , cd ) > nsd (φ1 , cd ) ≥ 0 if
φ2 > φ1 ≥ φ∗,n=0
               sd   (cd ).
    Inverting the first-order condition (S.19) to solve for the optimal nsd (φ, cd ), and using (S.20),
yields the optimal market penetration rate for a firm’s product line
                                                         (σ−1)/β
                                          φ∗,n=0
                                      
                                                 (cd )
(S.21)           nsd (φ, cd ) = 1 −        sd
                                                                           if φ ≥ φ∗,n=0
                                                                                   sd    (cd ).
                                               φ

S2.4     Equilibrium properties
In the combined model with both AGM market-access costs and Arkolakis (2010) market pene-
tration costs, the optimal exporter scope choice implies that the productivity threshold φ∗,1sd (cd )
for exporting at all from s to d is φ∗,1
                                     sd  (cd ), while the zero-consumer threshold is φ ∗,n=0
                                                                                       sd    . Both




                                                       S.12
need to be satisfied, so the effective entry threshold is φ∗sd (cd ) = max[φ∗,1           ∗,n=0 52
                                                                             sd (cd ) , φsd    ].
    Note that ψsd (Gsd , cd ) strictly monotonically decreases in cd by (S.17), so the zero-consumer
threshold φ∗,n=0
              sd    (cd ) strictly monotonically increases in cd by (S.20).53 Similarly, by AGM’s
equation (10) the productivity threshold for exporting at all (Gsd ≥ 1) strictly increases in cd . We
conclude that, also in the combined model with both AGM market-access costs and Arkolakis
(2010) market penetration costs, a higher market-access cost draw cd strictly raises the effective
entry threshold φ∗sd (cd ).
    However, the effect of a higher market-access cost draw cd on realized total market-access
cost Fsd (Gsd , cd ; nsd ) is ambiguous by (S.17). The reason is that ψsd (Gsd , cd ) strictly monoton-
ically decreases in cd with a unitary elasticity, thus raising Fsd with a unitary elasticity, while
nsd (φ, cd ) strictly decreases in cd with a non-unitary elasticity by (S.21), thus lowering Fsd with
a non-unitary elasticity. The net effect of a cd shock on a firm’s realized Fsd (Gsd , cd ; nsd ) is
therefore ambiguous.

S2.5      Implications for estimation
A firm’s optimal market penetration rate nsd (φ, cd ) for its product line shifts the product-invariant
part of incremental market-access costs cd fsd (nsd ). Our estimator flexibly allows for a firm-
destination specific market-access cost shock cd , which also shifts the product-invariant part
of incremental market-access costs cd fsd (nsd ). Our estimator therefore subsumes within the
stochastic market-access cost parameter cd any firm-destination specific variation in the mar-
ket penetration rate, and fully accounts for the possibility that firms optimally set their market
penetration rate nsd .
    Similarly, our estimator flexibly
                                PGsd allows for a non-unitary firm-destination specific average
                         ¯
product appeal shock ξsd· = g=1 ξsdg /Gsd . Our estimator therefore subsumes within the av-
erage product appeal shock ξ¯sd· any firm-destination specific variation in the revenue shifter
Dsd (nsd ) = nsd D̄sd , and fully accounts for the possibility that firms optimally set their market
  52
    By AGM’s equation (10), the productivity threshold for exporting at all (Gsd = 1) is implicitly given by

                           cd fsd nsd (φ∗,1
                                                     
          ∗,1     σ−1                      sd , cd )
(S.22)   φsd (cd )    ≡
                            Dsd nsd (φ∗,1
                                                   
                                          sd , cd )
                                                     ∗,n=0        (σ−1)(1−β)/β
                                                       φsd   (cd )
                                (Ld ) ρ       1  −       ∗,1
                                                        φsd (cd )                            1
                      =                                                                           (σ−1)/β ,
                           ψsd (1, cd ) D̄sd                  1−β                    ∗,n=0
                                                                                     φ       (c )
                                                                                 1 − φsd∗,1 (c )d
                                                                                          sd   d



where the latter equality follows from (S.17), (S.18) and (S.21) under the condition that φ∗,1         ∗,n=0
                                                                                           sd (cd ) ≥ φsd    (cd ).
Restating (S.20), the zero-consumer threshold for productivity is

                                                                (Ld )ρ
                                     φ∗,n=0
                                                 σ−1
                                      sd    (cd )      ≡                     H̄(1)σ−1
                                                           ψsd (1, cd ) D̄sd

for a firm’s first product (Gsd = 1), where H̄(1) = 1. Using the latter condition in (S.22), it follows that φ∗,1
                                                                                                              sd (cd ) ≥
φ∗,n=0
  sd     (cd ) need  not hold for β < 1 or β > 1.
   53
      The optimal market penetration rate nsd (φ, cd ) therefore strictly decreases in cd by (S.21) for σ > 1 and
β > 0.



                                                           S.13
penetration rate nsd .
   In summary, our existing estimation framework in AGM flexibly allows for the consequences
of market penetration costs as in Arkolakis (2010).


S3     Reduced Form Evidence on Non-Tariff Measures
In this section we provide additional evidence on the relationship between exporter behavior
and the NTM proxies from UNCTAD’s TRAINS data and their extension by Kee, Nicita and
Olarreaga (2009). In Section II.A we constructed a single indicator variable for the presence
of at least one core non-tariff barrier and used it throughout the main text (the variable NTM jd
which takes the value 1 if country d imposes at least one core NTMs in an HS 6-digit product,
and zero otherwise). For additional evidence in this supplement, we also explore four separate
indicator variables for the presence of each of the four core non-tariff barriers considered in Kee,
Nicita and Olarreaga (2009) and Niu et al. (2018).
    We specify regressions that reflect Facts
                                          P 1-3 from Section II.B. As NTM proxies we reuse the
firm-destination aggregate NTM ωd ≡ j∈Jωd ={j:yωdj >0} NTM jd /|Jωd | and the individual NTM
proxies for each of the four core non-tariff barriers. To control for tariffs, we use the mean of
the log of one plus the HS 6-digit tariff rate ln(1 + τωd ) for an exporter as in Section II.B.
    Table S.1 reports results from regressing the logarithm of the revenues of the best selling
product for a firm to a destination on the log exporter scope, discerning separate effects for LAC
destinations and the prevalence of NTMs at a destination, while conditioning on tariff rates.
Specification (1) controls for firm fixed effects, specification (2) controls for industry-destination
fixed effects, specification (3) controls for both types of fixed effects, and specification (4) parses
out separate effects for different categories of NTMs. In general, more prevalent NTMs at a des-
tination act on exporter scope in a similar way as does the remoteness of non-LAC destinations.
A comparison of the specification in column (4), which breaks down the non-tariff measure into
individual NTM categories, to preceding specifications in columns (1) through (3) suggests that
the main NTM types behind the NTM effect of wide-scope exporters in log sales are price based
non-tariff barriers. Wide-scope exporters exhibit higher total export sales in destinations with
restrictive price based NTMs.
    Table S.2 revisits Fact 2 with regressions of log exporter scope on indicators for LAC as
well as the NTMs that a firm faces, conditional on average tariff rates. Specification (1) controls
for firm fixed effects, specification (2) for industry-destination fixed effects, specification (3)
for both types of fixed effects, and specification (4) parses out separate effects for different
categories of NTMs. Exporter scope is lower for exporters to non-LAC destinations and for
exporters to destinations with many NTMs. Quantity based and technical non-tariff measures are
the most relevant for a firm’s exporter scope, resulting in narrower product scope for exporters
to destinations that are subject to more restrictive quantity based and technical NTMs.
    Table S.3 turns to Fact 3 and regresses average exporter scale on exporter scope and in-
teractions with both LAC destinations and NTMs proxies. Specification (1) controls for firm
fixed effects, specification (2) for industry-destination fixed effects, specification (3) for both
types of fixed effects, and specification (4) parses out separate effects for different categories
of NTMs. In general, the scope-scale association is weakly positive and increases for exports



                                                 S.14
                Table S.1: Fact 1.1. Firm-product Sales Distributions by Exporter Scope
                                                 (1)               (2)             (3)                    (4)
                                              log yωd1          log yωd1        log yωd1               log yωd1

log Gωd                                      1.272∗∗∗           .986∗∗∗         1.160∗∗∗              1.158∗∗∗
                                              (.0397)           (.0397)          (.0385)               (.0382)

LAC                                           -.105∗∗
                                              (.0406)

log Gωd × LAC                                 -.230∗∗∗          -.217∗∗∗        -.277∗∗∗               -.269∗∗∗
                                               (.0413)           (.0395)         (.0373)                (.0389)

NTMωd                                          .0464             .00760           .0704
                                              (.0367)            (.0462)         (.0502)

log Gωd × NTMωd                               .125∗∗             .124∗∗          .121∗∗
                                              (.0418)            (.0460)         (.0423)

Mean Ln Tariff                                -.163∗∗∗           -.108∗∗        -.166∗∗∗               -.166∗∗∗
                                              (.00950)           (.0345)         (.0354)                (.0354)

NTM - Price Based                                                                                      -.0336
                                                                                                       (.0629)

NTM - Quantity Based                                                                                    -.371
                                                                                                        (.219)

NTM - Competition Based                                                                                 .0353
                                                                                                        (.381)

NTM - Technical Measures                                                                                .138∗
                                                                                                       (.0588)

log Gωd × NTM - Price Based                                                                            .157∗∗
                                                                                                       (.0479)

log Gωd × NTM - Quantity Based                                                                           .134
                                                                                                        (.172)

log Gωd × NTM - Competition Based                                                                        -.514
                                                                                                        (.456)

log Gωd × NTM - Technical Measures                                                                      .0270
                                                                                                       (.0507)

Fixed Effects                                  Firm             Ind.-dest.   Ind.-dest., Firm      Ind.-dest., Firm
Observations                                  32,486             34,450          30,167                30,167
R2                                             .539               .416             .685                  .685


Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products, UNCTAD TRAINS database, WTO
WITS tariff database.
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level (: p < .05, : p < .01, : p < .001). The dependent variable is the
log sales of a firm’s bestselling product to a given destination. Sample sizes change across specifications since
singleton observations are dropped from regressions with multiple fixed effects.



                                                         S.15
                             Table S.2: Fact 2. Exporter Scope Distribution
                                          (1)                 (2)                    (3)                     (4)
                                       log Gωd             log Gωd                log Gωd                 log Gωd

LAC                                    .450∗∗∗                                                            .459∗∗∗
                                       (.0198)                                                            (.0202)

NTMωd                                 -.0495∗∗∗            -.0626∗∗                -.0329
                                        (.0124)             (.0192)                (.0191)

Mean Ln Tariff                        -.0943∗∗∗            .0548∗∗∗                 .0122                -.0925∗∗∗
                                       (.00453)             (.0123)                (.0131)                (.00460)

NTM - Price Based                                                                                         -.00417
                                                                                                          (.0148)

NTM - Quantity Based                                                                                      -.177∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (.0452)

NTM - Competition Based                                                                                   -.0998
                                                                                                          (.0632)

NTM - Technical Measures                                                                                 -.0571∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (.0150)

Fixed Effects                           Firm              Ind.-dest.           Ind.-dest., Firm            Firm
Observations                           36,647              34,450                  30,167                 36,647
R2                                      .596                .296                     .700                  .597


Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products, UNCTAD TRAINS database, WTO
WITS tariff database.
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level (: p < .05, : p < .01, : p < .001). The dependent variable is the
log exporter scope (the log of the number of products sold by a firm to a given destination). Sample sizes change
across specifications since singleton observations are dropped from regressions with multiple fixed effects.




                                                       S.16
                         Table S.3: Fact 3. Exporter Scope and Exporter Scale
                                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)                  (4)
                                            ln tωd /Gωd         ln tωd /Gωd     ln tωd /Gωd          ln tωd /Gωd

log Gωd                                       .505∗∗∗            .231∗∗∗          .397∗∗∗              .399∗∗∗
                                              (.0383)            (.0384)          (.0378)              (.0375)

LAC                                           -.0874∗
                                              (.0396)

log Gωd × LAC                                 -.226∗∗∗           -.208∗∗∗         -.261∗∗∗             -.254∗∗∗
                                               (.0379)            (.0375)          (.0358)              (.0373)

NTMωd                                          .0334             -.00657           .0640
                                              (.0364)            (.0456)          (.0495)

log Gωd × NTMωd                               .160∗∗∗            .188∗∗∗          .162∗∗∗
                                              (.0389)            (.0439)          (.0405)

Mean Ln Tariff                                -.163∗∗∗            -.107∗∗         -.159∗∗∗             -.159∗∗∗
                                              (.00927)            (.0341)          (.0347)              (.0347)

NTM - Price Based                                                                                       -.0415
                                                                                                       (.0620)

NTM - Quantity Based                                                                                    -.419
                                                                                                        (.220)

NTM - Competition Based                                                                                 -.0171
                                                                                                        (.380)

NTM - Technical Measures                                                                                .143∗
                                                                                                       (.0581)

log Gωd × NTM - Price Based                                                                            .187∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (.0458)

log Gωd × NTM - Quantity Based                                                                           .281
                                                                                                        (.171)

log Gωd × NTM - Competition Based                                                                        -.462
                                                                                                        (.450)

log Gωd × NTM - Technical Measures                                                                      .0419
                                                                                                       (.0484)

Fixed Effects                                   Firm             Ind.-dest.   Ind.-dest., Firm     Ind.-dest., Firm
Observations                                   32,488             34,452          30,169               30,169
R2                                              .512               .378             .666                 .667


Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products, UNCTAD TRAINS database, WTO
WITS tariff database.
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the firm level (: p < .05, : p < .01, : p < .001). The dependent variable is the
log exporter scale (the log of the average sales of a firm’s products to a given destination). Sample sizes change
across specifications since singleton observations are dropped from regressions with multiple fixed effects.



                                                         S.17
to non-LAC destinations and destinations with more NTMs. Price based non-tariff measures,
when interacted with exporter scope, are the only relevant category of non-tariff measures for
a firm’s average export sales. Wide-scope exporters exhibit higher average sales in destinations
with restrictive price based NTMs.
     When it comes to the breakdown of non-tariff measures by type, a comparison between Ta-
bles S.1 through S.3 suggests that quantity based and technical non-tariff barriers are associated
with a narrower exporter scope at the destinations that are subject to more such NTM restric-
tions. However, it is the price based non-tariff barriers that are associated with higher total sales
and higher average export sales per product at relatively wide-scope exporters, suggesting that
the exporters that enter a destination with wide exporter scope do so with higher sales to cover
the price based non-tariff measures.


S4      Export Products and Export Destinations
Tables S.1 and S.2 show Brazil’s top ten export destinations by number of exporters and the top
ten exported HS 6-digit product codes by total value in 2000. In Table S.1, Argentina is the most
common export destination and the United States receives most Brazilian exports in value. In
Table S.2, medium-sized aircraft is the leading export product in value, followed by wood pulp
and soybean material for fodders.

                          Table S.1: Top Brazilian Export Destinations
Destination                              # Exporters                          Export Value (USD)

Argentina                                      4,590                                5,472,333,618
Uruguay                                        3,251                                  504,642,201
USA                                            3,083                                9,772,577,557
Chile                                          2,342                                1,145,161,210
Paraguay                                       2,319                                  561,065,104
Bolivia                                        1,799                                  282,543,791
Mexico                                         1,336                                1,554,452,204
Venezuela                                      1,333                                  658,281,591
Germany                                        1,217                                1,364,610,059
Peru                                           1,191                                  329,896,577
Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.




S5      Monte Carlo Simulations
To document identification under our simulated method of moments estimator, we run Monte
Carlo tests with generated data. We create 333,000 Brazilian firms under the initial parameters
Θ, where            n                         o
               Θ = δ1 , δ2 , , α̃, θ̃, σξ , σc = {−1.20, −.90, 1.73, 1.84, 1.89, .53}


                                                  S.18
                             Table S.2: Top Brazilian Exported Items
HS Code          Description                                                                  Value (USD)

880230           Airplanes between 2 and 15 tons                                             2,618,856,983
470329           Bleached non-coniferous chemical wood pulp                                  1,523,403,942
230400           Soybean oil-cake and other solid residues                                   1,245,752,048
870323           Passenger vehicles between 1,500 and 3,000 cc                               1,197,222,859
852520           Transmission apparatus incorporating reception apparatus                      926,618,451
640399           Footwear, with outer soles                                                    854,950,667
720712           Semifinished products of iron or nonalloy steel                               802,801,270
760110           Unwrought aluminum, not alloyed                                               765,195,563
200911           Orange juice, frozen                                                          561,103,666
170111           Raw solid cane sugar                                                          520,544,094
Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.


reflects the baseline estimates from Table 3 in the main text. The generated data have approxi-
mately 10,000 exporters. We then apply our simulated method of moments routine to the gener-
ated data and find the optimum, recovering an estimate of the parameter vector Θ̂. We repeat the
data generation and estimation procedure 30 times and report in Table S.1 the mean and standard
deviation of the elements of Θ̂.
    The Monte Carlo results in Table S.1 document that our procedure accurately pinpoints all
parameters of interest. In particular, the parameters (α̃,  ˆ σ̂ξ , σ̂c ) are precisely estimated, with
point estimates close to the initial parameters behind the generated data and with standard errors
less than 2 percent of the true value. Similarly, δ̂ and θ̃ˆ are estimated close to their true values,
their standard errors are under 4 percent of their true values. The proximity of our parameter
estimates to the initial parameters underlying the data generation, and their precision, substanti-
ate the hypothesis that our simulated method of moments estimator identifies the AGM model’s
parameters of interest.

                                  Table S.1: Monte Carlo Results

Θ                                    δ1        δ2           α̃     θ̃       σξ       σc            δ1 − δ2

Parameter of generated data        -1.17      -.90      1.73     1.84      1.89     .53             -.27

Estimate (mean)                    -1.20      -.92      1.71     1.90      1.88     .51             -.28
(s.e.)                              ( .03)   ( .03)     ( .03)   ( .05)    ( .02)   ( .01)          ( .01)




                                                     S.19
                                      Table S.1: Estimation Results
                                  δLAC      δROW          α̃         θ̃       σξ        σc         δLAC −δROW

Baseline                         -1.17       -.87     1.77        1.73     1.82        .58              -.30
                                   (.05)     (.07)     (.05)      (.09)     (.04)     (.02)             (.06)
No product appeal                -1.41      -1.18     2.42        1.00                 .99              -.23
  shocks (σξ = 0)                  (.03)     (.05)     (.03)     (.001)               (.01)             (.04)
No market access                 -1.20       -.91     1.78        1.77     2.00                         -.28
  cost shocks (σc = 0)             (.05)     (.08)     (.03)      (.11)     (.03)                       (.05)
Imposed single products                                           3.82     1.26      0.30
  (δc = α = ∞)                                                   (0.55)     (.03)     (.04)

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. Standard errors from 100 bootstraps in parentheses. Estimates of δLAC
measure the scope elasticity of market-access costs for Brazilian firms shipping to other LAC destinations, δROW
for Brazilian firms shipping to destinations outside LAC. The upper three rows restate Table 3, the final row shows
the limiting case of our model close to the Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011) model with single-product firms.


S6      Limit Cases
In the main text, we deviate from the baseline estimation model in two ways: we remove product
appeal shocks by setting their variance to the limit (σξ = 0), and we remove market access cost
shocks by setting their variance to the limit (σc = 0). In this supplement, we strip the multi-
product nature out of our model entirely by setting the scope elasticity of market access cost δ
and the scope elasticity of marginal cost α both to infinity. The resulting modification needed
for estimation is to exclude moments from the SMM estimator that relate to the multi-product
aspects of the data. We remove these moments to create an approximation of the Eaton, Kortum
and Kramarz (2011) model within our framework. The accordingly reduced model allows us to
identify the parameters θ̃, σξ and σc . We report the findings on the final row of Table S.1. The
upper three rows of Table S.1 repeat for comparison the results from the baseline and the limit
cases (σξ = 0, σc = 0) considered in Table 3 in the text.
    When we force the model to make all firms single-product firms (δc = α = ∞), the estimate
of the Pareto shape parameter θ̃ does not drop to the limit of one, as it did when we removed
product appeal shocks (with σξ = 0) but retained multi-product firms. To the contrary, when we
force firms to be single-product exporters, the Pareto shape parameter increases substantively.
Important implications follow from this result and related findings in the other limits.
    First, the imposed single-product version of our model results in a non-problematic θ̃ es-
timate away from the lower bound of one. Second, taken together with the opposite finding
for multi-product firms in the absence of product appeal shocks, we infer that a determinis-
tic multi-product model makes the SMM estimator strive for possibly much other variation—
raising cross-firm dispersion to its limit at the lower bound of θ̃ = 1 and raising cross-destination
dispersion within firms by pushing σc above the baseline level (of 0.58) and far above the level
in the imposed single-product version (0.30). Third, our θ̃ estimates take plausible values when
compared with the Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011) benchmark: we find that θ̃ is 1.73 in the


                                                      S.20
baseline product-level model, while Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011) obtain θ̃ around 2.46
using French data for single-product firms; we find θ̃ = 3.82 (with a wide standard error of 0.55)
using Brazilian data after forcing the firms in the model to be single-product firms. The esti-
mate of θ̃ = 3.82 in the single-product limit of our model is higher than in EKK but plausible,
especially in light of the fact that the productivity dispersion tends to be wider in low-income
economies than in advanced countries (e.g. Hsieh and Klenow 2009). These insights lend sup-
port to our choices of heterogeneity: product appeal shocks are a crucial source of variation
when turning to firm-product-destination data in estimation.
    There are crucial differences between our model and the Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011)
model. Most importantly, the product appeal shock ξ in our model varies by product within
firm, not just by firm as in Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011). The models also differ in
timing. In our model firms realize the entry cost shock ξ only after entering a market and
after choosing the number of products to export. This is different from the Eaton, Kortum
and Kramarz (2011) setup, where the market access shocks are jointly observed. Moreover,
the Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011) model features two additional parameters that we do
not estimate. One additional parameter regulates the correlation between the shocks, which
we can omit because our model has different timing. The other additional parameter in the
Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011) model is the Arkolakis (2010) market penetration sensitivity
parameter. We discuss in Supplement S2 above how we accommodate market penetration cost
through our stochastic setup rather than through a deterministic functional form.


S7     Sensitivity Analysis
To assess the robustness of our baseline estimates in AGM, we perform a number of modifica-
tions to our main specification. Overall, we find that our baseline results are remarkably robust
to sample restrictions and alternative variable definitions.

S7.1    Adjusted sales
Our baseline estimates imply a large and statistically significant difference between δLAC and
δROW . In a first robustness check, we strive to rule out that this difference could be driven by
different typical sales across sets of products that Brazilian firms ship to LAC and non-LAC
countries. We therefore correct sales and control for the mean sales of product groups at the
HS 2-digit level. Concretely, we take the upward or downward deviation of a firm’s HS 6-digit
                                   p
product sales to a destination ln yωd from the worldwide product-group sales mean of Brazilian
exporters:                        (                                        )
                                              1 X 1 X X
                      ỹωdg = exp ln yωdg −                        ln yωdg .
                                              M ω N d g∈ HS 2

    This adjustment does not reduce the sample size. We report the results in the row 1. Adjusted
sales of Table S.1. The estimates are broadly consistent with the baseline, but the estimated
scope elasticities of market-access costs δ and of product efficiency α̃ are lower in absolute
magnitude, and so is the estimated Pareto shape parameter θ̃. These estimates imply that both



                                              S.21
the within-firm product distribution is more concentrated in the top product and the between-
firm sales distribution has more firms in the upper tail with extremely high sales. An intuitive
explanation is that demeaning sales by the average exporter’s typical sale in a product group ex-
acerbates sales deviations of specific products, thus making distributions appear more extreme.
However, signs of our estimates stay the same and broad magnitudes remain qualitatively similar
to the baseline estimates.

S7.2    Advanced manufacturing
A related robustness concern is that estimation could be driven by different feasible exporter
scopes across product groups that Brazilian firms ship to LAC and non-LAC destination. For
example, more differentiated industries, or more technology driven industries, might allow for
the export of more varieties, or the HS classification system might simply provide more individ-
ual HS 6-digit products within more refined HS 2-digit product groups. In a second robustness
exercise we therefore restrict the sample to firms that are active in relatively advanced manu-
facturing industries. We present results from our definition of advanced manufacturing as three
top-level CNAE sectors “Manufacture of machinery and equipment”, “Manufacture of electrical
and optical equipment” and “Manufacture of transport equipment” (codes DK, DL and DM).
    Under this sectoral restriction, a markedly reduced sample size of only 2,539 Brazilian man-
ufacturing exporters remains. Despite the considerable drop in sample size, however, results in
the row labeled 2. Advanced manufacturing in Table S.1 are broadly consistent with the base-
line. In advanced manufacturing industries, the difference in scope elasticities of market-access
costs δ is slightly larger between LAC and non-LAC countries than it is in the baseline (but
the difference in not statistically significant). Market-access costs in advanced manufacturing
industries drop off similarly fast with scope in LAC and non-LAC countries as in the average
industry. For our counterfactual exercise, the slightly wider difference of market-access cost
elasticities between LAC and non-LAC countries implies somewhat more pronounced benefits
of harmonizing market-access costs across the world. Except for the higher variance of prod-
uct appeal shocks in advanced manufacturing than in the average industry, parameter estimates
are generally similar to the baseline, and specially the scope elasticity of product efficiency α̃
is not statistically significantly different in advanced industries compared to the average indus-
try. Overall, every sign remains the same and estimates that are statistically different from the
baseline remain comparable in their qualitative economic implications.

S7.3    Eight-digit NCM product categories
To make our results closely comparable to evidence from other countries, in our main text we
define a product as a Harmonized System (HS) 6-digit code, which is internationally comparable
by requirement of the World Customs Organization (WCO) across its 200 member countries. To
query the potential sensitivity of our results to a refined product classification, we use the Merco-
sur 8-digit level (Nomenclatura Comum do Mercosul NCM8), which roughly corresponds to the
8-digit HS level by the World Customs Organization. As the row 3. NCM 8-digit manufacturing
in Table S.1 shows, our results are hardly sensitive at all to the change in level of disaggregation.
No single estimate is statistically different from our baseline estimates.


                                                S.22
                            Table S.1: Robustness for Select Subsamples

                                 δLAC     δROW         α̃        θ̃       σξ        σc          δLAC −δROW

Baseline                        -1.16      -.86      1.76      1.72      1.82      .58               -.30
                                 ( .04)    ( .06)    ( .04)    ( .08)    ( .04)    ( .02)            ( .06)
1. Adjusted                     -1.00      -.76      1.60      1.67      1.88      .62               -.24
   sales                         ( .05)    ( .06)    ( .05)    ( .06)    ( .03)    ( .02)            ( .04)
2. Advanced                     -1.14      -.78      1.63      1.77      2.19      .56               -.36
   manufacturing                 ( .13)    ( .13)    ( .17)    ( .23)    ( .09)    ( .08)            ( .16)
3. NCM 8-digit                  -1.14      -.88      1.73      1.71      1.79      .58               -.26
   manufacturing                 ( .04)    ( .06)    ( .05)    ( .08)    ( .03)    ( .02)            ( .05)
4. Dropping ARG, USA            -1.20      -.95      1.74      2.01      1.78      .56               -.35
   (all manufacturing)           ( .06)    ( .08)    ( .05)    ( .15)    ( .03)    ( .04)            ( .06)
5. Exporter share               -1.28     -1.02      1.86      1.80      1.79      .56               -.27
    10 percent                   ( .08)    ( .11)    ( .07)    ( .11)    ( .04)    ( .03)            ( .04)

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level. Estimates of δLAC indicates the scope elasticity for incremental product
access costs for Brazilian firms shipping to other LAC destinations. Similarly δROW perform the same role for
exports to non-LAC destinations. See text for full description of various specifications.


S7.4     Sensitivity to destinations Argentina and United States
Two destination markets dominate Brazilian manufacturing exports: Argentina (the top destina-
tion in terms of exporter counts) and the United States (the top destination in terms of export
value). To assure ourselves that the estimates are not driven by potential outlier behavior of
export flows to those two destinations, we remove them from the sample. As Table S.1 in the
row labeled 4. Dropping ARG, USA shows, only the estimate of the firm size distribution’s
shape parameter θ̃ becomes statistically significantly different from the baseline estimate. All
other estimates are statistically indistinguishable from the baseline estimates. When we omit
Argentina and the United States, the higher estimate for the Pareto tail index θ̃ implies a lower
probability mass in the upper tail of firms with extremely high sales. Even though Argentina
and the United States attract a large number of export entrants from Brazil, these markets also
exhibit a stronger concentration of exports among just a few top-selling firms than the average
Brazilian export destination.

S7.5     Exporter share
An arguably important moment for our simulated method of moments is the share of formally
established Brazilian manufacturing firms that export. Among the universe of Brazilian firms
with at least one employee, only three percent of firms are exporters in 2000. This share is
similar to that observed in other countries, for which data on the universe of firms with at least
one employee is available. However, censuses and surveys in most developing and some in-



                                                     S.23
                           Table S.2: Alternative Regional Aggregates
δ1                                              δ2                                       δ1 − δ2

Baseline                                        Baseline                                  -.30
Latin America and Caribbean (LAC)               Rest of World                             ( .06)
                                                                                          -.03
1. Mercosur                                     Rest of LAC (Non-Mercosur)
                                                                                          ( .03)
                                                                                          -.20
2. Mercosur                                     Rest of World (Non-Mercosur)
                                                                                          ( .04)

Source: SECEX 2000, manufacturing firms and their manufactured products.
Note: Products at the HS 6-digit level.


dustrialized countries truncate their target population of firms from below with thresholds up to
20 employees. To query sensitivity of our estimates to the share of exporters, we hypothetically
consider an alternative share of 10 percent of Brazilian firms exporting. This exercise serves two
purposes. First, comparisons of our findings to future results in other countries may depend on
using a hypothetically truncated target population of firms from below. Second, we can check
how our results might depend on a hypothetically more export oriented manufacturing sector
such as, for instance, the U.S. manufacturing sector.
     Table S.1 reports the results in the row 5. Exporter share 10 percent. Compared to the
baseline, the scope elasticities of market-access costs δ and of product efficiency α̃ increase in
absolute magnitude. Intuitively, the estimator tries to “explain” the hypothetically higher share
of exporters with relatively faster declines in market-access costs as exporter scope increases
but to offset those access cost reductions with relatively steeper declines in product efficiency
away from core competency, so as to keep matching the overall pattern of exporter scopes across
destinations. The other three parameter estimates remain similar to the baseline estimates. This
final robustness exercise therefore clarifies how the firm entry margin influences identification:
if firm entry with the first product were hypothetically more prevalent, then for a given common
market-access cost component fsd (1) the access cost schedule would need to decline faster with
scope, leading to wider exporter scopes everywhere, unless production efficiency also declines
faster with scope.

S7.6     Sensitivity to Mercosur
In a final set of robustness exercises, we alternate the pairings of regional aggregates. In the
baseline, we split the world into LAC (Latin American and the Caribbean) and the Rest of the
World (non-LAC). In a first alteration, we drop destination countries outside of LAC from our
sample and split LAC into Mercosur destinations in 2000 (Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay) and
non-Mercosur destinations. In the row labelled 1. Mercosur–Rest of LAC, Table S.2 reports
the results for the difference in the scope elasticities of market-access costs between the two
sub-regions within LAC, and the difference is negative as in the baseline but small (and not
statistically different from zero). This finding justifies our treatment of LAC in the baseline as



                                                  S.24
a relatively homogeneous region for Brazilian exporters. In a second alteration of the regional
split, we discern between Mercosur destinations in 2000 and the Rest of the World, where the
Rest of the World includes LAC countries outside Mercosur as well as non-LAC destinations.
Expectedly, given the earlier results in the baseline and in the first alteration, the difference is
negative but not quite as pronounced in magnitude as the difference between LAC and the Rest
of the World. We therefore conclude that LAC countries outside Mercosur are more similar to
Mercosur than to the Rest of the World and consider our baseline split of destinations into LAC
and non-LAC an adequate country grouping.


S8     Counterfactual Exercises with Log-normal Productivity
Counterfactual exercises in international trade traditionally use the “hat” algebra of Dekle, Eaton
and Kortum (2007a) to show welfare changes in the presence of Pareto distributed firm pro-
ductivity. We generalize this methodology to allow for any arbitrary productivity distribution,
including the log-normal distribution used in Fernandes et al. (2018). We find results that are
predicated on recovering the minimum productivity cutoff for a domestic firm: zii∗ , which serves
as a useful normalization and allows for the recovery of nearly all other required parameters.
While our data do not allow us to recover this object, we find in simulations that counterfactual
welfare results are sensitive to the choice of zii∗ under log-normal firm productivities, but are
stable under Pareto firm productivities. The stability of simulation results for the Pareto distri-
bution stems from the “memoryless” property of the ratio of weighted firm productivities that
holds only under the Pareto distribution.




                                               S.25
Appendix to the Online Supplement
S-A       Optimal Product Prices
We characterize the first-order conditions for the firm’s optimal pricing rules at every destination
d. There are Gsd (φ) first-order conditions with respect to psdg . For any Gsd (φ), taking the first
derivative of profits πsd (φ) from (S.1) with respect to psdg yields
                                                                                
  ∂πsd (φ)          σ−1                 ε−σ −ε                     ws         −1
(S-A.1)      = Pd Td · Psd (φ; Gsd )        psdg 1 − ε 1 −               τsd psdg
   ∂psdg                                                        φ/h(g)
                                                              Gsd (φ)                         
                                                          ε−1
                                                               X                  ws         −ε
                                    +(ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )                psdk −         τsd psdk .
                                                               k=1
                                                                               φ/h(k)

The first-order conditions require that (S-A.1) is equal to zero for all products g = 1, . . . , Gsd (φ).
Using the first-order conditions for any two products g and g 0 and reformulating we find

                                         psdg /psdg0 = h(g)/h(g 0 ).

So the firm must optimally charge an identical markup over the marginal costs for all prod-
ucts. Define this optimal markup as m̄. To solve out for m̄ in terms of primitives, use psdg =
m̄ ws τsd /[φ/h(g)] in the first-order condition above and simplify:
                                                        Gsd (φ)
                         1                     ε−1 m̄−1
                                                         X −(ε−1)
                    1 − ε + (ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )                  p = 0.
                         m̄                          m̄ k=1 sdk
         PGsd (φ) −(ε−1)
Note that k=1    psdk = Psd (φ; Gsd )−(ε−1) . Solving the first-order condition for m̄, we find
the optimal markup over each product g’s marginal cost

                                            m̄ = σ̃ ≡ σ/(σ−1).

A firm with productivity φ optimally charges a price

(S-A.2)                                 psdg (φ) = σ̃ ws τsd /[φ/h(g)]

for its products g = 1, ..., Gsd (φ).


S-B       Second-order Conditions
We now turn to the second-order conditions for price choice. To find the entries along the
diagonal of the Hessian matrix, take the first derivative of condition (S-A.1) with respect to the




                                                    S.26
own price psdg and then replace ws τsd /[φ/h(g)] = psdg (φ)/σ̃ by the first-order condition to find

 ∂ 2 πsd (φ)
                                                     
                   σ−1                      ε−σ −ε       ε −1
             =   P d   T d · P sd (φ; Gsd )    p sdg   −   p
  (∂psdg )2                                              σ̃ sdg
(S-B.3)                 +(ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−1 [−(ε−1) + ε/σ̃] p−ε
                                                                sdg
                                                                            Gsd                         
                                                                                               −(ε−1)
                                                        2(ε−1)
                                                                            X
                        +(ε−σ)(ε−1)Psd (φ; Gsd )                 p−ε
                                                                  sdg   ·         (1 −   1/σ̃)psdk
                                                                            k=1
                                                n                                        o
              = Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−σ Pdσ−1 Td ·         − εp−ε−1
                                                        sdg  + (ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−1 −2ε
                                                                                    p sdg /σ̃.


This term is strictly negative if and only if
                                                             −(ε−1)
                                  (ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−1 psdg                < ε.

If ε ≤ σ, this last condition is satisfied because the left-hand side is weakly negative and ε > 0.
                                                   −(ε−1) P sd −(ε−1)
If ε > σ, then we can rewrite the condition as psdg /[ G     k=1 psdg    ] < 1 < ε/(ε−σ) so that the
condition is satisfied. The diagonal entries of the Hessian matrix are therefore strictly negative
for any demand elasticity configuration across nests.
    To derive the entries off the diagonal of the Hessian matrix, we take the derivative of condi-
tion (S-A.1) for product g with respect to any other price psdg0 and then replace ws τsd /[φ/h(g 0 )] =
psdg0 (φ)/σ̃ by the first-order condition to find

   ∂ 2 πsd (φ)
                                                     
                                            ε−σ −ε
                        σ−1
                 = Pd Td · Psd (φ; Gsd )         psdg (ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−1 [−(ε−1) + ε/σ̃] p−ε   sdg 0
 ∂psdg ∂psdg0
                                                                              Gsd                   
                                                                                             −(ε−1)
                                                                  2(ε−1) −ε
                                                                              X
                                     +(ε−σ)(ε−1)Psd (φ; Gsd )           psdg0     (1 − 1/σ̃)psdk
                                                                                           k=1
                                                      ε−σ+ε−1
(S-B.4)         =   Pdσ−1   Td · (ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )              p−ε   −ε
                                                                  sdg psdg 0 /σ̃.

This term is strictly positive if and only if ε > σ.
    Having derived the entries of the Hessian matrix, it remains to establish the conditions under
which the Hessian is negative definite. We discern two cases. First the case of ε ≤ σ and then
the case ε > σ.

S-B.1     Negative definiteness of Hessian if ε ≤ σ
By (S-B.3) and (S-B.4), the Hessian matrix can be written as

              H = Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−σ Pdσ−1 Td HA + (ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−1 HB ,
                                                                        




                                                    S.27
where
       −εp−ε−1
                                             −ε −ε                            
          sd1                                   psd1 psd1
               −εp−ε−1                         −ε p−ε p−ε p−ε
          0                         and HB ≡  psd2
                                                                               
HA ≡             sd2                                 sd1 sd2 sd2                .
                          −ε−1                   −ε   −ε  −ε   −ε   −ε   −ε
         0       0    −εpsd3                p p
                                                 sd3 sd1 psd3 psd2 psd3 psd3
                                                                                 
         ...                   ...                 ...                       ...

   The Hessian matrix H is negative definite if and only if the negative Hessian

            −H = Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−σ Pdσ−1 Td −HA + (σ−ε)Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−1 HB
                                                                                


is positive definite. Note that the sum of one positive definite matrix and any number of positive
semidefinite matrices is positive definite. Hence if −HA and HB are positive semidefinite and
at least one of the two matrices is positive definite (given ε ≤ σ), then the Hessian is negative
definite.
    A necessary and sufficient condition for a matrix to be positive definite is that the leading
principal minors of the matrix are positive. The leading principal minors of −HA are positive, so
−HA is positive definite. For HB , the first leading principal minor is positive, and all remaining
principal minors are equal to zero. So HB is positive semidefinite. Therefore the Hessian matrix
H is negative definite.

S-B.2       Negative definiteness of Hessian if ε > σ
Another necessary and sufficient condition for the Hessian matrix H to be negative definite is
that the leading principal minors alternate sign, with the first principal minor being negative.
The first diagonal entry is strictly negative as is any diagonal entry by (S-B.3). An application of
the leading principal minor test in our case requires a recursive computation of the determinants
of Gsd (φ) submatrices (a solution of polynomials with order up to Gsd (φ)). We choose to check
for negative definiteness of the Hessian in two separate ways when ε > σ. First, we derive a
sufficient (but not necessary) condition for negative definiteness of the Hessian and query its
empirical validity. Second, we present a necessary (but not sufficient) condition for negative
definiteness of the Hessian for any pair of two products.

Sufficiency. A sufficient condition for the Hessian to be negative definite is due to McKen-
zie (1960): a symmetric diagonally dominant matrix with strictly negative diagonal entries is
negative definite. A matrix is diagonally dominant if, in every row, the absolute value of the
diagonal entry strictly exceeds the sum of the absolute values of all off-diagonal entries. By our
derivations above, all diagonal entries of the Hessian are strictly negative.
    For ε > σ, the condition for the Hessian to be diagonally dominant is
            Gsd
            X
                   (ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−1 p−ε   −ε       −ε−1
                                          sdk psdg < ε psdg  − (ε−σ)Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−1 p−2ε
                                                                                      sdg
            k6=g


for all of a firm φ’s products (rows of its Hessian), where we cancelled the strictly positive terms



                                                  S.28
Pdσ−1 Td Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−σ /σ̃ from the inequality.
    Using the optimal price (S-A.2) of product g from the first-order condition and rearranging
terms yields the following condition
                                  PGsd        −ε
                                     k=1 h(k)         ε
(S-B.5)                          PGsd              <      h(g)−1
                                    k=1 h(k)−(ε−1)   ε−σ

for the Hessian to be a diagonally dominant matrix at the optimum.
    By convention and without loss of generality h(1) = 1 for a firm with productivity φ. So the
product efficiency schedule h(g) strictly exceeds unity for the second product and subsequent
products. As a result, the left-hand side of the inequality is bounded above for an exporter with
a scope of at least two products at a destination:
                              PGsd        −ε
                                                  PGsd
                                 k=1 h(k)               h(k)−(ε−1)
                            PGsd               < Pk=1
                                                    Gsd
                                                                    = 1.
                                        −(ε−1)               −(ε−1)
                               k=1 h(k)             k=1 h(k)

A sufficient (but not necessary) condition for the Hessian to be negative definite is therefore
                                                        ε
                                         1 ≤ h(g) <
                                                       ε−σ
for all of the firm’s products. However, the Hessian can still be negative definite even if this
condition fails. Clearly, the Hessian becomes negative definite the closer is ε to σ because
then the off-diagonal entries approach zero and the Hessian is trivially diagonally dominant.
Moreover, the Hessian can be negative definite even if it is not a diagonally dominant matrix.
    To query the empirical validity of the sufficient condition h(g) < ε/(ε−σ), consider ev-
idence on products and brands in Broda and Weinstein (2006). Their preferred estimates for
ε and σ within and across domestic U.S. brand modules are 11.5 and 7.5. Estimates in AGM
suggest that α(ε−1) is around 1.84 under the specification that h(g) = g α . These parameters
imply that the condition h(g) < ε/(ε−σ) is satisfied for Hessians with up to 414 products. In
the AGM data, no firm-country observations involve 415 or more products in a market (with a
median of one product and a mean of 3.52). Even if additional products individually violate the
sufficient condition, Hessians with more products may still be negative definite.

Necessity. Consider any two products g and g 0 . Negative definiteness of the Hessian must
be independent of the ordering of products, so these two products can be assigned the first
and second row in the Hessian without loss of generality. As stated before, a necessary and
sufficient condition for the Hessian to be negative definite is that the leading principal minors of
the Hessian alternate sign, with the first principal minor being negative. A necessary condition
for the Hessian to be negative definite is therefore that the principal minors of any two products
(first and second in the Hessian) alternate sign, with the first principal minor negative and the
second positive.
     The first principle minor is strictly negative because all diagonal entries are strictly negative




                                                S.29
by (S-B.3). The second principal minor is strictly positive if and only if the determinant satisfies
(S-B.6)                                          
                  −(ε−1)          −(ε−1)   −(ε−1)
   2
2 ε Psd (φ; Gsd )        −ε(ε−σ) psdg + psdg0       −(ε−σ)2 (psdg psdg0 )−(ε−1) Psd (φ; Gsd )ε−1 > 0,

                                                             2(σ−1)
where we cancelled the strictly positive terms Pd           Td Psd (φ; Gsd )2(ε−σ) /σ̃ 2 from the inequal-
                                                            −(ε−1)
ity and multiplied both sides by pε−1   ε−1
                                   sdg psdg 0 Psd (φ; Gsd )        .
    To build intuition, consider the dual-product case with Gsd (φ) = 2. Then condition (S-B.6)
simplifies to
                           h(g)−(ε−1)            h(g 0 )−(ε−1)         ε ε+σ
                        PGsd               · PGsd                   <            .
                          k=1 h(k)
                                   −(ε−1)
                                                 k=1 h(k)
                                                           −(ε−1)     ε−σ ε−σ
For ε > σ, both terms in the product on the right-hand side strictly exceed unity while the terms
in the product on the left-hand side are strictly less than one, and the condition is satisfied.
                                                              −(ε−1)   −(ε−1)
     In the multi-product case with Gsd (φ) > 2, replace psdg + psdg0 = Psd (φ; Gsd )−(ε−1) −
P            −(ε−1)
   k6=g,g 0 psdk    in condition (S-B.6) and simplify to find

                                                                                          −(ε−1)
                                                                           P
             h(g)−(ε−1)                 h(g 0 )−(ε−1)         ε ε+σ     ε   k6=g,g 0 h(k)
         PGsd                    · PGsd                    <         +     PGsd                  .
            k=1     h(k)−(ε−1)          k=1   h(k)−(ε−1)     ε−σ ε−σ   ε−σ    k=1 h(k)
                                                                                        −(ε−1)


For ε > σ, the necessary condition on any two products of a multi-product firm is trivially
satisfied by the above derivations because the additional additive term on the right-hand side is
strictly positive.
    In summary, parameters of our model are such that, for any two products of a multi-product
firm, the second-order condition is satisfied.


S-C       Proof of Proposition S.3
Average sales from s to d are

                                     θ (φ∗sd )θ                                φσ−2−θ / (φ∗sd )σ−1−θ
                       Z                                              Z
             T̄sd   =      ysd (Gsd ) θ+1       dφ = σfsd (1)θ                                       dφ.
                      φ∗sd             φ                                φ∗sd     H (Gsd (φ))σ−1

The proof of the proposition follows from the following Lemma.

Lemma 2 Suppose Assumptions S.1, S.2 and S.3 hold. Then

                                        φσ−2−θ / (φ∗sd )σ−1−θ       fsd (1)θ̃−1
                             Z
                                                              dφ =              F̃sd ,
                                 φ∗sd     H (Gsd (φ))σ−1           θ − (σ−1)

where
                                            ∞
                                            X                [fsd (υ)]1−θ̃
                                 F̃sd ≡                                    −θ̃ .
                                                   H (υ)1−σ − H (υ − 1)1−σ
                                                  
                                            υ=1




                                                           S.30
Proof. Note that
                                         Z φ∗,2                          Z φ∗,3
      φσ−2−θ / (φ∗sd )σ−1−θ
 Z
                                              sd                              sd
                                     1−σ           σ−2−θ             1−σ
                      σ−1   dφ = H(1)            φ       dφ + H(2)               φσ−2−θ dφ + . . .
   ∗
  φsd   H (Gsd (φ))                       φ ∗                               ∗,2
                                                                           φsd
                                         " sd ∗,2 σ−1−θ                #
                                             φsd         − (φ∗sd )σ−1−θ
                               = H(1)1−σ
                                            [θ − (σ−1)] (φ∗sd )σ−1−θ
                                                  " ∗,3 σ−1−θ           σ−1−θ #
                                             1−σ     φsd         − φ∗,2
                                                                      sd
                                     +H(2)                                        + ... .
                                                     [θ − (σ−1)] (φ∗sd )σ−1−θ

       Also note that, using equations (S.4) and (S.6), the ratio
                                h      σ−1−θ              i
                                  φ∗,2
                                    sd        − (φ∗ σ−1−θ
                                                  sd )       / (φ∗sd )σ−1−θ

can be rewritten as
          σ−1−θ          σ−1−θ
      φ∗,G
       sd        −  φ ∗,G−1
                      sd
                                                      =
                       (φ∗sd )σ−1−θ
                             σ−1
                                                     σ−σ−1
                                                         1−θ                         σ−1
                                                                                                           σ−σ−
                                                                                                               1−θ
                                                                                                                1
                        (φ∗sd )           fsd (g)                               (φ∗sd )       fsd (g−1)
                 H(g)1−σ −H(g−1)1−σ       fsd (1)
                                                               −       H(g−1)1−σ −H(g−2)1−σ    fsd (1)
         =                                              ∗ σ−1  σ−σ−
                                                                    1−θ
                                                                     1
                                                        (φsd )
                                                                                                                           
                                                          1−θ̃                                                   1−θ̃
                                       fsd (g)                        fsd (g − 1)                                          
         = fsd (1)θ̃−1                                       −                                      .
                                   1−σ             1−σ 1−θ̃
                                                                        1−σ             1−σ 1−θ̃ 
                               H (g)    − H (g − 1)            H (g − 1)     − H (g − 2)
                            

       We define54
                                                                                                                           
                                                                         1−θ̃                                        1−θ̃
                 X               [fsd (υ + 1)]                          [fsd (υ)]
F̃sd ≡         H (υ)1−σ                                  −                                  
                                     1−σ        1−σ 1− θ̃           1−σ             1−σ 1−θ̃
           υ=1             H (υ + 1)     − H (υ)              H (υ)       − H (υ − 1)
                                                                               
                                                               1− θ̃
           X 
                H (υ)1−σ − H (υ − 1)1−σ
                                                     [fsd (υ)]
         =                                                                      
                                                 1−σ                 1−σ 1−θ̃
           υ=1                               H (υ)     − H (υ − 1)
                 X                    [fsd (υ)]1−θ̃
         =                                             .
                             1−σ             1−σ −θ̃
                 υ=1    H (υ)     − H (υ − 1)
  54
       In the special case with ε = σ, we can rearrange the terms and find
                                                      ∞           1−θ̃     ∞           1−θ̃
                                                     X   [fsd (υ)]        X   [fsd (υ)]
                                           F̃sd =                  i−θ̃ =             −θ
                                                                                            .
                                                                                h (υ)
                                                        h
                                                     υ=1 h (υ)σ−1         υ=1




                                                                        S.31
With this definition we obtain

                               φσ−2−θ / (φ∗sd )σ−1−θ       fsd (1)θ̃−1
                         Z
                                                     dφ =              F̃sd .
                          φ∗sd   H (Gsd (φ))σ−1           θ − (σ−1)




S-D       Welfare
We have that
            XZ
Pd1−σ   =                 [Psd (φ)]1−σ µ(φ)dφ
               s   φ∗sd
                                                                          1−σ
                                                                            1−ε
                               Gsd (φ)                            1−ε
            XZ                    X                   ws    θ (φ∗sd )θ
        =                 Msd                 σ̃          τsd  θ+1
                                                                       dφ 
          s   φ ∗
                sd         υ=1
                                                    φ/h(g)    φ
                                "                    σ−1−θ          σ−1−θ !          #
          X             1−σ θ           1−σ     φ∗,2
                                                 sd         − φ∗,1sd
        =   (σ̃ws τsd )     bs θ H(1)                                           + ...
          s
                                                       θ − (σ−1)
                                         1−θ̃ "                ∗,2 σ−1−θ          ∗,1 σ−1−θ
                                                                                           !      #
                                                                             −
                               
          X             −θ θ     fsd (1)                      φ sd               φ sd
        =   (σ̃ws τsd ) bs θ      1              H(1)1−σ                     σ−1−θ            + ... ,
          s                       σ
                                    T d                                 φ∗,1
                                                                         sd


where we use the definition of φ∗,1
                                sd for the last step. The final term in parentheses equals F̃sd so


                                                    θ (σ̃)−θ              X
                             Pd−θ   =                                         bθs (ws τsd )−θ F̃sd .
                                           1 1−θ/(σ−1)
                                                                 Td1−θ̃
                                            
                                           σ                              s

    Using this relationship in equation (S.12), we obtain

                                                                      θ (σ̃)−θ bθd F̃dd (1)
                                          θ                   θ
                                      Td                    Td
                                                    =                           −θ
                                                                                            .
                                      Pd                    wd        (σ)θ̃−1 λdd Td1−θ̃

If trade is balanced then Td = Yd , where Td is consumption expenditure and Yd is output. By the
definition of F̃dd (1), this variable is homogeneous of degree 1 − θ̃ in wages, and the wage bill
share in output wd Ld /Yd is constant in all equilibria (see proof below). We therefore arrive at
the same welfare expression as in Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012): the share of
domestic sales in consumption expenditure λdd and the coefficient of the Pareto distribution are
sufficient statistics to characterize aggregate welfare in the case of balanced trade.
     The final step is to verify that the wage wd is a constant fraction of per-capita output yd so
that the first ratio on the right-hand side is constant. We demonstrate this next.




                                                                  S.32
S-E       Constant Wage Share in Output per Capita
We show that the ratio wd /yd is a constant number. We first look at the share of fixed costs in
bilateral sales. Average fixed costs incurred by firms from s selling to d are
                 φ∗,2                     Z φ∗,3
                            (φ∗sd )θ                       (φ∗ )θ
             Z
                  sd                          sd
  F̄sd   =       Fsd (1) θ θ+1 dφ +                Fsd (2)θ sdθ dφ +
            φ∗sd             φ             φ∗,2
                                            sd
                                                              φ
                            h        −θ             i                    h                  i
                                              ∗ −θ                            ∗,3 −θ     ∗,2 −θ
         = −Fsd (1) (φ∗sd )θ φ∗,2                                    ∗ θ
                                                                                 
                                  sd     − (φ sd )      − F sd (2) (φsd )   φ sd     − φ sd     − ...

                                                fsd (g) and collecting terms with respect to φ∗,G
                                      PGsd
Using the definition Fsd (Gsd ) ≡         g=1                                                 sd we can
write the above expression as
                                        −θ                                −θ
                F̄sd = fsd (1) + φ∗,2
                                  sd          (φ∗sd )θ fsd (2) + φ∗,3
                                                                  sd             (φ∗sd )θ fsd (3) + . . . .

Using the definition of φ∗,G
                           sd from equation (S.6) to replace terms in the above equation, we
obtain
                  
                     ∗,G
                         σ−1                (φ∗sd )σ−1            fsd (Gsd )
                    φsd       =                              −(σ−1) f (1)
                                                                              .
                                H(Gsd )−(σ−1) − H (Gsd − 1)          sd

   Therefore
                                                               −1/(σ−1) !−θ
                        fsd (2)1/(σ−1) H(2)−(σ−1) − H(1)−(σ−1)
                                      
F̄sd = fsd (1) +                                            −1/(σ−1)
                                                                                  fsd (2) + . . .
                              fsd (1)1/(σ−1) [H(1)−(σ−1) ]
                                                                                      −θ                 
                           θ̃         1/(σ−1)          −(σ−1)          −(σ−1) −1/(σ−1)
                                                                            
     = fsd (1) + fsd (1) fsd (2)                H(2)          − H(1)                        fsd (2) + . . .
                  "                                                                                           #
                                                      1−θ̃                                1−θ̃
                                              f sd (2)                            f sd (3)
     = [fsd (1)]θ̃ fsd (1)1−θ̃ +                                      +                                  ...
                                                                 − θ̃                                −θ̃
                                   [H(2)−(σ−1) −H(1)−(σ−1) ]            [H(3)−(σ−1) −H(2)−(σ−1) ]
     = [fsd (1)]θ̃ F̃sd

and hence
                            h                                      i
                                             fsd (2)1−θ̃                          P∞           fsd (g)1−θ̃
         F̄sd     fsd (1)θ̃ fsd (1)1−θ̃ +      h(2)θ
                                                           + ...         θ − (σ−1) g=1           h(g)θ
                =                                                      =                                      < 1.
         T̄sd              fsd (1)θ̃ θσ P∞
                                         fsd (g)1−θ̃                         θσ   P∞         fsd (g)1−θ̃
                           θ−(σ−1)    g=1 h(g)θ                                           g=1 h(g)θ


    Finally, the share of profits generated by the corresponding bilateral sales is the share of
variable profits in total sales (1/σ) minus the average fixed costs paid, as derived above. So

                              π̄sd  1 θ − (σ−1)   σ−1    1
                                   = −          =     =     ≡ η.
                              T̄sd  σ     θσ       θσ   θ̃σ
    This finding implies that the wage is a constant
                                               P      fraction of per capita
                                                                       P income. The reason
is that total profits for country s are πs Ls = k λsk Tk /(θ̃σ), where k λsk Tk is the country’s


                                                           S.33
total income because total manufacturing sales of a country s equal its total sales across all
destinations. So profit income and wage income can be expressed as constant shares of total
income:
                                    1                   θ̃σ−1
                           πs Ls =     Ys and ws Ls =         Ys .
                                   θ̃σ                    θ̃σ




                                            S.34
