                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CONVENIENTLY UPSET:
           AVOIDING ALTRUISM BY DISTORTING BELIEFS ABOUT OTHERS

                                           Rafael Di Tella
                                        Ricardo Pérez-Truglia

                                        Working Paper 16645
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16645


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2010




We thank Micaela Sviatschi for excellent research assistance. Rafael Di Tella thanks the support of
the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Rafael Di Tella and Ricardo Pérez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Conveniently Upset: Avoiding Altruism by Distorting Beliefs About Others
Rafael Di Tella and Ricardo Pérez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 16645
December 2010
JEL No. E62,P16

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper we present the results from a “corruption game” (a dictator game modified so that the
second player can accept a side payment that reduces the overall size of the pie). Dictators (silently)
treated to have the possibility of taking a larger proportion of the recipient’s tokens, take more of them.
They were also more likely to report believing that the recipient would accept a low price in exchange
for a side payment; and selected larger numbers as their best guess of the likely proportion of recipients
acting “unfairly”. The results favor the hypothesis that people avoid altruistic actions by distorting
beliefs about others.


Rafael Di Tella
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Rd
Boston, MA 02163
and CIFAR
and also NBER
rditella@hbs.edu

Ricardo Pérez-Truglia
Liitauer Center
Harvard University
rtruglia@fas.harvard.edu
                                                  “He who wants to kill his dog, accuses it of rabies”1


I.       Introduction

Beliefs are central in many economic models. To provide just one example, consider the
seminal paper of Piketty (1995) in political economy, which showed that economic systems
can heavily depend on the beliefs that people hold concerning labor market parameters (such
as whether effort pays or not) or agent moral types (such as whether the rich are corrupt).2
This literature uses the finding that individual beliefs are a strong predictor of a person’s
demand for redistribution (even more than income and education; see, for example, Fong,
2001, Corneo and Gruner, 2002 and Alesina and La Ferrara, 2002). Of particular interest are
papers where people who believe others misbehave (e.g., by being corrupt) also want to tax
them. Aghion, et al (2010), for example, document that government regulation has a strong
negative correlation with measures of trust in a cross section of countries, which is
consistent with people taxing those they do not trust. Given their potential importance, a
natural question involves identifying the factors that affect the formation of beliefs.


Standard economics emphasizes the possibility that beliefs reflect reality following a (perhaps
incomplete) learning process.3 Previous work, however, has emphasized the fact that a lot of
variation in beliefs remains to be explained and have explored the possibility that beliefs may
be affected by other factors. A classic example is Lerner (1982), who discusses how people
tend to believe in a just world, even in the presence of contradictory evidence. Benabou and
Tirole (2006) observe that such distortion in beliefs could be a useful strategy to compensate
for incomplete will power.4 While these authors focus on the motivational value of beliefs (in


1 French proverb: “Qui veut noyer son chien l'accuse de la rage”, famously appearing in Moliere’s play, Les
Femmes Savants.
2 He focused on how differences in beliefs about the role of luck vs effort in generating income could give rise

to two different political equilibria, one with low taxes and widespread belief that effort pays (called American
equilibrium) and another with higher taxes and a prevailing belief in the importance of luck. See also Denzau
and North (1994); see Alesina and Glaeser (2004) for a review.
3 As in Piketty (1995) and Buera, et al, (2010). For related evidence, see Giuliano and Spilimbergo, (2010). For

the role on cultural factors in preserving differences in beliefs even in similar environments see, for example,
Bisin and Verdier, (2000) and Giuliano (2007).
4 And that voting could shape economic systems in a way that reinforces the value of such motivated beliefs.

Part of the interest for us of Benabou and Tirole (2006) is that they focus on the type of beliefs that appear
crucial in models of political economy (namely, whether “the poor are lazy or they are unlucky”). A related


                                                       2
this case leading people to work harder), others have pointed out the possibility of self-
serving beliefs (see Hastorf and Cantril, 1954; see Babcock and Loewenstein, 1997, for an
interesting discussion).5 In this paper we emphasize a particular form of self-serving beliefs,
namely beliefs that facilitate adopting a course of action that would be unpopular under
normal beliefs (like killing a dog that does not have rabies). In particular, we test the
hypothesis that people who can take advantage of a particular situation, will tend to believe
that others also take advantage of those situations. Thus, our paper is particularly close to
Rabin (1995), who emphasizes the possibility of distorting beliefs by selectively gathering
evidence so as to relax internal moral constraints, or reduce cognitive dissonance, and to the
work of Konow (2000) on self-serving views about what is fair and what is not.6


Our Study
Our approach involves studying beliefs in a modified “dictator game” (Forsythe et al., 1994)
which we call a “corruption game”. After completing a set of tasks (which give agents an
equal number of tokens), agents were randomly assigned to the role of dictator or recipient,
with the main modification consisting in having the recipient simultaneously decide on the
value at which the tokens would be “sold” to the experimenter and hence determine the
payoffs to each side. Recipients chose the selling price for the tokens from a list that
included two prices. One was simply a high price. The second alternative was the
combination of a low price for the tokens with a monetary transfer to themselves (no
transfer was given to the dictator). Thus, the modification allowed the recipient the
possibility of affecting (lowering) the value of the payoffs to both players, in exchange for a
side payment (just to themselves). It mirrors the classic corruption mechanism of under-




class of models has focused on the direct consumption value of overoptimistic beliefs (such anticipatory
feelings –see Caplin and Leahy, 2001- are studied for example in Brunnermeier and Parker, 2005).
5 A striking example is Babcock et al. (1996), who report that teacher contract negotiators in the US select

“comparable” districts in a biased fashion and that this is correlated with strike activity. A key finding is that the
bias has real consequences (it causes bargaining impasse) and that the bias results from selective evaluation of
information (see Babcock and Loewenstein, 1997). On the other hand, the survey of tithing practices amongst
Mormons studied in Dahl and Ransom (1999) finds little evidence of the use of self-serving definitions of what
constitutes income for tithing purposes.
6 For pioneering work on cognitive dissonance, see Festinger, (1957) and Akerlof and Dickens, (1982). Piketty

(1995) and others in the political economy literature referenced above involves a channel going from taxation
to beliefs, whereas in this paper we study the effect of the capacity to tax to beliefs.


                                                          3
invoicing a sale (as when a privatized company is sold for less than the market value in
exchange for a bribe to the official in charge).7


After dictators made their choice, but before finding out their payments, they were asked a)
the likelihood that recipients choose the low price in exchange for a side payment; and b) the
proportion of the population of recipients that accepted the side payments. One advantage
of b) is that dictators guessing the right answered received a substantial monetary reward.
Two treatments were used. In one (the high stakes treatment) dictators could transfer a large
proportion of tokens from the recipient’s pile (8 out of 10). In the other (the low stakes
treatment), dictators could transfer only a few tokens (2 out of 10). The dictators (i.e.,
allocators) in one treatment were not aware of the existence of the other treatment.
Recipients (i.e., sellers) were not aware of the existence of either of the two treatments. The
study does not include direct deception, although it might be argued that a more “honest”
approach would have involved informing players of all the potentially relevant information.


Our main hypothesis is that individuals who have the possibility of taking more in dictator
games will cause themselves to believe that recipients were selfishly accepting a low price for
all players in exchange for side payment to themselves. In other words, the paper’s main
hypothesis is that people can avoid altruistic actions by distorting beliefs about others.


Related Literature
A large experimental literature has studied games that demonstrate how people fail to
maximize their material payoffs. In a classic study of the dictator game, for example,
Forsythe et al., (1994) find that approximately 20 percent of proposers offered even splits.
Significant sharing occurs even when full anonymity is ensured (see Hoffman et al, 1994 and
Bolton, et al, 1998). The usual interpretation is that people have preferences that include the
well-being of others, as in Kahneman, et al., (1986).8 One important finding in this literature
is that decisions in dictator games are heavily influenced by the player’s perceived “rights” to

7 The other classic mechanism is over-invoicing purchases. Obviously the words “corruption” or “bribe” do
not enter our actual instructions. There is a small experimental literature on corruption that studies different
aspects of the problem. A prominent example is the work of Abink, et al, (2002) using variations of the trust
game (see Berg, et al, 1995). See Dusek, et al, (2004) for a review.
8 A vast literature studied different aspects of these preferences, including Rabin, (1993), Fehr and Schmidt,

(1999), Bolton and Ockenfels, (2000), inter alia. Robustness across cultures is studied in Heinrich, et al (2001).


                                                        4
whatever sum is being distributed. In a classic demonstration of this effect, Hoffman and
Spitzer (1985) and Hoffman et al, (1994) show that the distribution of payoffs is heavily
affected by having players earn their roles. Similarly, Ruffle (1998), Cherry et al, (2002) and
Oxoby and Spraggon (2008) find that players with legitimate property rights (having earned
their positions by some means that is accepted by the other party) end up with larger shares.
Beliefs also play an explicit role in theories of reciprocal altruism, where agents form a belief
about other player’s altruism so as to respond like with like (see Levine, 1998 and
Rotemberg, 2005, 2008; see also the evidence in Ben-Ner, et al, 2004).9


Given the material cost of altruism, it is (perhaps) unsurprising that people sometimes
develop strategies to avoid the material cost of altruism.10 For example, Dana, et al, (2007)
present an experiment where people chose to remain ignorant of the consequences of their
actions, even when this was costless, and went on to reduce other-regarding behavior (for
work where candidates for dictator prefer to opt out for a fixed fee that is lower than the
dictator endowment see Dana, et al, 2006 and also Oberholzer-Gee and Eichenberger, 2008).
In a similar spirit, Hamman, et al, (2009), present results from sharing experiments where
recipients receive significantly less when allocation decisions are made by agents rather than
the principals themselves.11 Our paper discusses another strategy for relaxing the fairness
constraint on behavior: changing the beliefs about the recipient, a strategy that responds to
incentives in the direction predicted by self-interest. Our approach is similar to that in Dana
et al, (2007) in the use of ambiguity. A key difference of that paper from usual dictator
experiments in that it obfuscates the one to one mapping from dictator actions into
outcomes (Dana, et al, call this lack of “transparency”). In our setting, we introduce a similar
obfuscation but concerning the recipient’s actions, although given the passive role of

9 A related result appears in the experimental study of the effect of democracy of Dal Bo et al (2010), who find
that changing payoffs from those in a prisoner’s dilemma game to those in a coordination game has a greater
impact on behavior when the modification was implemented democratically than when it was imposed
randomly.
10 The effectiveness of these strategies will obviously depend on the context and, in particular, the nature and

ambiguity of the information available. The literature in psychology which has studied communication has
showed how motivated reasoning is constrained by the extent to which reasonable justifications can be invoked
(see, for example, Kunda, 1991), while work on elastic justification by Hsee (1996) showed that unjustifiable
factors influenced decisions more when justifiable factors were more elastic. Schweitzer and Hsee (2002)
present evidence suggesting that the reason private information constrains motivated communication is that
people will eventually face excessive costs justifying (to themselves) extreme claims about inelastic information.
11 These findings emphasize some advantages of considering the expectation of fair behavior as a constraint on

behavior (rather than a part of preferences), as in Rabin (1995) and Bolton, et al (1998).


                                                        5
recipients in dictator game we had to produce a modified dictator game. Thus, we no longer
have a one to one mapping between recipient’s actions and outcomes (which could be
termed as lack of “recipient-transparency” to distinguish it from the “moral wiggle room”
scenario).


Closer to our experiment in terms of the focus on self-serving is the work of Konow (2000),
who shows that players can interpret fairness ideals in self-serving ways when entitlements
are heterogeneous. He employs a clever double dictator setting, where dictators who are
observed to make a certain favorable material allocation (and hence employ one fairness
criterion) are observed to later use the same fairness criterion when asked to make an
allocation decision in a similar setting where he is not involved (and where his material utility
plays no role). This findings suggest that people are consistent in the criterion of justice they
adopt when they are and when they are not involved. Our approach follows Konow (2000)
in its focus on self-serving beliefs to reduce cognitive dissonance.12 One difference from
Konow (2000) is that the focus on beliefs about other player’s actions (instead of fairness
ideals) allows us to define an objective standard (a proportion) and reward an action (an
accurate guess of that proportion).13 Indeed, in our setting we focus on beliefs concerning an
action (instead of a fairness ideal) making it straightforward to obtain a measure of belief
bias by rewarding dictators for the most accurate guess concerning the proportion of
recipients who accept side payments in the population. Although still imperfect as a measure
of true beliefs, it introduces a negative consequence for reporting biased beliefs (consistent
with the strategy in Babcock, et al, 1996).


Section II introduces our experimental design in detail, while section III presents the results.




12 When two cognitions (e.g. beliefs) are inconsistent, they are said to be “dissonant.” In the case of the dictator

game, the dissonant cognitions are the desire to keep the entire pie and the desire to split it fairly. People are
naturally motivated to reduce dissonance and, according to social psychologists, often do so by distorting
beliefs. In many settings people reduce dissonance by changing the way they learn. For example, in the studies
of overconfidence of Köszegi (2006) and Benoit and Dubra (2009), agents stop collecting information, which
contrasts to the approach we use where the learning channel is closed.
13 The approach is to elicit fairness ideals by having a proposer that is not a stake-holder, and therefore not

susceptible to self-serving bias (see Konow, 2003). It should be noted that Cappelen et al (2010) present similar
findings (involving the preponderance of the liberal egalitarian principle) in a study that studies the role of
other fairness ideals and puts special attention on framing.


                                                         6
II.     Experimental Design

Our conjecture is that people who can gain from taxing others will distort their belief in the
direction of believing others are undeserving. This section presents a simple lab experiment
designed to test this hypothesis. Intuitively, we will present a modified dictator game in
which one player can take resources from the second player in a manner that is evocative of
the practice of taxation. The key modification is that the second player can take an action
that reduces the size of the overall pie in exchange for a side payment, in a manner evocative
of the practice of hiding economic activity from the tax authorities in the
shadow/underground economy (see, for example, Frey and Schneider, 2000). The first
player is uncertain about which action was selected by the second player (i.e. if he was
“corrupt” or not; obviously this terminology is used in the description in this paper but not
in the experiment; the word corrupt does not appear anywhere in the experiment), which
will make room for motivated beliefs (a strategic “offense” motive).


A Simple Model
We begin the model without motivated beliefs. There are two players: the “allocator” and
the “seller” (denoted by subscripts 1 and 2). Their endowments are denoted xi , and their

consumptions ci . The allocator can transfer an amount t from the seller, although 1    t

gets lost in the transference, where   0,1 represents the efficiency of the redistribution.
This is one possible way of capturing differences in K (which is admittedly quite crude).
“Intrinsic” utility from consumption is given by the function U ( c1 ) , with the standard
properties U ()  0 and U ()  0 . The allocator also cares about the utility of the seller.
The argument that follows does not depend upon the kind of fairness or altruistic concerns
that we assume. Next we are going to introduce a specification for fairness concerns in line
with the theories on reciprocal altruism (e.g., Levine, 1998; Rotemberg, 2005). In the
Appendix we provide a specification where fairness concerns are a function of outcomes
(e.g. Fehr and Schmidt, 1999).


The total utility of the allocator is a weighted average of his own intrinsic utility and the
intrinsic utility of the seller: U1   (2 )  U 2 . The weight  (2 ) is a function of the altruistic


                                                   7
concerns of the seller, 2 .14 We assume  ()  0 , so the sentiments of the allocator are
reciprocal to those of the seller. Also, assume that  () is positive and concave. The
problem of the allocator is then:


                                                max U  x1  t    (2 )U  x2  t 
                                                t0 , x 2 




The comparative statics are straightforward. If the allocator believe that the seller is more
altruistic (i.e. greater 2 ) then he will take less. A marginal increase in efficiency,  , will
always increase the net amount transferred from the seller, t , but it may lead to an increase
or a decrease in t .


We can now introduce motivated beliefs. The allocator knows that the seller was randomly
chosen from a population of sellers of two types: 2  2L , 2H . The actual proportion of
sellers of the low type (i.e. the least altruistic) is given by p0  0,1 . The allocator’s belief

about that proportion is given by p  0,1 . The allocator may hold a biased belief about p ,
but for that he has to pay a cognitive dissonance cost that is increasing in the size of the bias:
  C  p  p0  , with   0 , and C  strictly convex and strictly increasing in p  p0 . If we
let the parameter    , that limiting case would represent the absence of motivated
beliefs. There are many costs bundled in the last term. Firstly, the more distorted the view
that the individual holds, the more likely it is to find counterfactual evidence, which makes
him uncomfortable. Secondly, in order to generate biases people have to systematically
ignore information, which takes effort and time, and may eventually lead to sub-optimal
choices in other aspects of life. The more someone wants to “deviate” from his prior belief
(e.g. the truth), the higher the psychological cost that he will have to pay.


The problem of the allocator becomes:
                      max                U x1  t    2L  p 2H  2L U  x2  t     C  p  p0 
                t0 , x 2 , p0 ,1




14Given the dictator setting, an asymmetric formulation is sufficient to capture the relevant effects. In more
general settings, reciprocal altruism involves λi(λj) for i=1,2. (see, Levine 1998 and Rotemberg, 2005).


                                                                    8
Proposition 1: If the solution is interior and    , then an increase in  changes p  and

t  in opposite directions.


Proof: take the FOC w.r.t. p for the interior solution:

H
  2    2L  2L  p 2H  2L U x2  t      C  p  p0   0 . And then differentiate w.r.t.  :

               dp 
                    
                              2H  2L  2L  p 2H  2L U x2  t                 dt 
                                                                                                      ,
               d 2H  2L 2  2L  p  2H  2L U x2  t      C  p   p0  d

where the ratio in the LHS is positive given the assumptions.


If the allocator decided to increase t  after a reduction in  , then he must have also

increased p . Intuitively, given that the allocator is taking more resources, he is willing to
pay a cognitive dissonance cost to have more negative beliefs about the seller and therefore
alleviate the moral cost from taking the extra resources.


Implementation
At the very beginning of the game each subject is asked to complete 5 tasks. Each task
consists in finding a sequence of binary numbers in a larger sequence, as shown in Figure I.
The average time to complete each task was around 1 minute. After completing the 5 tasks,
each player is told that he has earned 10 tokens, and only then is allowed to continue with
the rest of the experiment. The fact that subjects are made to earn their endowments, and
that all enter the game with the same number of tokens, ensures that there is some similarity
in entitlements (this stage is not crucial for our purposes).


After working for the tokens, the subjects go through detailed instructions about how the
game works and then face a set of questions about it that ensures that they have understood
them, as well as the implications (for example, concerning anonymity). Roles (“allocator”
and “seller”) are randomly assigned and each allocator is matched with a seller. Each pair of
players has 20 tokens total. The allocator has to decide how to split the 20 tokens between
him and the corresponding seller. The seller has to “sell” the tokens to the experimenter. If
the seller chooses “Option A” then the price is $2 (so both the seller and the allocator are



                                                         9
paid $2 per token). If he chooses “Option B” then the price of the tokens is $1, but the
seller gets an additional payment of $10 only for him. The game is simultaneous, so the seller
does not know how the allocator split the 20 tokens when choosing A or B. And the
allocator does not know whether the seller chose A or B when splitting the tokens. Note that
a purely selfish seller without fairness concerns would always choose Option B, and a purely
selfish allocator would always choose to take the 20 tokens for him.


We took many precautions to ensure that the subjects understood the rules of the game
clearly. The subjects must complete a true-false questionnaire about the rules of the game. In
order to give them incentives to pay close attention to the rules, they are told in advance that
the questionnaire will pay extra money for each correct answer. There are four questions. In
the first two, subjects were given hypothetical decisions for both allocator and seller, and
they had to calculate the resulting payments for both players. In the first hypothetical
situation the allocator keeps 10 tokens for himself and the seller chooses B. In the second
situation the allocator keeps 19 tokens for himself and the seller chooses A. The answers of
the subjects were correct over 70% of the time. The last two questions of the questionnaire
were: i. The other players or the experimenter will be able to identify your decisions in the
game; ii. Even though they do not know your name, the seller (allocator) knows how you
split the tokens (whether you chose A or B) at the time of choosing A or B (splitting the
tokens). The correct answer is False in both cases. The subjects were right 90% of the time.
After answering the questionnaire, the subjects are shown the right answers with
explanations, even if they entered the right answer, clearly indicating whether they got each
question right or wrong. Finally, the allocator is shown a screen with all the instructions of
the seller, which contains no information about how the tokens are split.


After they finished with the questionnaire, allocators reach the stage where they have to split
the 20 tokens. It is a screen with 20 circular yellow tokens, 10 on each side, as shown in
Figure II. The allocator can transfer tokens among the two players with a click-drag-and-
drop of the mouse. We introduced the efficiency of redistribution (i.e.  ) as a step-function:
when transferring a token from one player to another it conserves its entire value (   1 ),




                                              10
but a given allocator cannot move the first K tokens of each player (colored in green),
which in practice is equivalent to   0 . We randomized two treatments: K  2,8.


Recall a key aspect of our design: nobody knows about differences in K. In the case of
allocators, those treated with K=2 are of course aware that K=2 exists (they can move/take
up to eight tokens), but do not know that there is a second treatment, and they do not know
that in that other group K=8. In the case of sellers, they are not aware of the existence of any
treatment, so as far as they are concerned, K=0 for all allocators.


Given this design, the “rational learning” hypothesis predicts that the subjects’ beliefs (both
those of allocators and those of sellers) concerning the proportion of sellers choosing B in
exchange for a side payment, should not depend on K, particularly given that there is a
monetary reward for a correct guess. On the contrary, if they engaged in self-serving biases
we should observe that those with K  2 think that the sellers are more likely to choose B.
Intuitively, allocators with K  8 can take at most a couple of tokens, so they do not have
much incentives to hold negative beliefs about the sellers. But allocators with K  2 have
incentives to hold negative beliefs about the sellers so as to justify (at least from a “fairness”
perspective), taking a greater share of the 20 tokens. Indeed, if sellers opted for B, then
taking more tokens increases fairness (both in outcome based and intentions based models
of fairness). This is exactly what the main Proposition of our schematic model predicts. And
given that subjects are randomly assigned to the two treatments, we can perform this test by
using a simple test of equality of means.


We retrieve two measures of the allocators’ beliefs (about how the sellers behaved). First,
before making the payment (an instance when the allocator finds out with certainty the
seller’s actions), we ask the allocator whether he thinks that the seller to which he was
matched chose Option A or B. We denote this variable Is Corrupt. There is no monetary
reward for guessing correctly. Immediately after, the allocator is asked to briefly explain his
answer. By asking him to explain his choice we ensure that he has the opportunity to think in
more detail about the topic and about the seller. In the following screen, the allocator is
given a bonus question. The allocator is told that he will be awarded 5 dollars if his answer is
correct, which helps ensure the allocators will have an incentive to declare what they actually


                                               11
believe. The amount is substantial (it is over 60% of the average payments actually received
during this experiment). The question asks: “What percentage of sellers playing today in the
lab chose Option B?”. The possible answers are the ten categories: “0-10% (0.1); 10-20%
(0.2); …; 90-100% (1).” We denote this variable Are Corrupt. We also obtain two measures of
beliefs for sellers, although these play a smaller role in our analysis given that there are no
changes in the incentives to distort them. We provide a reward of 2.5 dollars for each of the
two (in case sellers guess the correct answer). One of the measures is again Are Corrupt. The
other is a question asking sellers to guess the number of tokens that that the allocator left
them.




III.    Experimental Results

The experiment took place in Universidad de San Andres, a private university in Argentina.
Participants were randomly drawn from a database of hundreds of college students who
declared to be interested in participating in experiments. Students were not informed of the
content or purpose of the experiment, only that the experiment took place in front of a
computer, that the participants were asked to perform simple tasks, that the decisions in the
experiment were anonymous, and that they could earn some money in return. Most of the
students belong to families in the highest decile of the income distribution of Argentina.
They are presumably to the center-right of the political spectrum in Argentina.


The subjects entered the laboratory in groups of 16. They were randomly assigned to the
role of allocator and the role of seller, and matched in pairs. Before starting play, subjects
had to read and sign a standard agreement. They were informed that the experimenters were
not going to deceive them in any way, that their actions were anonymous, and that their
decisions were actually going to affect their payments and those of their circumstantial
partners. They were again reminded about these rules at the start of the experiment through
a set of on-screen instructions. The subjects earned on average a little fewer than 10 dollars,
and the time spent since they entered the laboratory until they left was around 30 minutes.
The stakes were reasonable: e.g. with 10 dollars you can buy 3 lunches in the university
cafeteria. All the subjects reported that they would like to be called for a future experiment,



                                              12
and most of them rated the experience as highest in a scale from 1 (unpleasant) to 5
(pleasant).


We employed a total of 64 subjects. Even though the sample size is modest, it proved to be
large enough to statistically identify the effect of interest. Unfortunately, we had to discard
two observations. At the end of the game the subjects were asked on the computer screen
whether they understood the rules of the game, and one of the subjects declared not to have
understood the rules. That is the first of the two observations discarded. As a confirmation,
we note that this subject spent over 15 minutes solving the last of the five tasks (we recorded
the time that each subject spent on each screen of the experiment). Therefore, we conclude
that he did not understand the rules not because they were difficult to understand, but
merely because he had to rush over the rest of the game to compensate for the time lost. We
discarded the second observation because in the questionnaire he declared that he was not a
student of the university. Including these two observations does not alter any of the results
below. After finishing the game all the subjects were invited to participate in an on-screen
paid survey. Every subject accepted to participate. In that survey we obtained information
about some basic demographic and socio-economic characteristics, values and beliefs.


As explained, the choices made by the sellers (i.e., the recipients) are not directly relevant for
the test that we are interested as sellers do not have incentives to distort beliefs (more
precisely, whatever the incentive, it is the same for all sellers). We note that 75% of sellers
choose Option B (low price + side payment) over Option A. Data definitions appear in
Table A, and their corresponding descriptive statistics in Table B.


The allocators with K  2 took on average 6 tokens from the sellers, and the allocators with
K  8 took on average 1.5 tokens. As a mild consistency check on the interpretations
offered in this paper (based on the concept of fairness), after taking its decision, but prior to
learning the decision of its partner, we asked each subject: "How morally satisfied are you
with your choices in the experiment?" The possible answers range from very satisfied (1) to
very unsatisfied (5). Consistent with the view of fairness concerns, taking more tokens is




                                               13
negatively correlated with declared moral satisfaction of the allocators, and choosing Option
B over Option A is negatively correlated to the declared moral satisfaction of the sellers.15


We can now test the main Proposition. Under the null hypothesis of rational learning with
no self-serving biases, the beliefs Is Corrupt and Are Corrupt should be independent from K .
Plain mean difference tests reject those two null hypotheses with p-values of 0.019 and
0.078, respectively.16 As predicted by the Proposition, the allocators with K  2 have a value
of Is Corrupt that is 0.4 (i.e., 40 percentage points) greater, and a value of Are Corrupt that is
greater by 0.2 (which would be equivalent to 20 percentage points) than those for allocators
with K=8.


We present the regression-equivalent of the mean difference tests in columns (1) and (3) of
Table I, where we regress the beliefs about the sellers on a dummy variable that takes the
value one if K  2 and zero otherwise. For the belief Is Corrupt we use a probit model, and
we report directly the marginal effects at the mean of the independent variables. For the
dependent variable Are Corrupt we use OLS. In order to assess the robustness of the results,
in columns (2) and (4) we add a basic set of control variables: gender, age, socio-economic
class and father’s education. The results are unaltered, which is also true if we use a different
set of control variables.


Of course, there is an alternative (more direct) way to test the Proposition. If the solution is
interior, we can take the FOC w.r.t. p̂ and use the Implicit Function Theorem:


             dp 
                   
                                  2H  2L  2L  p 2H  2L U x2  t               
             dt      2H  2L 2  2L  p 2H  2L U x2  t      C  p  p0 




15 See Konow (2010) who combines experimental outcomes with reports on emotions to tests theories of
giving.
16 As standard with experimental analysis, we repeated the mean difference test with many variables (e.g. male,

gender, socio-economic class, values and beliefs) and we found no statistically significant correlation with K .


                                                       14
Where  is zero if    , and positive otherwise. Testing   0 would be a more direct
test of the Proposition.17 It is straightforward to implement this test, exploiting the
exogenous variation in  that we generated in the experiment. We can recover  by simply
running a regression of the beliefs about the sellers on the number of tokens taken from the
seller, and use the dummy K  2 as instrumental variable. To see the intuition for why this
is a more direct test of the theory, consider the possibility that K had no effect on the
number of tokens taken by the allocator. Then the allocator would not need to justify further
redistribution, and therefore we should not expect any effect of K on beliefs about the
seller. In practice, K affected how many tokens most allocators took, but it did not affect
the choice of some allocators: i.e. 20% of the group with K  2 took two or less tokens. By
using the IV regression we can improve the power of the test. The results are shown in
columns (1) and (3) of Table II for the beliefs Is Corrupt and Are Corrupt, respectively. As
expected, we reject the null hypothesis of   0 at the 1% and 10% levels of significance,
respectively. In columns (2) and (4) we reproduce the regressions but adding control
variables, and the results remain the same.




IV.      Conclusions

A natural interpretation of positive offers in dictator games is that people have “fairness”
concerns. This is reinforced by variations in sharing induced by having some players “earn”
their roles (or their “property rights”). Recent work has identified circumstances in which
agents try to avoid information that would allow them to know if they are being fair (Dana,
et al, 2007) and distort their beliefs about what fairness ideals to apply (Konow, 2000). In this
paper we introduce a “corruption game” which is just a modified dictator game where
recipients take an action that can reduce the size of the overall pie in exchange for a side
payment. We then use it to explore another strategy that would allow dictators to keep a
higher share: increasing their belief that the recipient has accepted the side payment. Our




17Note that in the previous regressions, with K on the right hand side, the emphasis is on the effect of the
opportunity to take tokens on beliefs, whereas in this regression we emphasize that the effect is really a result
of actually taking that opportunity: beliefs change in players that actually take the tokens.


                                                        15
hypothesis is that such negative beliefs about recipients may lower the cost of acting unfairly
(and keeping a larger share of the endowment).


Our set up is a standard anonymous dictator game with two small modifications. The first
involved an initial stage where the two players performed a set of tasks until they reached the
same number of correct answers, so as to each enter the sorting of roles (randomly into
dictator and recipient) with the same number of tokens (10 each). The second modification
was more important: simultaneously with (and blind to) the dictator’s allocation decision, we
allowed the recipient to set the unique “selling price” for the tokens which determines the
players’ payoff (together with whatever share they were allocated by the dictator). The key
feature of this modification is that the recipient can choose a low price in exchange for
significant side payment for himself, a feature that we designed with the hope of mirroring
the action of “under invoicing” that is typical in many corruption settings. We obtain two
measures of beliefs by asking dictators two questions after they make their allocations (but
before finding out the payoff), namely if they think the recipient choose the low price (in
exchange for the side payment) and what was their best guess of the proportion of the
population of recipients that choose the low price. In the case of the second belief, we
offered dictators a significant reward for accurate answers. A basic finding is that dictators
that take a lot of tokens from the recipient report believing that recipients choose the low
price (and accept side payments).


Of course, this correlation admits several interpretations. Thus, we introduced to two
treatments. In one (the high stakes treatment), dictators could transfer a large proportion of
tokens from the recipient’s pile (8 out of 10). In the other (the low stakes treatment),
dictators could transfer only a few tokens (2 out of 10). The dictators in one treatment were
not aware of the existence of the other treatment. Recipients were not aware of the existence
of either of the two treatments. Our main finding is that dictators in the high stakes scenario
had significantly higher estimates of the proportion of recipients that would accept side
payments.


One possible application of this finding is political economy. In some circumstances, beliefs
about the rich are central to policy. For example, it is possible that during the 2009 financial


                                              16
crisis in the US many policy decisions were taken in response to deteriorating beliefs about
the merits of the rich, particularly in the financial sector. Many of these policies involved
taxing bankers perceived to have gotten rich without much merit and some practices that
many regarded as morally questionable. A natural question is what might happen to that
belief after the possibility of taxing bankers has been turned into a practice. Our paper
suggests that, even if regulation is put into place so that morally questionable lending
practices are eliminated, voters might become conveniently righteous (or conveniently
upset). It is worth emphasizing that prediction is a rewarded task, so the conveniently
righteous appear to be unaware of the fact that they are distorting beliefs for their taxing
convenience.




                                             17
Appendix: A Simple Model of Fairness over Outcomes

We start without motivated beliefs. The players are the allocator and the seller, just like
before (denoted by subscripts 1 and 2). Their “actual” endowments, “deserved”
endowments and consumptions are given by xi , ei and ci , respectively. Intuitively, the
“deserved” endowments are those that would arise in a perfectly fair world. The allocator
can transfer an amount t from the seller, although 1    t gets lost in the transference,
where   0,1 represents the efficiency of the redistribution. The first component of the
allocator’s utility function is given by his consumption utility, U ( c1 ) , which we assume to be
linear and whose coefficient we normalize to one: U ( c1 )  c1 . The second component of the
allocator’s utility is given by his moral sentiments, c, e  :

                               c, e   
                                                  
                                                  2
                                                    c  e   c
                                                         1        1
                                                                      2
                                                                                2    e2 
                                                                                         2
                                                                                             
We assume   0 . Note that the moral cost for the allocator is higher whenever someone
consumes something different from what he deserves. A higher  would represent that the
allocator is more concerned about justice. For the sake of simplicity we assume x1  e1 and
 x 2  e2 . If this was the whole story, the allocator would solve a trade-off between the
marginal utility from consumption and the marginal moral cost from doing something
unfair:
                                                             
                                   max x1  t 
                                   t0, x 2 
                                                                       t2 2
                                                                                 t2 
                                                              2
From the FOC we obtain the interior solution:
                                                              
                                                 t 
                                                         1   2 
The comparative statics for  and  are very intuitive: i.e. if the individual cares more
                                         t 
about justice then he will take less,    
                                                  0 , and if redistribution is more efficient then he will
             t 
take more,   
                    0.

Now we can introduce motivated beliefs. In a first stage the seller has to choose whether to
“betray” the allocator or not. However, the allocator does not know whether the seller
betrayed him or not, at least not until after he chose t . A given allocator may be in one of
two states of the world, denoted by superscripts 1 and 2, but he does not know in which
state he is. In both states the allocator got what he deserved: x12  e12 . In the first state (“just
world”) the seller got exactly what he deserved, c12  e12 , and in the second state (is corrupt
or “robber baron”) he got more than he deserved: x 22  e22    0 . The perceived
probability of being in the latter (former) state is p ( 1  p ). The actual probability is
 p0  0,1 . The allocator can change his perception of that probability by incurring a
“cognitive dissonance cost”: µ   p  p0  , with µ  0 .
                                                  2




                                                         18
In this new situation, apart from choosing how much to take ( t ) the allocator has to choose
simultaneously how much to distort its perception of p :

                 max
           t0 , x 2 , p0 ,1
                                    c1 
                                           
                                           2
                                             c  e   (1  p)c  e   pc  e   µ p  p 
                                               1   1
                                                       2
                                                                      2
                                                                          1 2
                                                                          2       2
                                                                                       2 2
                                                                                       2             0
                                                                                                         2



                                    s.t. c1  x1  t      and    c2  x2  t

We are interested in the following comparative static:

Proposition 1a: If the solution is interior and    , then an increase in  changes p and
t  in the same direction.
                                                                           dp   dt 
Proof: take the FOC w.r.t. p and differentiate w.r.t.  :                              , where the relation between
                                                                           d 2  d
dp      dt 
     and      follows directly.
d       d

Imagine that the individual decided to increase t  after a reduction in  . Then it must
follow that the individual also increased p . To see the intuition, note that, given that the
allocator is taking more resources, he is willing to pay a cognitive dissonance cost to have
more negative beliefs about the seller, and therefore alleviate the moral cost from taking the
extra resources.




                                                                 19
References
Abbink, K., Irlenbusch, B., & Renner, E. (2002), “An Experimental Bribery Game”, Journal of Law
         Economics & Organization, 18, 428 – 454.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara, (2005) “Redistribution in the Land of Opportunities,” Journal
         of Public Economics, LXXXIX, 897–931.
Alesina, Alberto and Glaeser, Edward (2004), Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe. A World of
         Difference, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Akerlof, G. and W. Dickens, (1982) “The Economic Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance,”
         American Economic Review, 72, 307—319.
Babcock, Linda, Xianghong Wag, and George Lowenstein, (1996) “Choosing the Wrong Pond:
         Social Comparisons in Negotiations that Reflect a Self-Serving Bias,” Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, XCI, 1-19.
Babcock, L., and G. Loewenstein, (1997). "Explaining bargaining impasse: the role of self-serving
         biases." Journal of Economic Perspectives. 11, 109-126.
Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2006) “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics”, Quarterly
         Journal of Economics, Vol. 121 (2), pp. 699-746.
Ben-Ner, Avner, Putterman, Louis, Magan, Dan and Fanmin Kong, (2004) “Reciprocity in a Two
         Part Dictator Game,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.53: 333-52.
Berg, J.E., Dickhaut, J.W., & McCabe, K.A. (1995), “Trust, Reciprocity, and Social History”, Games
         and Economic Behavior, 10, 122-142.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier, “A Model of Cultural Transmission, Voting and Political
         Ideology,” European Journal of Political Economy, XVI (2000), 5-29.
Bolton, Gary E.; Katok, Elena and Zwick, Rami. (1998) “Dictator Game Giving: Rules of Fairness
         Versus Acts of Kindness.” International Journal of Game Theory, July, 27(2), pp. 269–99.
Bolton, Gary.E, and Axel Ockenfels (2000) “ERC: A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity and
         Competition.” American Economic Review, 90(1): 166-193.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Jonathan Parker, (2005) “Optimal Expectations,” American Economic
         Review, XCV, 1092–1118.
Cappelen, A.W.; Hole, A.D.; Sorensen, E.Ø. and Tungodden, B. (2007), "The pluralism of fairness
         ideals: an experimental approach," American Economic Review, Vol. 97 (3), pp. 818-827.
Cherry, T.L.; Frykblom, P. and Shogren, J.F. (2002), "Hardnose the Dictator," American Economic
         Review, Vol. 92 (4), pp. 1218-1221.
Caplin, Andrew, and John Leahy, “Psychological Expected Utility Theory and Anticipatory
         Feelings,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001), 55–79.
Camerer, C. (2003). Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments on Strategic Interaction. Princeton, NJ:
         Princeton University Press.
Corneo, Giacomo, and Hans P. Gruner, (2002) “Individual Preferences for Political Redistribution,”
         Journal of Public Economics, LXXXIII, 83-107.
Dahl, Gordon B. and Ransom, Michael R., (1999) “Does Where You Stand Depend on Where You
         Sit?: Tithing Donations and Self-Serving Beliefs”, American Economic Review, 89, 4, 703-27.
Dal Bó, Pedro, Andrew Foster, and Louis Putterman (2010) “Institutions and Behavior:
         Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Democracy”, American Economic Review, 100: 2205–
         29.
Dana, J., Cain, Daylian and R.M. Dawes. (2006) "What You Don’t Know Won’t Hurt Me: Costly
         (But Quiet) Exit in Dictator Games," Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100,
         2, 193-201.
Dana, Jason, Weber, Roberto and Jason Xi Kuang. (2007). Exploiting moral wriggle room:
         experiments demonstrating an illusory preference for fairness. Economic Theory, 33, 67–80.
Denzau, A. and D. North (1994) “Shared Mental Models: Ideologies and Institutions”, Kyklos, 47, 1,
         3-31.
Benoit, Jean-Pierre and Juan Dubra. (2009) “Overconfidence?”, mimeo.



                                                  20
Dusek, L., Ortmann, A. and L. Lizal (2004) “Understanding Corruption through Experiments: A
         Primer”, Cerge-ei, Discussion Paper No. 2004-136.
Festinger, Leon (1957), “A theory of cognitive dissonance.” Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Frey, Bruno S. and Friedrich Schneider (2000) “Informal and Underground Economy”, in Orley
         Ashenfelter (editor), International Encyclopedia of Social and Behavioral Science,
         Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Fong, Christina, “Social Preferences, Self-Interest, and the Demand for Redistribution,” Journal of
         Public Economics, LXXXII (2001), 225–246.
Forsythe, Robert, Joel L. Horowitz, N. E. Savin, and Martin Sefton. 1994. “Fairness in Simple
         Bargaining Experiments.” Games and Economic Behavior, 6(3): 347–69.
Giuliano, P. (2007), "Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?" Journal
         of the European Economic Association, 5, 927-52.
Giuliano, P. and A. Spilimbergo (2008), "Growing Up in Bad Times: Macroeconomic Volatility and
         the Formation of Beliefs," UCLA mimeo.
Haisley, Emily C. and Roberto A. Weber (2010) “Self-serving interpretations of ambiguity in other-
         regarding behavior”, Games and Economic Behavior, Volume 68, Issue 2, 614-625.
Hamman, John R., Loewenstein, George and Roberto A. Weber (2009) “Self-interest through
         delegation: An additional rationale for the principal-agent relationship”, forthcoming
         American Economic Review.
Hastorf, Albert H. and Hadley Cantril (1954) “They saw a game; a case study”, Journal of Abnormal
         and Social Psychology, Volume 49, Issue 1, January, pages 129-134
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., McElreath, R., (2001) “In search
         of homo-economicus: behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies”, American Economic
         Review, 91 (2), 73–78.
Hoffman, E., and L. Spitzer (1985), “Entitlements, Rights and Fairness: An Experimental
         Examination of Concepts of Distributive Justice”, Journal of Legal Studies, 14: 2, 259-97.
Hoffman, E.; McCabe, K.; Shachat, K. and V. Smith, (1994) “Preferences, Property Rights, and
         Anonymity in Bargaining Games.” Games and Economic Behavior, 7(3), 346–80.
Hoffman, Elizabeth; McCabe, Kevin and Smith, Vernon (1996) “Social Distance and Other-
         Regarding Behavior in Dictator Games”, American Economic Review, 86(3), 653-60.
Hsee, Chris K. (1996). “Elastic Justification: How Unjustifiable Factors Influence Judgments,”
         Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 66, 122–129.
Konow, James, (2000). “Fair shares: accountability and cognitive dissonance in allocation decisions”,
         American Economic Review, 90 (4), 1072–1091.
Konow, James, (2003). “Which is the fairest one of all? A positive analysis of justice theories”, Journal
         of Economic Literature 41 (4), 1186–237.
Konow, James (2010) “Mixed Feelings: Theories of and Evidence on Giving,” Journal of Public
         Economics, vol. 94, nos. 3-4 (April), pp. 279-97.
Köszegi, Botond (2006) “Ego Utility, Overconfidence, and Task Choice”, Journal of the European
         Economic Association, June, 4(4):673–707.
Kunda, Z. (1991). “The Case for Motivated Reasoning,” Psychological Bulletin 108, 480–498.
Lerner, Melvin J., (1982) The Belief in a Just World: A Fundamental Delusion, New York, NY:
         Plenum Press.
Levine, David K. 1998. “Modeling Altruism and Spitefulness in Experiments.” Review of Economic
         Dynamics 1, no. 3: 593–622.
Oberholzer-Gee, Felix and Reiner Eichenberger (2008) "Fairness in Extended Dictator Game
         Experiments," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy: Vol. 8(1), 16.
Oxoby, Robert J. and John Spraggon, (2008) “Mine and yours: Property rights in dictator games”,
         Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Vol 65, 3-4, 703-13.
Piketty, Thomas (1995). “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
         110:3, 551–84.



                                                   21
Rabin, M. (1993) “Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics.” American Economic
        Review, 83, 5, 1281–302.
Rabin, M. (1995) "Moral Preferences, Moral Constraints and Self Serving Biases", Mimeo.
Rotemberg, Julio (2005). “Customer Anger at Price Increases, Changes in the Frequency of Price
        Adjustment, and Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 52, no. 4: 829–52.
Rotemberg, Julio (2008). “Minimally Acceptable Altruism and the Ultimatum Game.” Journal of
        Economic Behavior and Organization 66, no. 3–4: 457–76.
Roth, Alvin E. (1995), ‘Bargaining Experiments’, in Kagel, John H. and Roth, Alvin E. (eds), The
        Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 253-348.
Schweitzer, M., and C. Hsee. (2002). “Stretching the truth: Elastic justification and motivated
        communication of uncertain information”, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 25:2, 185-201.




                                              22
                       Figure I: A sample task (one of five)




Figure II: Screen faced by an allocator when asked to decide on the split (for K=2)




                                        23
                           Table A: Data definitions (experiment)


       Name                                              Definition
Is Corrupt               Dummy variable that takes value 1 if the allocator guesses that his
                         corresponding seller chose Option B, and 0 if he thinks otherwise.

Are Corrupt              “What percentage of sellers playing today in the lab chose Option B? 0-
                         10% (0.1); 10-20% (0.2); …; 90-100% (1)”
Block == 2               Dummy variable that takes value 1 if the individual faced 2 blocked tokens,
                         and zero if he faced 8 blocked tokens.
Tokens Taken             Number of tokens taken from the seller by the allocator.
Socio-economic class     “What is the socio-economic class of your family? Lower class (1); Middle-
                         lower class (2); Middle class (3); Middle-higher class (4); Higher class (5)”
Father's education       “What is the educational level of your father? Primary incomplete (1);
                         Primary complete (2); Secondary incomplete (3); Secondary complete (4);
                         Undergraduate incomplete (5); Undergraduate complete (6); Graduate (7)”




                         Table B: Summary Statistics (experiment)

              Variable             Obs          Mean        Std. Dev.       Min          Max
    Is Corrupt                       30          0.67          0.48           0            1
    Are Corrupt                      30          0.69          0.31          0.1           1
    Block == 2                       30          0.50          0.51           0            1
    Tokens Taken                     30          3.77          3.05           0            8
    Socio-economic class             30          3.50          0.63           2            5
    Father's education               30          5.73          0.94           3            7

    Notes: subset of observations corresponding to the allocators.




                                                 24
                                          Table I: First test

                             (1)                      (2)           (3)                 (4)
                                      Probit1                                OLS

 Dep. Var.:                          Is Corrupt                           Are Corrupt


 Block == 2               0.400**               0.428***          0.200*             0.217*
                           (0.159)                  (0.156)       (0.110)            (0.121)

 Controls2                   no                       yes           no                  yes

 Observations                30                       30            30                  30


Notes: Heteroskedastic-robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%; 1 We report the marginal effect at the mean
independent variables instead of the raw coefficients; 2 The control variables are: gender, age,
socio-economic class and father's education.



                                     Table II: Second test

                             (1)                      (2)          (3)                  (4)
                                     IV   Probit1                            2SLS

 Dep. Var.:                          Is Corrupt                           Are Corrupt

 Second Stage:
 Tokens Taken             0.586***              0.970**           0.045*             0.052*
                           (0.200)                  (0.480)      (0.024)            (0.028)
 First Stage:
 Block == 2               4.467***              4.194***        4.467***            4.194***
                           (0.742)                  (0.530)      (0.755)            (0.627)

 Controls2                   no                      yes            no                  yes

 Observations                30                       30            30                  30

Notes: Heteroskedastic-robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%; 1 We report the marginal effect at the mean
independent variables instead of the raw coefficients; 2 The control variables are: gender, age,
socio-economic class and father's education.




                                                     25
