NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRE SALES IN FINANCE AND MACROECONOMICS
Andrei Shleifer
Robert W. Vishny
Working Paper 16642
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16642

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

We thank Efraim Benmelech, Eduardo Davila, Nicola Gennaioli, Robin Greenwood, Samuel Hanson,
Oliver Hart, Anil Kashyap, Joshua Schwartzstein, Alp Simsek, Jeremy Stein, Rene Stulz, and the editors
of the Journal of Economic Perspectives for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics
Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny
NBER Working Paper No. 16642
December 2010
JEL No. E44,E51,G01,G21,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
Fire sales are forced sales of assets in which high-valuation bidders are sidelined, typically due to debt
overhang problems afflicting many specialist bidders simultaneously. We overview theoretical and
empirical research on asset fire sales, which shows how they can arise, how they can lead to asset
under-valuations, how contracts and bankruptcy regimes adjust to the risk of fire sales, how fire sales
can lead to downward spirals or cascades in asset prices, how arbitrage fails in the presence of fire
sales, and how fire sales can reduce productive investment. We conclude by showing how asset fire
sales shed light on several aspects of the recent financial crisis, and can account for the success of
the liquidity provision and asset purchase policies of the Federal Reserve.

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
Robert W. Vishny
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Rvishny@gmail.com

Analysts of the recent financial crisis often refer to the role of asset “fire sales” in
depleting the balance sheets of financial institutions and aggravating the fragility of the
financial system. For example, a report from the U.S. Treasury (2009) held: “An initial
fundamental shock associated with the bursting of the housing bubble and deteriorating
economic conditions generated losses for leveraged investors including banks. . . . The
resulting need to reduce risk triggered a wide-scale deleveraging in these markets and led
to fire sales.”

Similarly, a discussion of the crisis by leading American financial

economists (French et al., 2010, p. 67) argued: “A bank that simply suffers large losses
may be forced to reduce its risk by selling assets at distressed or fire-sale prices. If other
banks must revalue their assets at these temporarily low market values, the first sale can
set off a cascade of fire sales that inflicts losses on many institutions. Thus, whether
through defaults or fire sales, one troubled bank can damage many others, reducing the
financial system’s capacity to bear risk and make loans.” Economists at the Federal
Reserve (Carlson, Haubrick, Cherney, and Wakefield, 2009), in explaining the Fed policy
of guaranteeing money market funds during the crisis, write: “The effect of the
announcement was to permit an orderly management of withdrawals from the money
funds, preventing a liquidation of assets at distressed prices, which could have
destabilized the funds’ net asset values.”
The current crisis is not the first where terminology of a “fire sale” has been used.
In 1998 testimony to Congress following the collapse and rescue of the Long-Term
Capital Management hedge fund, Fed Chairman Greenspan testified (as quoted in
Caballero and Simsek, 2010): “Quickly unwinding a complicated portfolio that contains
exposure to all manner of risks, such as that of LTCM, in such market conditions

2

amounts to conducting a fire sale. The prices received in a time of stress do not reflect
longer run potential, adding to the losses incurred.”
The term “fire sale” has been around since the nineteenth century to describe
firms selling smoke-damaged merchandise at cut-rate prices in the aftermath of a fire.
But what are fire sales in broad financial markets with hundreds of participants? How
can fire sales matter for generic goods, such as airplanes or financial securities? In
modern financial research, the term “fire sale” has acquired a different meaning. As we
suggested in a 1992 paper, a fire sale is essentially a forced sale of an asset at a dislocated
price. The asset sale is forced in the sense that the seller cannot pay creditors without
selling assets. The price is dislocated because the highest potential bidders are typically
involved in a similar activity as the seller, and are therefore themselves indebted and
cannot borrow more to buy the asset. Indeed, rather than bidding for the asset, they
might be selling similar assets themselves. Assets are then bought by nonspecialists who,
knowing that they have less expertise with the assets in question, are only willing to buy
at valuations that are much lower.
Assets sold in fire sales can trade at prices far below value in best use, causing
severe losses to sellers. Of course, borrowers and lenders can seek to negotiate and
renegotiate contracts to avoid fire sales, but sometimes they fail. Fire sales and efforts to
avoid them shed light on a range of empirical phenomena, such as the structure of debt
contracts, organization of bankruptcy regimes, and even the failures of arbitrage and
market efficiency in financial markets. Fire sales can also lead to fragility of financial
markets during crises. When a fire sale leads to a sharp reduction in an asset’s price,
similar assets held by other market participants decline in value as well, which might

3

bring them also to financial distress and forced asset sales. This self-reinforcing process
can lead to downward spirals or cascades in asset prices and net worth of market
participants.

Because of fire sales, risk becomes systemic. Through this process, asset

fire sales and the deterioration of the net worth of firms and financial institutions can
severely undermine financial intermediation, leading to reductions of real investment and
output.
In this paper, we selectively review some of the research on fire sales,
emphasizing both concepts and supporting evidence. We begin by describing our 1992
model of fire sales and the related findings in empirical corporate finance. We then show
that models of fire sales can account for several related phenomena during the recent
financial crisis, including the contraction of the banking system and the failures of
arbitrage in financial markets exemplified by historically unprecedented differences in
prices of very similar securities.

We then link fire sales to macroeconomics by

discussing how such dislocations of security prices and the reduction in balance sheets of
banks can reduce investment and output. Finally, we consider how the concept of fire
sales can help us think about government interventions in financial markets, including the
evidently successful Federal Reserve interventions in 2009. Fire sales are surely not the
whole story of the financial crisis, but they are a phenomenon that binds together many
elements of the crisis.

Modeling Fire Sales
A fire sale of an asset is a forced sale, which can occur for a number of reasons.
A person might sell his car quickly because he has urgent medical expenses. A mutual

4

fund might sell securities because it faces capital withdrawals by its shareholders (Coval
and Stafford, 2007). A firm might quickly sell a division to pay a regulatory fine.
However, the most common mechanism that precipitates forced sales of both real and
financial assets is collateralized lending. In such lending agreements, collateral is a
borrower’s pledge of specific property to a lender to secure repayment of a loan. If the
borrower defaults on a loan, the borrower forfeits to the lender the property pledged as
collateral—sometimes automatically and sometimes through a legal process. Most debt
contracts, including mortgages and corporate debt, are collateralized. When the borrower
fails to either repay or meet some conditions of the loan, the lender has the right to sell
collateral, and might wish for various reasons to do this quickly.
Despite the importance of collateralized lending in the world, the traditional
model of corporate finance of Modigliani and Miller (1958) has no role for collateral in
supporting debt contracts. In that model, debt is simply a promise of a part of cash flows
of the firm. Even second-generation corporate finance models emphasizing asymmetric
information, such as Myers and Majluf (1984), leave no room for collateral. These
models thus fail to capture what can in situations of financial distress become the central
feature of debt contracts.
Models of debt contracts supported by collateral began to appear in corporate
finance in the late 1980s, as the field shifted its attention from describing securities in
terms of their cash flows to emphasizing their voting and other control rights (Grossman
and Hart, 1988; Aghion and Bolton, 1992; Hart, 1995). In an early paper along these
lines, Townsend (1979) models debt as a contract that gives the lender the right to
investigate the borrower and then seize its cash flows if the borrower defaults on its debt.

5

In this costly state verification model, control over the cash flows shifts from the
borrower to the lender after default. More natural models of collateralized debt were
proposed in the late 1980s by Hart and Moore (1994, 1995, 1998). In their models, the
lender has the explicit legal right to seize and liquidate collateral in the event of a default.
The threat of liquidation provides an incentive for the borrower to repay.
In these models, the liquidation value of collateral is taken as exogenous.
Although liquidation value can be low for a highly idiosyncratic asset with no alternative
use (Williamson, 1988), there is no reason in these models why liquidation value should
be especially low for a generic asset such as a commercial airplane or a financial security.
For such assets, the most plausible reason why specialists are not buying is that they
themselves are financially constrained. This might happen, for example, when all the
industry specialists suffer the same adverse industry-wide or market-wide shock, and so
are distressed, and selling assets, at the same time. The constraints facing industry
specialists are the second essential feature of fire sales. An asset fire sale is thus a forced
sale in which high-valuation bidders are sidelined, often due to debt overhang problems
afflicting many specialists simultaneously (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992).
To describe this situation, we used a version of a model in Hart (1993) and Hart
and Moore (1995). An entrepreneur borrows some money from a lender to buy an asset,
such as an airplane, used to generate cash flows. The optimal contract is a combination
of short-term and long-term senior debt collateralized by the asset, the former used to
force liquidation when the project turns out to be bad, the latter used to provide debt
overhang that prevents the borrower from borrowing more and wasting money. If the
project is bad, the optimal contract calls for the sale of the asset. Unlike Hart and Moore,

6

we considered liquidation as a sale of the asset in a market in which there is a potential
high-valuation industry specialist who values the asset a lot, but also low-valuation
outsiders, who are not expert at using the asset and hence have lower valuations.

For

example, if the asset is a plane, and the seller is an airline, the high-valuation industry
specialists would be other airlines.

In this case, low-valuation outsiders might be

financial buyers, who would buy planes to lease them to other airlines.
The key observation is that the specialist industry buyer, who would be the natural
candidate for buying the assets, might itself be financially encumbered, and hence unable
to bid, at precisely the time when the assets are being liquidated. This would happen, for
example, if liquidation is prompted by an industry-wide adverse shock. In the case of
airplanes, consider a decline in travel caused by higher perceived terrorism risk, which
creates cash shortages and external financing problems for nearly all airlines. If industry
specialists do not have, and cannot raise, external funds to bid, the asset in liquidation
will need to be acquired by an industry outsider at a lower price than value in best use.
The specialists are sidelined.

Financially constrained industry buyers have become

central to many models, and have been variously referred to as specialists, natural buyers,
optimists, and farmers, as we discuss below.
This analysis raises a number of questions.

Why don’t the lender and the

borrower renegotiate, rather than have the lender repossess the asset? Why doesn’t the
lender, once it has repossessed the asset, hold on to it until market conditions improve?
Presumably, it is in everyone’s interest to avoid a fire sale. As we discuss below,
substantial efforts are often made by market participants to avoid fire sales, by means of
both how contracts are structured before the default and finding new financing rather than

7

repossessing the asset after the default. The Coase theorem is hard at work. But such
solutions are not always possible. Borrowers often do not have the cash needed to avoid
a fire sale, and cannot raise additional funds because (as in the Hart–Moore optimal
financial structure) they face overhang from senior debt.

When negotiations do not

succeed because additional cash flows cannot be pledged and a high-valuation buyer is
not available, a fire sale is difficult to avoid.
There are two related ideas in finance used to explain why some bidders do not
bid, and hence the price falls below value in best use. Grossman and Miller (1988)
introduced the idea of slow-moving capital, arguing that sometimes it takes time for
capital to come to the market, and in the meantime the price can deviate from
fundamental value. The authors had in mind a very short time period, perhaps a few
minutes or hours, during which price pressure from a rapid sale would be felt. This
theory is a less-compelling account of price dislocations that last for months. Allen and
Gale (1994) stress the costs of market participation as the explanation for the absence of
some buyers. Allen and Gale’s theory is a good explanation for why only industry
insiders, and not others, are present in the market at the time of the sale. One still needs
an explanation of why, in a fire sale, it is these insiders, and especially the insiders, who
are sidelined.
Our model of fire sales yields a notion of liquidity as the difference between
market price and value in best use.

When market participants are financially

unencumbered, liquidation brings prices close to value in best use, and markets are said
to be liquid. When, in contrast, market participants—and in particular specialists in using

8

or holding the asset—are financially encumbered, liquidation leads to sale of assets to
outsiders at lower prices, and markets are said to be illiquid.

Evidence on Fire Sales of Real Assets
The theory of fire sales raises questions. Do fire sales actually exist? Do they
have significant effects on prices? Do firms take actions to avoid them? Do the terms of
collateralized loan contracts reflect the risk of fire sales?

Are bankruptcy regimes

responsive to the risk of fire sales?
The empirical research on fire sales of real assets began with Pulvino’s (1998)
study of prices of used airplanes. Commercial airplanes present a great advantage for the
study of asset sales because the industry is heavily regulated, and as a consequence, an
enormous amount is known about each airplane, so that it becomes possible to control for
quality. Pulvino compared the prices of planes sold by financially distressed airlines to
those sold by the airlines that were not distressed, holding the exact characteristics of the
planes constant. He found that used planes sold by distressed airlines bring 10 to 20
percent lower prices than planes sold by undistressed airlines. Similar magnitudes appear
in other studies. For example, Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (forthcoming) report in a
study of forced home sales that “foreclosure discounts are on average 27% of the value of
the house.”
Other research shows that firms try to avoid such sales of assets in illiquid
markets. Asquith, Gertner, and Scharfstein (1994) find that, when industry conditions are
bad, a debt work-out is more likely than a liquidation. Schligemann, Stulz, and Walkling
(2002) study divestitures of business units by U.S. firms, and find that firms are more

9

likely to divest segments from industries with a more liquid market for corporate assets,
even when this means keeping some of their worst-performing units.

Almeida,

Campello, and Heckbarth (2009) show how poorly performing firms agree to be acquired
by firms with substantial liquidity, even when there are no synergies in the merger, in
order to avoid having to sell assets in illiquid markets. These are clear efforts by firms
and their lenders to avoid joint wealth loss in a fire sale.
What about contractual adaptations to the risk of fire sales?

Benmelech and

Bergman (2008) take advantage of the fact that, in the United States, the acquisition of
airplanes by airlines is often financed by individual plane debt contracts. They then
consider what happens during renegotiation of debt contracts collateralized by airplanes.
They find that airlines successfully renegotiate their lease obligations downward when
their financial position is sufficiently poor and when the liquidation value of their fleet is
low. What determines an airline’s bargaining power is the ability of the lessors to lease
the plane to its competitors, which falls when the industry is in distress. Benmelech and
Bergman (2009) find that airlines borrow on more attractive terms when airplanes used as
collateral have less financially-encumbered buyers.

Benmelech and Bergman

(forthcoming) show quite remarkably that the bankruptcy of an airline raises the cost of
capital to its competitors who have similar airplanes.

Using a broader sample of

industries, Ortiz-Molina and Phillips (2010) also find that firms in industries with more
liquid assets (meaning more potential buyers), and during periods of high asset liquidity,
face a lower cost of capital. This evidence suggests that lenders to firms are aware of the
costs of fire sales and structure debt contracts to take them into account.

10

Fire sale considerations also play a role in the debate on the optimality of the two
main choices in corporate bankruptcy: reorganization (Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code) or liquidation (Chapter 7). Many economists and legal scholars favor Chapter 7
liquidation, using the argument that auctions generally allocate resources to those who
value them most (for example, Baird, 1986). In our 1992 paper, we argued that this logic
does not hold when high-valuation bidders in auctions are financially impaired. Indeed,
the standard case for Chapter 11 reorganization, while not focusing specifically on fire
sales, warns about the risk of lost value arising through piecemeal liquidation of firms for
prices substantially below the value in best use. In countries that rely on Chapter 7-style
liquidations, such as Sweden, the original lenders to firms finance the liquidation bids,
often by the existing management, thus avoiding fire sales (Stromberg, 2000).
Subsequent research on a cross-section of countries has confirmed that liquidation can be
very costly. In developed countries, in particular, liquidation leads to lower recovery
rates for creditors than reorganization (Djankov, Hart, McLiesh, and Shleifer, 2008).
The punch line of corporate finance research is that fire sales of real assets do
exist, that they lead to substantial price discounts, and that firms and lenders are aware of
these discounts and take them into account both before and after the onset of financial
distress. But there is limited drama in fire sales of real assets because firms, unlike
financial institutions, do not exacerbate crises when they sell assets in fire sales. Fire
sales of financial assets raise new challenges.

Fire Sales of Financial Assets

11

Fire sales of securities have broader effects than fire sales of real assets because
financial investors, such as hedge funds or banks, finance themselves with money that
can be withdrawn quickly.

Demand deposits in banks are the standard example, but

investors in mutual funds and hedge funds can also withdraw funds on short notice.
Financial institutions are also typically heavily leveraged, and some of their loans are
short-term, collateralized, or both. Many banks fund their activities with commercial
paper, which is a debt instrument with duration between a day and several months. Such
funding requires almost continuous renewal. More recently, hedge funds and dealer
banks financed some of their activities with repurchase agreements, which are extremely
short-term loans collateralized by longer-term securities.

Adrian and Shin (2010)

document high and growing leverage ratios of financial institutions, reaching debt-toequity ratios of 30 or more for dealer banks.

Much of this debt is short- term

collateralized loans.
The extreme vulnerability of financial investors to sudden stops in short-term
financing can lead to cascades of liquidation. When financial investors are forced to
liquidate their holdings, security prices decline. These declines, in turn, prompt further
fund withdrawals and collateral calls for both these investors and their competitors.
Such self-reinforcing fire sales were central in the recent financial crisis. We begin by
describing the relevant mechanisms, and then turn to crisis facts.
In financial economics, the discussion of fire sales of financial assets is intimately
related to an older idea of limited arbitrage, which is the central building block of models
of market inefficiency and behavioral finance (Shleifer and Summers, 1990).

In the

standard view of arbitrage, arbitrageurs lean against the wind to correct the mispricing of

12

financial assets—and thus their influence is fundamentally stabilizing.

But might it be

possible that arbitrageurs lose funds under management, and hence their ability to lean
against the wind, at precisely the same time as prices move away from fundamental
values and arbitrage opportunities improve? Might arbitrageurs be more likely to exit
their positions, rather than doubling up, when prices are most wrong? Might they sell
assets in a fire sale?
In Shleifer and Vishny (1997), we connected the ideas of limited arbitrage and fire
sales in a model of arbitrageurs, such as hedge funds, who experience capital withdrawals
when their performance is poor. Consider an arbitrageur that raises funds from outside
investors and bets against a mispricing of a security which the arbitrageur knows for
certain will disappear after some time.

Suppose, however, that this mispricing

temporarily gets more extreme, and so the arbitrageur loses money. Unfortunately for
this arbitrageur, outside investors do not know whether the losses on these positions are
due to a temporary deepening of mispricing, or rather to the errors in this arbitrageur’s
strategies.

Absent such knowledge, the outside investors may choose to withdraw

capital. If they do so, the arbitrageur who is fully invested has to reduce its position and
return capital to investors, even though holding on, or even adding to the holdings, is
extremely attractive.
But here comes the problem. It is likely that the arbitrageur is not unique in
following a particular strategy. When this arbitrageur and a number of the arbitrageur’s
competitors who are doing the same thing all face fund withdrawals, they all start
liquidating their positions, which only causes mispricing to widen further. This is a fire
sale of financial assets, but with an even deeper problem: As arbitrageurs liquidate their

13

positions and mispricing widens, their losses grow, so that fire sales and the withdrawals
of funds from arbitrage are self-reinforcing.

This feedback effect from growing

mispricing to arbitrageur causes prices to spiral or cascade away from fundamental
values. This process can lead to a complete collapse of the market, or it can be arrested
by the entrance of outsiders to support the market when prices fall far enough.
Our 1997 model focused on the withdrawals of investor funds, but a similar and
even stronger argument can be made if arbitrageurs finance their positions with debt. In
an important paper, Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) develop a macroeconomic model of
credit cycles driven by self-reinforcing changes in asset values and availability of
collateralized loans. In their model, there is a homogeneous asset called “land.” They
refer to high-valuation users of land as “farmers,” and to low-valuation users as
“gatherers.” Because farmers are the high-productivity users of land, they borrow as
much as they can to invest, using their land holdings as collateral. But suppose that an
adverse shock hits farmers’ profits. Now their net worth is not as high, and they cannot
maintain as high a level of borrowing.

Because the farmers are levered up to the

maximum, they have to liquidate some land. But all the other farmers are also fully
levered up, so the land must be sold to the less-productive gatherers who have some spare
debt capacity but value the land less. A fire sale occurs.

As land shifts to less-

productive gatherers, its fundamental value declines, which reduces its market value as
collateral and precipitates further deleveraging and fire sales of land by farmers. The
process only stops because gatherers face decreasing marginal productivity, so eventually
land becomes so unproductive in their hands and cheap that farmers can afford to hold it.
In this way, Kiyotaki and Moore obtain a feedback from the declining value of collateral

14

to further deleveraging by high-valuation users, which results in a downward spiral in
prices.
Gromb and Vayanos (2002) present a related model of fire sales leading to
widening mispricing in the context of financial arbitrage. In their model, a widening of
mispricing can lead to forced deleveraging by arbitrageurs due to a decline of collateral
values, which in turns leads to further widening of mispricing.

Equity and credit

withdrawals by financiers from arbitrageurs work in the same direction of causing a
downward price spiral in the valuation of a mispriced asset.
The workings of our 1997 model and the Gromb–Vayanos (2002) model were
seen in the collapse of Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) in 1998 (referred to in
the Greenspan testimony mentioned at the start of this paper). LTCM was a heavily
leveraged hedge fund that sustained some losses on its positions during the Russian
government’s bond default in summer 1998. These losses precipitated substantial calls
for cash or more collateral by short-term lenders to LTCM, as well as fund withdrawals
by its investors. Unable to come up with cash, LTCM had to liquidate its positions in a
fire sale, which caused enormous price dislocations and losses for other hedge funds,
which then also had to liquidate. The process was stopped before it could run its full
destructive course by a takeover of LTCM by a consortium of financial institutions,
organized by the New York Federal Reserve to “avoid a fire sale liquidation of LTCM’s
positions” (Edwards, 1999).
An important feature of debt contracts collateralized by securities is time-varying
margins often called “haircuts.” To protect themselves from default, lenders require
borrowers to post a margin, which means that they lend less than 100 percent of the price

15

of the collateral. If the market price of collateral falls, lenders require either more
collateral or some cash back, which the borrower has to come up with to avoid having the
collateral liquidated by the lender. This mechanism can precipitate a fire sale in two
distinct ways. First, as the value of collateral declines, the borrower might be unable to
come up with the cash to maintain its loan, and hence the collateral will be liquidated.
Second, the margins or haircuts are determined endogenously (Geanakoplos, 2003). A
negative shock to collateral can lead to increased price volatility (or alternatively
increased disagreement among investors), and thus increased equilibrium margins and
haircuts imposed by lenders keen to protect themselves against losses. If that happens,
the borrower must come up with still more collateral, or return some cash. This is again
extremely destabilizing, since increases in margins force traders to reduce their positions,
which can in turn further deepen mispricing.
Several of the mechanisms just described are analyzed together by Brunnermeier
and Pedersen (2009), who model the simultaneous determination of security prices and
margins. In their model, as security prices fall, margins or haircuts required to borrow
using these assets as collateral rise because by assumption volatility increases.

They

refer to this phenomenon as a decline in “funding liquidity.” Unable to meet margin
calls, arbitrageurs are forced to sell their securities in a fire sale, making markets illiquid
in the sense of prices diverging from values. They refer to this as “market liquidity,”
similar to the sense of our 1992 paper. The two spirals described by Brunnermeier and
Pedersen reinforce each other: as prices fall, margins rise, arbitrageurs sell, and prices fall
further, leading to a collapse of both prices and liquidity in a market.

16

Even before the financial crisis, considerable empirical work documented the
significance of limited arbitrage as related to fire sales in permitting deviations of prices
from fundamental values. We describe two strands of this research. The first concerns
failures of arbitrage directly. Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino (2007), for example, study
merger arbitrage during the crash of 1987 and convertible bond arbitrage in 2005, a time
when the convertible bond market imploded following investor withdrawal of equity
capital from money-losing hedge funds. They show quite directly the self-reinforcing
effects of arbitrageur losses, equity withdrawals, and liquidation of positions, which in
turn lead to further losses. Mitchell and Pulvino (2010) present an even more striking
study of arbitrage failures during the current financial crisis. The authors look at a range
of very common arbitrage strategies involving corporate securities, such as convertible
debt arbitrage, credit default swap–corporate debt arbitrage, and several others. They
show that in the worst months of the crisis during 2008, arbitrage spreads—differences in
the prices of nearly identical securities—reached fantastic levels.

For example,

convertible debentures normally included in arbitrage trades, and typically mispriced by
less than 2 percent, sold at a 10 percent discount.
A second line of research, initiated by Coval and Stafford (2007), focuses on the
behavior of mutual funds. These funds are forced to sell securities immediately in
response to withdrawals by their investors. Coval and Stafford point out that by focusing
on portfolios of stocks that mutual funds hold at the beginning of the quarter, and
knowing their returns during the quarter (since mutual funds report net asset values
continuously), one can predict roughly which stocks will be sold when investors liquidate
their holdings of poorly performing funds at the end of the quarter. This approach turns

17

out to successfully predict future negative returns on the stocks held by poorly
performing funds, and has been used in other studies (Dong, 2010; Ellul, Jotikasthira, and
Lundblad, 2010; Greenwood and Thesmar, 2009; Jotikasthira, Lundblad, and Ramodarai,
2010).

Fire Sales and the Financial Crisis
To illuminate the significance of fire sales in the recent financial crisis, we start
with a generally accepted narrative of the crisis, as summarized in Table 1. We sketch
only the most basic outline; more detailed accounts are contained in Brunnermeier
(2009), Gorton and Metrick (2010), and Pozsar, Adrian, Ashcraft, and Boesky (2010).
The financial crisis was most proximately related to the bubble in the housing market and
to the financing of this bubble with mortgage-backed securities. These mortgage-backed
securities were created by pooling together portfolios of mortgages and then separating
them into tranches such that the most senior tranches were perceived to be virtually safe
and rated AAA by credit rating agencies (Coval, Jurek, and Stafford, 2009). Because of
this high rating, senior tranches of mortgage-backed securities ended up in the portfolios
of institutional investors such as pension funds and insurance companies, but also as
highly leveraged investments on the balance sheets of hedge funds, dealer banks,
commercial banks, and special investment vehicles guaranteed by these banks.
There remains a controversy as to why dealer banks were so exposed to mortgagebacked securities. Some of their holdings were surely explained by inventory and other
market-making considerations, but some banks were perhaps speculating on the spreads

18

Table 1
A Narrative of the Financial Crisis
1. A housing bubble inflates in the mid 2000s. Homes are financed by mortgages
that are increasingly securitized. Although the quality of mortgages deteriorates,
the securities into which these mortgages are packaged are perceived to be safe
and receive AAA-ratings.
2. Financial institutions such as banks and dealer banks retain substantial exposure
to the real estate market through direct holdings of commercial real estate and
direct holdings of mortgage-backed securities, but also through implicit
guarantees of special investment vehicles they organize that hold mortgagebacked securities and finance them with commercial paper.
3. Bad news about the housing market in the summer of 2007 surprises investors in
AAA-rated mortgage-backed securities and precipitates a sequence of substantial
disruptions in financial markets, such as the collapse of the asset-backed
commercial paper market. Aggressive liquidity interventions from the Federal
Reserve, including lending to market participants against risky collateral, stabilize
markets through the summer of 2008 despite continued bad news about housing.
4. In September 2008, several events, including a run on money market funds,
nationalization of AIG, Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac, and particularly the
collapse of Lehman Brothers, precipitate a massive financial crisis. Banks’
balance sheets contract because of massive losses on assets and withdrawal of
short-term financing, which prompts banks to liquidate assets in fire sales. The
consequences of fire sales are exacerbated by uncertainty about bank solvency
and government policy.
5. In response to their losses and to reduced availability of financing, banks cut
lending to firms.
6. The economy slides into a major recession.
7. Starting in October 2008, the government begins massive interventions in
financial markets, including equity injections in banks, expansion of lending
against risky collateral, but also direct purchases of long-term agency bonds,
which sharply reduce the supply of risky bonds in the market. The combination
of government interventions eventually stabilizes the financial markets by spring
2009, although the real economy remains sluggish.

19

between returns on mortgage-backed securities and the cost of funding these positions
with commercial paper and repurchase agreements (Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez 2010;
Gorton and Metrick 2010). It also seems likely that many market participants, including
the rating agencies themselves, did not understand the risks of mortgage-backed
securities (Jarrow, Li, Mesler, and van Deventer, 2007; Coval, Jurek, and Stafford, 2009;
Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny, forthcoming). Whatever the true reasons for investor
confidence in mortgage-backed securities, the result was that the high-valuation buyers of
mortgage-backed securities (and similar asset-backed securities), such as hedge funds and
financial institutions, financed some of their holdings with collateralized short-term debt.
As the grim news about the housing market and the safety of AAA-rated
securities started to unfurl in 2007, investors in AAA-rated mortgage-backed securities,
like many others, were caught by surprise. Some of the short-term funding arrangements,
such as asset-backed commercial paper, evaporated.

The Federal Reserve intervened

starting in the summer of 2007 by facilitating mergers of troubled financial institutions
and lending to others against risky collateral.

This series of interventions successfully

delayed a major crisis by over a year.
In September 2008, however, as bad news about the housing market and the
values of mortgage-backed securities continued to pour in, markets collapsed.

The

immediate impetus for the collapse was some combination of the run on money market
funds investing in the commercial paper of banks, virtual nationalization of the AIG
insurance company as well of government-sponsored housing enterprises Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, and most importantly the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers investment bank.
As these events rolled out in quick succession, many forms of short-term financing, such

20

as commercial paper and repurchase agreements, dried up, forcing banks to shrink their
balance sheets.

Banks also had to improve the quality of their assets for regulatory

purposes, forcing them out of previously safe but now risky securities. To accomplish
this, banks sold assets in a market where other banks and financial institutions were
themselves liquidating their holdings, resulting in massive price declines and dislocations
(Adrian and Shin, 2010). We saw a classic cycle of price collapses and deleveraging
described by fire sales models, driven by both capital withdrawals because of declining
collateral values and growing haircuts because of increased risk.
In fall 2008, the price of risk rose to unprecedented levels, and financial markets
plummeted. But why were the events after September 2008 so much worse than those
before? After all, bad news about housing and AAA-rated mortgage-backed securities
started arriving in the summer of 2007, and dramatic events, such as the drying up of the
asset-backed commercial paper market, started then. In our view, after the Lehman
bankruptcy a much larger proportion of specialist investors were sidelined from bidding
for securities than in 2007 or early 2008. Banks sustained massive losses and could not
easily borrow to buy assets. The contraction of commercial paper and repo markets
eliminated short-term funding that financed the holdings of dealer banks (Adrian and
Shin, 2010; Gorton and Metrick, 2010). Hedge funds as well sustained major losses and,
if anything, were liquidating their holdings because of investor redemptions and
withdrawal of prime broker financing.

Before the Lehman bankruptcy, in contrast,

liquidity provision by the Federal Reserve kept most of the specialist buyers in the
market. With natural buyers of distressed securities sidelined after Lehman, security
prices went into a free fall.

21

The Federal Reserve began to intervene in markets almost immediately after
Lehman, injecting equity into commercial banks, expanding lending to financial
institutions against risky collateral, guaranteeing the commercial paper markets, and
eventually buying hundreds of billions of dollars of risky securities, mostly bonds of
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Essentially, the Federal Reserve became the high-

valuation holder of risky securities. Between accepting risky collateral as a guarantee for
loans on advantageous terms, and removing massive quantities of securities from the
market, the Federal Reserve stabilized banks and the financial system by spring 2009.
The price of risk fell. The economy remained sluggish, but a depression was avoided.
Importantly, the fundamentals of the economy were probably worse in spring 2009 than
earlier; the fact that financial markets stabilized quickly suggests that liquidity problems
caused by fire sales were indeed severe after Lehman, and had to be addressed through
public interventions. The financial crisis appears to have been a liquidity crisis, not just a
solvency crisis.
The fire-sales mechanism unifies several aspects of the propagation of the crisis.
It explains how hedge funds, dealer banks, and commercial banks suffered huge financial
losses, largely from reductions in the value of their security holdings. It sheds light on
massive violations of arbitrage conditions as hedge funds lost their financing (Mitchell
and Pulvino, 2010; Krishnamurthy, 2010; Garleanu and Pedersen, 2010). And it explains
why investors most reliant on short-term financing were particularly exposed, and pulled
back the most. The common theme in all these phenomena is the sidelining of natural
buyers of distressed securities, contributing to the near-shutdown of key parts of the
financial system.

22

Fire Sales in Macroeconomic Models
How did fire sales and deterioration of balance sheets of banks lead to a broader
economic crisis? How did government policy stabilize the market? In this section and
next, we argue that the fire-sales perspective can shed light on these questions as well.
The idea that asset liquidations can have adverse consequences for real activity
has been present in the macroeconomics literature at least since the 1930s. In his debt
deflation theory, Fisher (1933) argues that an adverse shock to the value of corporate
assets forces firms to sell those assets to meet their debt obligation, and that such asset
sales lead to declines in output prices. The resulting deflation raises the real value of debt
denominated in nominal terms and forces further liquidations, leading to a vicious debt
deflation cycle. Although the theory is not entirely transparent, Fisher offers some
impressive data consistent with the story.
For a more modern analysis, we need to explain why fire sales of financial assets
such as bonds would entail real consequences. Why would pecuniary effects from
mispricing not only transfer wealth from sellers to buyers of securities but also
undermine physical capital investment? The financial crisis saw the decline of bank
lending to firms and of real investment (Ivashina and Scharfstein, 2010; Campello,
Graham, and Harvey; 2010, Kahle and Stulz, 2010). What can explain it?
Bernanke and Gertler (1989) argued that shocks to corporate net worth reduce the
ability of firms to post collateral and borrow, and as such undermine corporate real
investment. The Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) paper, in addition to modeling price spirals
due to deleveraging and fire sales of land by farms, shows that, as land values decline, so

23

does the net worth of farms and their investment. In the crisis, a sharp decline in asset
values was inevitable as the housing bubble burst, but fire sales have worsened these
declines.
Most attention in the analysis of the crisis has however focused on the declines in
balance sheets of banks. Such declines would reduce bank-financed investment through
the so-called bank lending channel (Bernanke and Blinder, 1988). As a bank’s net worth
declines, so does its ability to extend credit. Research establishing the importance of the
lending channel is voluminous; Kashyap and Stein’s (2000) is among the most
convincing papers. Stein (2010) explains how the bank lending channel can account for
investment reductions during the crisis.
There are two additional ideas of how fire sales of securities and the reductions in
the net worth of banks can undermine investment. Price dislocations resulting from fire
sales influence bank decisions about whether to lend to real investment projects, to hold
cash, or to pursue other financial investments. Fire sales may increase the attractiveness
of the alternatives to financing real investment.
One key alternative is for a bank to hold cash and “keep its powder dry” because
it might need cash in the future. The idea that banks might want to hoard liquidity has
been around for awhile, going back to Keynes’ description of “liquidity preference” as an
alternative to real investment. In the context of asset fire sales, in Shleifer and Vishny
(1997), we discuss “the hold back effect,” whereby financial investors might hoard cash
if the possibility of deepening mispricing and improving arbitrage opportunities seems
likely. Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) describe liquidity hoarding as a precaution firms or
banks use against future liquidity needs.

Caballero and Simsek (2010) present an

24

argument for cash hoarding when banks face uncertainty about the solvency of other
banks they are dealing with. Several recent papers have looked at these issues in firesales models, emphasizing macroeconomic consequences of cash hoarding (Acharya,
Shin, and Yorulmazer, forthcoming; Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2010; Diamond and
Rajan, 2010).

Consistent with these studies, there is compelling evidence that banks

sharply increased their holdings of cash and deposits with the Federal Reserve in 2009,
presumably at the expense of lending (He, Kang, and Krishanmurthy, 2010).
In Shleifer and Vishny (2010a), we alternatively argue that real investment must
compete with investment in financial assets when bank capital is scarce. We start with
the observation that fire sales of assets by deleveraging financial institutions, such as
banks, drive the prices of those assets below fundamental values. If price dislocation is
extreme enough, banks will choose to invest in underpriced assets rather than lend money
to firms, and real investment will suffer. The evidence presented by He, Kang, and
Krishnamurthy (2010) and Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010) is consistent with the
prediction that banks have used spare balance sheet capacity, including capital injections
from the government, to buy securities rather than to lend in the wake of the financial
crisis.
The mechanisms we have described focus on the social costs of fire sales after
they have occurred.

But presumably if market participants consider the possibility of

fire sales before they arise, the conditions of borrowing and lending should reflect the
risks of fire sales. In this situation, there might be no social losses from pecuniary
externalities, and no over-borrowing relative to the social optimum. Several studies have
however argued that this is not so. Lorenzoni (2008) shows that when firms ignore the

25

effect of fire sales on other firms, the level of borrowing need not be socially efficient.
Stein (2010) begins with the crucial observation that, prior to the crisis, many of the
securitized mortgages were essentially transformed by financial intermediaries into
shorter-term securities, such as commercial paper, that were subsequently sold to
investors. In his model, this demand from money market funds for safe short-term assets
drove the securitization process and made it profitable. Stein then shows that, because
the consequences of fire sales of securities are not fully internalized by banks, the
creation of short-term assets was excessive from the social point of view.
An alternative approach to explaining why leverage is socially excessive is to
drop the assumption of rational expectations. In Shleifer and Vishny (2010a), we focus
on investor optimism in the securitized loan market as a precursor of a crisis. As banks
make and securitize loans to cater to investor demand, the incentives of even fully
rational banks lead to overexpansion of lending and excessive leverage in good times, but
then fire sales and credit crunches in bad times.

Such credit crunches create real

efficiency losses when good investment projects are not financed.
In Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (forthcoming), we also dispense with rational
expectations, but argue alternatively that during the period of growing home prices and
securitization, market participants neglected the risk that home prices could collapse,
leading to defaults even on AAA-rated securities.

We show that this neglect of small

risks could have led to the massive assumption of such risks by risk-averse investors,
who then fled to safety when they became aware of the risks they were bearing.
The punch line of this analysis is that the sidelining of natural buyers in fire sales
can lead to declines in asset prices and the net worth of financial institutions, which in

26

turn trigger cuts in lending. Fear of future fire sales likewise encourages financial
institutions to hoard cash rather than finance investment. The fire-sales mechanism thus
entails real, and not just financial, consequences.

Policy Implications
Economic theory suggests the possibility of efficiency losses from fire sales.
Before the event, banks might expand their balance sheets excessively if they or investors
make mistakes or if they fail to take into account the social cost of fire sales. After the
event, fire sales undermine the ability of financial institutions and firms to lend and to
borrow by reducing their net worth. The presence of externalities provides a justification
for policy interventions.
Some policies aim to reduce the chances of a fire-sale scenario arising. Examples
of such policies include increases in the capital cushions of financial firms and
improvements in the plumbing of the financial system (French et al., 2010; Hanson,
Kashyap, and Stein, in this issue).

Likewise, policies such as mandating higher haircuts

and margins in derivative markets aim to stop the cycle of deleveraging and fire sales
before it starts.
Here, we focus on policies that seek to contain and limit the effects of fire sales
that are already underway. When the government reacts to a fire sale in progress, what
should it be seeking to accomplish, and what type of intervention is most likely to be
beneficial? During fire sales, many key financial institutions such as banks are sidelined
due to their inability to access capital. In this setting, two distinct ways to increase bank
lending and real investment have been proposed: 1) the government can lend to banks

27

against risky collateral; 2) the government can purchase assets directly or provide
subsidies targeted at the purchasers of certain assets.
The relative merits of these two types of interventions have been addressed, albeit
briefly, in the recent literature. Diamond and Rajan (2010) support liquidity injections
into the banking system over government asset purchases on the grounds that the
government is not able to judge whether asset prices are truly dislocated. Conversely,
they argue that misguided government purchases could distort asset prices in other
directions and even result in losses. On the other side, in Shleifer and Vishny (2010b), we
argue that liquidity injections into the banking system may not increase asset prices or
lead to new lending to firms. Instead, banks may engage in precautionary hoarding of
liquidity or may purchase assets but still leave their prices well below the level at which
new lending becomes attractive. A further problem with providing loans or equity to
banks is that the government may end up supporting institutions that ultimately fail and
perhaps encourage some of the desperate intermediaries to gamble with government
funds by taking on more risk. Security purchases can address asset price dislocations
directly, without providing extra subsidies to weak or irresponsible banks.

To avoid

overpaying for assets, government purchases could target potentially less-toxic asset
classes, with greater prospects of reviving new lending in the short run and a lower
chance of government losses.
The idea of the government buying financial assets may seem suspicious to a
number of economists. After all, most economists would not think of the government
buying airplanes, even during a fire sale. But buying financial assets during a fire-sale
crisis is very different from buying airplanes.

28

First, financial markets have more

systemic implications for the rest of the economy than markets for used airplanes.
Restoring the balance sheets of banks would unlock the lending channel in a way that
restoring the balance sheets of airlines would not. Second, the government would be a
terrible owner of airplanes, unable to negotiate leases nearly as efficiently as the private
sector. In contrast, the Federal Reserve might be a reasonably efficient owner of certain
fixed-income securities, especially if it can mostly avoid buying “lemons” by purchasing
the relatively safe ones.
How does the Federal Reserve know that some securities are cheap, rather than
reflecting a high risk of insolvency of underlying issuers? Of course, it can never know
for sure, but in the aftermath of the Lehman bankruptcy in September 2008, there were
many striking indications that illiquidity was a problem.

For example, 10-year

government agency bonds that the Fed ended up buying were yielding up to 170 basis
points more than similar duration Treasury bonds. This compares to a normal spread on
agency paper of 10 to 30 basis points. In many other markets, wide credit spreads for the
highest quality borrowers pointed to illiquidity rather than fundamental problems. Even
setting credit spreads aside, the Federal Reserve witnessed the near implosions of
commercial paper and repo markets, effectively sidelining natural buyers who relied on
these markets to finance purchases of risky debt.

This too seems to point to fire sales

and illiquidity rather than pure solvency problems.
U.S. government policies in response to the financial crisis and to fire sales in
particular took various forms. The government bailed out some financial institutions, but
also lent money against risky collateral and bought some assets.

Prior to the Lehman

bankruptcy in September 2008, liquidity provision to financial institutions was the

29

dominant strategy; in 2009, purchases of agency debt became important. We do not
know which one of these strategies was ultimately effective in arresting the crisis in
spring 2009, although it does appear that pure liquidity injections and rescues of
institutions in 2008 were insufficient to stop the slide.

Federal Reserve Chairman

Bernanke (2009) described the Fed policy of credit easing in winter 2009, and his
justifications seem to largely correspond to the analysis of fire sales presented here. In
Shleifer and Vishny (2010b), we describe the virtuous circle and the multipliers that arise
from government security purchases as market liquidity improves.
What emerges most clearly from the fire-sales models is the complementarity
between tough preventive policies to reduce the risk of fire sales and soft policies when a
fire sale and financial crisis is underway. The basic prescription of these models is for
the government to intervene in markets to stop fire sales quickly, because failure to do so
can severely harm the financial system and the economy as a whole. Although the choice
is a controversial one, we think there is a case for the government supporting purchases
of dislocated securities by market participants, or even buying them directly, rather than
supporting weak or poorly run financial institutions. But this type of softness in the face
of an actual crisis works best when combined with safeguards that minimize the chance
that the banking system becomes engulfed in fire sales.

30

Bibliography
Acharya, Viral V., Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez. 2010. “Securitization
Without Risk Transfer.” Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1364525.
Acharya, Viral V., Hyun Song Shin, and Tanju Yorulmazer . Forthcoming. “Crisis
Resolution and Bank Liquidity.” Review of Financial Studies.
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Shin. 2010. “The Changing Nature of Financial
Intermediation and the Financial Crisis of 2007–2009.” Annual Review of Economics,
vol. 2, pg 603–618.
Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton. 1992. “An Incomplete Contracts Approach to
Financial Contracting.” Review of Economic Studies, 59(3): 473–94.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. 1994. “Limited Market Participation and Volatility
of Asset Prices.” American Economic Review, 84(4): 933–55.
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Dirk Heckbarth. 2009. “Liquidity Mergers.”
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1362327.
Asquith, Paul, Robert Gertner, and David S. Scharfstein. 1994. “Anatomy of
Financial Distress: An Examination of Junk Bond Issuers.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109(3): 625–58.
Baird, Douglas G. 1986. “The Uneasy Case for Corporate Reorganization.” Journal of
Legal Studies, 15(1): 127–47.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman. 2008. “Collateral Pricing.” Journal of
Financial Economics, 91(3): 339–60.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman. 2009. “Liquidation Values and the
Credibility of Financial Contract Renegotiation: Evidence from U.S. Airlines.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 123(4): 1635–77.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman. Forthcoming. “Bankruptcy and the
Collateral Channel.” Journal of Finance.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2009. “The Crisis and the Policy Response.” Speech, Stamp Lecture
at the London School of Economics, London, January 13, 2009.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan Blinder. 1988. “Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand.”
American Economic Review, 78(2): 435–39.

31

Bernanke Ben S., and Mark Gertler. 1989. “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
Fluctuations.” American Economic Review, 79(1): 14–31.
Brunnermeier, Markus. 2009. “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–08.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1): 77–100.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse H. Pedersen. 2009. “Market Liquidity and Funding
Liquidity.” Review of Financial Studies, 22(6): 2201–38.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Yuliy Sannikov. 2010. “A Macroeconomic Model with a
Financial Sector.”
http://www.princeton.edu/~markus/research/papers/macro_finance.pdf.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Alp Simsek. 2010. “Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity.”
MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 09-28. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1496592.
Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. Forthcoming. “Forced Sales
and House Prices.” American Economic Review.
Campello, Murillo, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey. 2010. “The Real
Effects of Financial Constraints: Evidence from a Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial
Economics, 97(3): 470–87.
Carlson, John, Joseph G. Haubrick, Kent Cherney, and Sarah Wakefield. 2009.
“Credit Easing: A Policy for a Time of Financial Crisis.” Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland. http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/trends/2009/0209/02monpol.cfm.
Coval, Joshua D., Jakub W. Jurek, and Erik Stafford. 2009. “The Economics of
Structured Finance.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1): 3–25.
Coval, Joshua D., and Erik Stafford. 2007. “Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity
Markets.” Journal of Financial Economics, 86(2): 479–512.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2010. “Fear of Fire Sales and the
Credit Freeze.” NBER Working Paper 14925.
Djankov, Simeon, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “Debt
Enforcement around the World.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(6): 1105–49.
Dong, Lou. 2010. “A Flow-Based Explanation for Return Predictability.” Available at
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1468382.

32

Edwards, Franklin. 1999. “Hedge Funds and the Collapse of Long Term Capital
Management.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(2): 189–210.
Ellul, Andrew, Pab Jotikasthira, and Christian T. Lundblad. 2010. “Regulatory
Pressure and Fire Sales in the Corporate Bond Market.” Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1362182.
Fisher, Irving. 1933. “The Debt Deflation Theory of the Great Depression.”
Econometrica, vol. 1, pp. 337–57.
French, Kenneth R., et al. 2010. The Squam Lake Report. Princeton University Press:
Princeton, NJ.
Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse H. Pedersen. 2010. “Margin-based Asset Pricing and
Deviations from the Law of One Price.”
http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~lpederse/papers/MarginPricingLoOP.pdf.
Geanakoplos, John. 2003. “Liquidity, Default, and Crashes: Endogenous Contracts in
General Equilibrium.” In Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and
Applications, Eighth World Congress, Vol. II, ed. Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter
Hansen, and Stephen J Turnovksy, 170–205. Cambridge University Press.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. Forthcoming. “Neglected
Risks, Financial Innovation, and Financial Fragility.” Journal of Financial Economics.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick. 2010. “Securitized Banking and the Run on
Repo.” NBER Working Paper 15223.
Greenwood, Robin, and David Thesmar. 2009. “Stock Price Fragility.” Harvard
Business School Research Paper 1490734. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1490734.
Gromb, Denis, and Dimitri Vayanos. 2002. “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with
Financially Constrained Arbitrageurs.” Journal of Financial Economics, 66(2–3): 361–
407.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver Hart. 1988. “One Share–One Vote and the Market
for Corporate Control.” Journal of Financial Economics, 20(1/2): 175–202.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Merton H. Miller. 1988. “Liquidity and Market Structure.”
Journal of Finance, 43(3): 617–33.
Hart, Oliver. 1993. “Theories of Optimal Capital Structure: A Managerial Discretion
Perspective.” In The Deal Decade: What Takeovers and Leveraged Buyouts Mean for
Corporate Governance, ed. Margaret Blair. Washington, DC : The Brookings Institution.
33

Hart, Oliver. 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. 1994. “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of
Human Capital.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4): 841–79.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. 1995. “Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of
Hard Claims in Constraining Management.” American Economic Review, 85(3): 567–85.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. 1998. “Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of
Debt.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 1–41.
He, Zhigou, In Gu Kang, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2010. “Balance Sheet
Adjustments in the 2008 Crisis.” IMF Economic Review, 58(1): 118–56.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1998. “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity.”
Journal of Political Economy, 106(1): 1–40.
Ivashina, Victoria, and David S. Scharfstein. 2010. “Bank Lending during the
Financial Crisis of 2008.” Journal of Financial Economics, 97(3): 319–38.
Jarrow, Robert, Li Li, Mark Mesler, and Donald van Deventer. 2007. “CDO
Valuation: Fact and Fiction.” Kamakura Corporation Paper. (Privately printed working
paper.)
Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Christian T. Lundblad, and Tarun Ramadorai. 2009.
“Asset Fire Sales and Purchases and the International Transmission of Financial Shocks.”
CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP7595. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1533200.
Kahle, Kathleen, and Rene M. Stulz. 2010. “Financial Policies and the Financial Crisis:
How Important Was the Systemic Credit Contraction for Industrial Corporations?”
NBER Working Paper 16310.
Kashyap, K. Anil, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2000. “What Do a Million Observations on
Banks Say about the Transmission of Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review,
90(3): 407–28.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political
Economy, 105(2): 211–48.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind. 2010. “How Debt Markets Have Malfunctioned in the Crisis.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(1): 3–28.

34

Lorenzoni, Guido. 2008. “Inefficient Credit Booms.” Review of Economic Studies,
75(3): 809–33.
Mitchell, Mark, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino. 2007. “Slow Moving Capital.”
American Economic Review, 97(2): 215–20.
Mitchell, Mark, and Todd Pulvino. 2010. “Arbitrage Crashes and the Speed of
Capital.” Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1628261.
Modigliani, Franco, and Merton Miller. 1958. “The Cost of Capital, Corporation
Finance and the Theory of Investment.” American Economic Review, 48(3): 261–97.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas Majluf. 1984. “Corporate Financing and Investment
Decisions When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have.” Journal of
Financial Economics, 13(2): 187–221.
Ortiz-Molina, Hernán, and Gordon M. Phillips. 2010. “Asset Liquidation and the Cost
of Capital.” NBER Working Paper 15992.
Pulvino, Todd. 1998. “Do Fire-Sales Exist? An Empirical Study of Commercial Aircraft
Transactions.” Journal of Finance, 53(3): 939–78
Pozsar, Zoltan, Tobias Adrian, Adam Ashcraft, and Hayley Boesky. 2010. “Shadow
Banking.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 458.
Schligemann, Fredrik P., René M. Stulz, and Ralph A. Walkling. 2002. “Divestitures
and the Liquidity of the Market for Corporate Assets.” Journal of Financial Economics,
64(1): 117–44.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1990. “The Noise Trader Approach to
Finance.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4(2): 19–33.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1992. “Liquidation Values and Debt
Capacity: A Market Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of Finance, 47(4): 1343–66.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. “The Limits of Arbitrage.” Journal of
Finance, 52(1): 35–55.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 2010a. “Unstable Banking.” Journal of
Financial Economics, 97(3): 303–18.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 2010b. “Asset Fire Sales and Credit Easing.”
American Economic Review, 100(2): 46–50.

35

Stein, Jeremy C. 2010. “Monetary Policy as a Financial-Stability Regulation.”
http://www.economics.harvard.edu/files/faculty/57_Monetary%20Policy%20as%20Regulation%
20April%202010.pdf.

Stromberg, Per. 2000. “Conflicts of Interest and Illiquidity in Bankruptcy Auctions:
Theory and Tests.” Journal of Finance, 55(6): 2641–91.
Townsend, Robert M. 1979. “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly
State Verification.” Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2): 1011–46.
United States Treasury. 2009. Public–Private Investment Program. Press Release,
March 29.
Williamson, Oliver. 1988. “Corporate Finance and Corporate Governance.” Journal of
Finance, 43(3): 567–91.

36

