                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DOMESTIC VIOLENCE:
                      A NON-RANDOM AFFAIR


                        Helen V. Tauchen

                          Ann D. Witte

                         Sharon K. Long



                     Working Paper No. 1665




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 1985




The research presented in this paper was supported by a grant from
the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). We gratefully
acknowledge this support; however, NIMH's support for this work
should in no way indicate the organization's aggreement with our
approach or conclusions. We would also like to thank Richard Berk
for his valuable comments on an earlier draft, David Ruppert for
providing us with a bounded influence regression program, and
Margaret Hazen and Mary Kokoski for programming assistance. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #1665
                                       July 1985




                      Domestic Violence:
                      A Non—random Affair
                            ABSTRACT



     In this paper, we develop and estimate a model of violence

between romantically linked men and women. Physical violence is

viewed as both a source of direct gratification and as an instrument

for controlling the victim's behavior. Our model is a Stackleberg

type model in which the assailant maximizes expected utility subject

to the stochastic reaction function of the victim. Our model is

estimated by a bounded—influence regression technique because the

process generating violence appears to lead to a heavy—tailed error

distribution.

     Our empirical results suggest that increases in the assailants

(i.e. the male's) income serve to increase violence, while increases

in the proportion of the year that he is employed serve to decrease

violence. Further, the employment effect is larger than the income

effect. y way of contrast, our results suggest that the effect of

a change in the female's employment or income depends heavily on

her economic status relative to the male's. Finally,we find that

improvements in the female's opportunites outside the relationship

significantly reduce the level of violence.



 Helen V. Tauchen                                 Ann D. Witte
 Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
 University of North Carolina                     Wellesley College
 Chapel Hill, NC 27514                            Wellesley, MA 02181

                           Sharon K. Long
                           Mathematica Policy Research Inc.
                           600 Maryland Ave., S.W.
                           Suite 550
                           Washington, D.C. 20024
I.   Introduction

     In the jast two decades economists have widened their areas of

interest to such non—market activities as marriage, divorce, and

crime.' Following in this tradition, we have applied work on the

economics of the family and the economics of crime to an issue which

is currently receiving widespread national attention, namely, the

issue of domestic violence.2'3

     There is rather extensive evidence that violence within the

family is neither new nor uncommon. The most comprehensive and

nationally representative data available indicate that 16 percent of

u.s. households (married or cohabitating couples) experienced

physical violence in the 12 months prior to the survey and 28

percent experience violence at some time during their relationship

 (Strauss, GelleS and Steinmetz, 1980). In recognition of the

breadth and scope of the problem the Attorney
                                                Generals Task Force

on Family Violence advises that we must admit that family violence

 is found at every level of our social structure   (William L. Hart,

 et al., 1984, iv).

      In this paper we develop and estimate a model of violence

 between romantically—linked men and women.   Physical violence is

 viewed as both a source of direct gratification (e.g., direct

 enjoyment of the pain of another person or release of frustration)

 and as an instrument for controlling the victims behavior. Our

 model is a Stackelberg type model in which the assailant maximizes

 expected utility subject to the stochastic reaction function of the

 victim. Randomness is an essential feature of a model in which




                                   1
violence occurs for instrumental purposes. In a deterministic

model, the do: nant decision maker cm easily exploit the other

person's reaction function, and credible threats of violence can be

sufficient to control behavior. Our theoretical model differs from

dictatorial bargaining models of family decision making and from

classical principal—agent models in that the dominant partner does

not assure the other individual some minimum level of well—being.

In contrast to these models, the dominant partner in our model

accepts some probability that his or her decisions will result in

the other person (agent) leaving the relationship.

     Our model is estimated by a bounded—influence regression

technique which limits the influence of small subsets of data on the

estimated parameters. We choose such a technique because the nature

of violence and early regression results both suggest a heavy—tailed

error distribution.

     To briefly summarize our empirical results, we find that

increases in the assailant's (in our sample the male's) income serve

to increase violence, while increases in the proportion of the year

that he is employed serve to decrease the level of violence.

Further, the employment effect is larger than the income effect. If

the median male in our sample were to work one additional month and

earn his average monthly salary, the number of violent incidents

would fall significantly. By way of contrast, our re..ilts suggest

that the effect of a change in the female's employment or income

depends heavily on her economic status relative to the male's. For

example, if the male's income is low and the female's high, then




                                  2
further increases in the female's income serve to increase violence

significantly. Finally, we find that improvements in the female's

opportunities outside the relationship significantly reduce the

level of violence. This finding is quite interesting theoretically

since it supports the contention that opportunities outside te

family affect the distribution of resources within the family. If

external opportunities matter, bargaining models, such as the one

developed in this paper, are more relevant than more traditional

neo—classical models of family decision—making such as those

developed by Becker.

     The outline of the paper is as follows. In the next section,

we briefly survey the relevant theoretical and empirical

literatures, and in Section III we develop our model of domestic

violence. We next, in Section IV, describe our data and present our

empirical model. Section V contains our empirical results and the

final section our conclusions.


II. The Literature

     The existing literature on domestic violence is primarily

descriptive with few attempts to model family situations that lead

to violence4. In their summary of the National Conference for

Family Violence Research, Finkelbor, et al. indicate a need to link

 the study of forms of family violence and abuse to more

well—established research literatures and the need for systematiC

theory building and testings (Firiklehor, et al., 1983, p. 12). The

work undertaken in this paper is in part a response to these

suggestions.



                                  3
     when developing our model we draw heavily on the economic

literatures that model criminal activity and family decirion

making. Both of these literatures have been heavily influenced by

Becker's pioneering work (Becker, 1968., 1973, 1974). In his 1968

article on crime Becker posits that an individual comlnits an

offense if the expected utility to him exceeds the utility he could

get by using his time and other resources in other activities

(Becker, 1968, p. 176). Since 1968, Becker's model of crime has

been extended and tested empirically. However, economic models of

crime have by and large remained models of purely individual

behavior.5 Only for crimes against persons, such as murder, is

the interaction between individuals considered. Even in these

cases, the model is often structured as an individual optimization

problem. For example, in Ehrlich's model of murder the interaction

between the murderer and the victim is handled by having the

victim's well—being enter the murderer's utility function (Ehrlich,

1975). The problem then reduces to one with a single individual,

the murderer, as the decision maker.

     By way of contrast, the family decision making literature has

as its focus relationships between individuals. Models of family

decision making are of two basic types: (1) models such as those

developed by Sainuelson (1956) and Becker (1973, 1974) that posit a

single Utility function for the family, and (2) bargaining models

which use game theoretic approaches.6




                                  4
     Bargaining models of family decision making have been developed

quite recently (see Manser and Brown, 1980 and McElroy and Homey,

1981). In these models the best opportunity for each individual

outside the re1ations:ip establishes a minimum acceptable position

within the relationship. Unlike models such as Becker's that posit

one family utility function, the bargaining models assume that the

family members have conflicting preferences and postulate an

explicit bargaining structure to resolve conflicts. In bargaining

models that, treat the individuals in the relationship symmetrically,

the outcome of the process is generally a Nash or a

Kalai—SmorOdiflskY equilibrium. The alternative dictatorial

bargaining models identify one individual as the dominant partner

and impose a Stackelberg equilibrium; the dominant partner maximizes

his or her utility subject to a constraint that the more submissive

partner receives the minimally acceptable utility level for which

the person will remain in the relationship.

     The usual dictatorial bargaining model is in some respects

appropriate for representing the behavior in violent relationships.

As a bargaining model, it allows the male and female to have

differing objectives as would seem likely in such relationships.

The nonsymnietric treatment of family members in the dictatorial

model is consistent with empirical evidence indicating that the male

tends to be the dominant partner and the aggressor when violence
          7,8
occurs.

     Our reading of the family violence and sociology literatures

suggests, however, that even the usual dictatorial bargaining model




                                   S
does not adequately capture all the essential aspects of violent

relationships. Violent relationships, even more than other

relationships, tend to be unstable.9 In terms of a dictatorial

bargaining model, this means that the dominant person does not

necessarily assure the other person the minimum utility level

required for the individual to stay.

     An additional complication in considering family violence and

in relating it to other models of criminal activity is that the

crime may not be an end in and of itself. The violence may also be

a means of exercising control over the victim's behavior. In terms

of the general literature on violence, the violence is both

expressive and instrumental. Expressive violence provides an

assailant with direct gratification; the gratification may result

simply from pleasure in inflicting harm, or it may be the result of

some indirect psychic improvement such as would occur if an

individual relieved pent—up frustrations by striking out. By way of

contrast, instrumental violence is used as a method of obtaining

some other desired end, for example, forcing the victim to behave as

desired by the assailant. The existing literature strongly

indicates that domestic violence occurs for both instrumental and

expressive reasons, and we seek to incorporate both motivations in

our model.


 III. The Theoretical Model

     Consistent with the existing evidence, we assume that the male,

 the dominant partner and assailant in the relationship, has




                                  6
expressive and instrumental motives for inflicting violence.    To

incorporate expressive violence we allow the level of violence to

enter the male's utility function directly. Incorporating

instrumental violence in the model is more difficult. We see the

male as attempting to impose certain types of behavior on his

partner. He does this by setting rules of behavior for his partner

and credibly threatening violence if these rules are not obeyed.

These rules might cover a number of aspects of behavior including

the use of financial funds, contact with friends and other family

members, and the provision of services within the home or ñirectiy

to the male.

     The male makes his choices in order to maximize his expected

utility. To focus on violent aspects of the relationship we assume

that his utility, if the relationship remains intact, depends only

upon the level of services provided by his partner (z), the level of

violence he inflicts on his partner (v), and the level of sanctions

against him as a result of his violent behavior (Cm). His utility

is an increasing function of the level of services and a decreasing

function of the sanctions. His utility may be an increasing or a

decreasing (eventually) function of the violence. The male

determines rules of behavior for his partner and the violence level

that will result if his rules are disobeyed. In its simplest form,

the rules may be expressed as a minimum level of the services that

he requires, , and the violence he will inflict if she disobeys,

    and if she obeys, v°. The rule—setting is affected by his

expectations concerning his partner's and external agents' reactions

to his decisions and the resulting violence.


                                  7
     Modeling the male's expectations concerning his partner's

reactions to his rules and the violence requires some care and leads

to an interesting discovery. in models where the male knows the

female's reaction with certainty [i.e., knows for any rule (z,

v°) whether the female will obey, disobey, or leave], no

instrumental violence will be observed. in such models, the male

sets the rules in such a way that it is never optimal for the female

to disobey. She will either stay in the relationship and obey the

rules or she will leave.10 See Tauchen, Long and Witte (1983).

     In order to allow for instrumental violence, we assume that the

male's expectation of the female's utility has a random component.

The random element may result from the inability of any one

individual to know the preferences and alternatives of another, or

from truly random elements in the female's behavior. We assume that

the male has a perceived joint probability density function, g, for

a random variable in the female's utility function if she remairs in

the relationship ()   and for her utility in the best   alternative

outside the relationship (it).   The male does not know the

realized values of the random variables when he makes the rules; the

female knows the value when she chooses whether to obey, disobey, or

leave.

     It is somewhat simpler to model the uncertainty arising from

intervention by external agents as a result of the male's violence.

Existing evidence indicates that external intervention often takes

non—monetary forms such as the disapproval of friends. To     reflect
this, we see the costs of external intervention as entering the




                                  8
male's and the female's utility functions directly. Although the

male is the culprit, external intervention may impose costs on the

female as a result of exposing the violent nature of the family or

as a result of direct court cost and legal fees paid from family

income. Eoth the expected probability of external intervention (71)

and the costs to the male (Cm) and to the female     () are

increasing functions of the level of violence.

     In the remaind€r of this section we describe: (1) the female's

choice problem in order to show how the probabilities of

disobedience, obedience, and leaving are affected by his rules; (2)

the male's choice problem in terms of setting the rules; and (3) the

properties of the resulting Stackelberg equilibrium. The female's

Utility if she remains in the relationship is:
                              f        f
                             U (z, v, c , c

where      denotes the female's utility function and     is the value

of the random variable in her preferences (at least as perceived by

the male). Her utility is an eventually decreasing function of the

level of services and a decreasing functior of violence and the

random variable      •   To simplify our work we assume that the

marginal utility of violence is a decreasing function of the random

variable

        Given her partner's rules, the female's choices are to disobey,

obey, or leave. If she disobeys, the female incurs violence,

and chooses the level of services to maxrnize her expected utility,

where her uncertainty results fom the possibility of external

intervention. Her expected utility if she disobeys, is:




                                      9
       f,d d          d                  d f d          d            f d
     EU        (z , V     ,   ) • ii   (V )U (z ,   V       ,    c    (V ),   C   )   +

                                 (1—ri   (vd))Uf(z,             vd, 0, c )                         (1)
where d denotes the optimal level of services if she disobeys.

     The female's second possible choice is to obey. The level of

ser ices must be at least , and in the interesting case the

required level of the services acts as a binding constraint on her

behavior. Her expected utility if she obeys is defined analogously

to (1) above.

     The female's third potential choice is to leave, in which case

the woman's best alternative yields her utility level                                        For any

realized values of the random variables,                             and          the     woman

compares the maximum utility levels if she obeys, disobeys, or

leaves and makes the choice that gives her the highest expected

utility.

     As noted earlier, the male, like the female, seeks to maximize

expected utility. However, the males problem is more complicated

than the female's as he has to estimate the probability that the

female will make each of her potential choices. He estimates these

probabilities from his perceived joint probability density function

on the random variables, g. Formally, the male seeks to:

         Max       Hum        pdEUm,d + POEUTh,O + plum
     ,     vd,   v0
            ,d
where ELI        and EU'° denote the male's expected utility if the

female disobeys and obeys, ?              is   the male's level of utility in
                                               d   o        1
his best alternative to the relationship, and P , P , and P

denote the male's expectation concerning the probability that the

female disobeys, obeys and leaves the relationship, respectively.




                                               10
The male's expected utilities are defined analogous to the

female's. The male's expectation that the female will disobey is:
          ——
          c (z, v', V
                           d
                        ) EU, (zd       vd
                                                                   d
               f
                                    ,         ,

        =                               .1.       g(c   ,   U)dc

where    is the value of r for which the female is indifferent

between disobeying and obeying given the required level of services

and the threatened violence levels. His expectations of p0 and

   are defined analogously.

     Given the above model, we can determine the first order

conditions for n optimum.     (See Tauchen, Long, and Witte, 1983,

for this derivation.) Even with rather strong assumptions on the

form of the utility functions (e.g., additive separability) and on

the probability density function, the signs for the comparative

static results are ambiguous. For example, consider the effects of

an improvement in the woman's opportunities outside the relationship

(e.g., greater support from public or private agencies). Such an

improvement has two distinct and opposing effects on the threatened

level of violence, even in the simplest case where violence is used

only for instrumental purposes. First, when the woman has better

opportunities, violence becomes a less effective means of obtaining

obedience. Threatening violence is less likely to induce her to

obey rather than disobey, and the optimal level of threatened

violence falls. Second, with an improvement in her opportunities,

the probability that she stays, ceteris paribus, is lower. Thus the

probability that the relationship remains intact and that the male

inflicts violence and bears the costs associated with violence are




                                        11
less. With a lower probability of bearing the cost, the optimal

level of threatened violence rises. The relative magnitude of these

two effects is ambiguous, and thus the effect of an improvement in

her opportunities on the level of violence is an empirical question.


IV. The npirical Model and Data

     The theoretical model presented in the previous section has two

important implications for empirical work. First, the model

suggests three jointly determined, reduced form equations: one each

for the level of rule setting, disobedience, and violence. There is

no identified structural system in which any of these endogenous

variables appear as right hand side variables. Second, the model

implies that all exogenous factors in the model enter all
             11
equations.        The exogenous variables in the model are of four

basic types:      (1) variables reflecting the characteristics of the

relationship (e.g., number of children, family income); (2)

variables reflecting the male's and female's situation if the

relationship were dissolved (e.g., whether the couple is married,

number of young children); (3) variables reflecting the tastes and

prefer-nces of the male and female (e.g., racial/ethnic group, age);

and (4) variables affecting the probability and cost of external

intervention as a result of the violence.

     The data used in the empirical analysis are from interviews

with 125 women who had been physically abused by their male,

romantic partners. The interviews were conducted in 1982 and 1983

with women recruited in Santa Barbara County, California. Most of




                                    12
the women (60 percent) were identifiei by personnel of local

shelters for battered women or a special victim/witness assistance

program in the county district attorneys office.   The remainder

were recruited through personal contacts of interviewers,

counselorS, lawyers, Catholic service agencies, classes, or using

snowball sampling techniques. Care was taken to achieve accurate

results by conducting the interviews face—to—face soon after the

women were identified and by paying a nominal amount ($25).

     While this data set is not idea for studying domestic violence,

it represents one of the most extensive and complete data sets

currently available for studying this sensitive and important

topic. We believe that results we obtain using these data provide

interesting insights concerning our model, but generalizations must

await more representative data sets.

     Table 1 contains a list of the endogeflous and exogenous

variables used in our empirical work and descriptive statistics for

the variables. The measure of violence is the number of violent

incidents that the women reported to have occurred in the 6 months

prior to the interview. The measure of male rule setting is the

number of areas in which the female reported that the male set rules

with which she disagrees.12 The measure of diobedience is the

number of areas in which the male sets rules and the female both

disagrees and disobeys.

     The exogenous variables are divided into an economic and a

noneconomic category in Tale 1. The economic category includes the

males and feniales income and employment. AFDC payments are not




                                  13
attributed either to the male or female. Under California's AFDC—U

program the male may receive payment while the family s intact;

however, the female is more likely to receive the payments if the

family were- to dissolve.

     Careful consideration of our measure of male employment led us

to delete 14 aged and disabled men from our data set. We did this

to allow unambiguous interpretation of a value of zero for the male

employment variable as indicating uneinloyment of an able—bodied male.

     The noneconomic category include sociodemographic variables

(e.g., age and race), variables which measure the characteristics of

the relationship and costs of ending it (e.g., the number of

children, marital status), and variables reflecting the

opportunities available to the male and female if the relationship

were ended (e.g., the number of children less than six and the

availability of alternative living arrangements for the female).

     The coefficients on the racial/ethnic variables must be

interpreted with care as they may well incorporate indirect as well

as direct effe:ts on violence. The indirect effects result from the

potential relationship between the male's and female's racial/ethnic

group and the probability of arrest for an incident of domestic

violence in Santa Barbara County. We discovered this indirect

effect while working with a Santa Barbara data set collected in

1978. This data set had information on whether or not an arrest

occurred as a result of an incident of domestic violence. Using

these data, we estimated a model for the probability of arrest.13

Most variables sign.ficantly related to the probability of arrest




                                 14
related to the nature of the violent incident. These variables are

endogenous to our model of violence and, thus, should not enter the

reduced form equations that we estimate. However, our results also

indicated that black males and males with minority female partners

are significantly more likely to be arrested than are other males.

Racial/ethnic variables are clearly exogenous to the model and,

thus, should enter the reduced forms not only because different

racial/ethnic groups my have different proclivities for violence

(the direct effect), but also because it appears that they face

different probabilities of arrest (an indirect effect).


V.   npirical Results

     We began by examining OLS and Tobit results for the violence

equation with all the variables listed in the second part of Table 1

appearing in linear form. The Tobit technique was considered

because the endogenous variable, the number of violent incidents

during the six month period, is censored at zero. In our sample,

the number of violent incidents ranges from zero (14 percent of the

sample) to 180 (daily beatings for 2 percent of the sample). The

correct specification of a model with a censored dependent variable

depends on the extent of censoring and the conditional distribution

of the non—censored observations. Recent Monte Carlo results

suggest that when it is reasonable to assume a truncated normal

distribution for non—censored observations, OLS and Tobit analyses

produce virtually identical results when the concentration at the
                                                               14
censoring point does not exceed 20 to 25 percent of the sample.




                                 15
Comparing the estimated OLS and Tobit parameters for our model

confirms this result. To our concern, however, both techniques

yield a number of abnormally large Studentized residuals. There are

several possible explanations: (1) data errors, (2) misspecifica—

tion of the model due to omitted variables or incorrect functional

form, and (3) incorrect distributional assumptions.

     We checked for data errors using techniques developed by

Beisley, Kuh and Welsch (1980). Given the extensive hand and

computer cleanin of the data, it was surprising to us to find six

observations where anrwers to questions were inconsistent. We were

able to correct two of these errors by going back to the coding

forms and were forced to delete four other inconsistent observations

from our sample.

     To examine the specification of the model we checked various

plots of the residuals but found no patterns suggestive of omitted

variables. Nor did careful consideration of the characteristics of

the outlying observations suggest any additional independent

variables. We did note, however, that for most of the outlying data

points the frequency of violence was high (> 20 incidents in a six

month period). As a final check for omitted variables we altered

the measures of some independent variables and added other variables

to our specification. The coefficients on the new variables were

either insignificant or less significant than the alternative

measure in our previous specification.5




                                16
     To explore the possibility that we had used an incorrect

functional form, we added quadratic and interaction terms for all

economic variables. The new specification for the economic

variables can, of course, oe considered a second order approximation

to any non—linear form. Given our sample size it was :ot possible

to consider second order approximations for the non—economic

variables.

     in all specifications considered, normal probability plots of

the Studentized residuals reveal an upper tail that is thicker than

can be accounted for by a normal distribution. We believe that the

process generating the large residuals is the potentially

uncontrollable nature of violence once it has reached a high level.

     We estimate our model using a bounded influence regression

technique (BIR) developed by .rasker and Welsch (1982). This

technique limits the bias in results due to departure from normality)

or other misspecificatiofl, while minimizing the asymptotic variance

of the normal model subject to a bound on the asymptotic gross error

sensitivity. An advantage of the BIR method is that it can be used

when, as in our case, the gross error distribution may be

assymetric. We selected this robust estimation method after

considering a number of other possibilities. See Tauchen, Witte and

Long (1984) for a discussion.

     Table 2 contains both OLS and BIR results. The large

differences between the least squares and BIR results are

immediately evident. For some variables the coefficient estimates

differ by a factor of ten. The message is clear: OLS, and by




                                  17
extension, Tobit parameter estimates contain substantial bias and,

thus, these techniques are inappropriate for our model. Further,

use of the SIR technique rather than OLS markedly improves the

"fit of our model. An improvement in fit is to be expected when

anomalous observations are downweighted as they are in BIR, but even

so the increase in the F—statistic and R2 is.rather striking.

     Since the economic varables enter our model in a non—linear

form, it was necessary to use Wald tests to determine the

significance of these variables. We find that all of the economic

variables except the proportion of the time that the female is

employed are significantly related to the number of violent

incidents at the .001 level; the female's employment is

significantly related to the number of violent incidents at the .01

level. With many of the second order terms in the economic

variables being significant, the effects of changes in the economic

variables depend on the level of income and employment and cannot

easily be described by examining only the indivdual coefficients.

Accordingly, we computed the elasticities for effects of changes in

the economic variables for values of income and employment

representative of our sample.

     Our results suggest that the frequency of violence depends on

both income level and source. At median values or all independent

variables, an increase in the male's weekly income is associated

with a significant increase in the violence, ceteris paribus

(t—ratio     3.52). The elasticity of the number of violent

incidents with respect to the male's income is 1.12 at the




                                 18
median. Thus for individuals representative of our sample,

increased income may actually serve to increase violence. Indeed,

for couples in which the males income is at or below the median, we

find that an increase in his income is assoiaed with a positive or

zero effect on violence regardless of the victim's income and either

partner's employment. Further, for non—working men, increases in

income (i.e.? increases in unearned and non—AFDC income) always

serve to increase violence. Only for high income males are

increases in income ever associated with less violence.

     We find that the level of violence decreases significantly as

the fraction of time the male is employed increases at median and

most other values representative of our sample. Indeed, when

significant, the effect of increased employment for the male is

always negative, and is stronger the higher is the couples income.

Further, increases in male employment have far stronger effects on

violence than do increases in male income (an elasticity of —3.74

and 1.12, respectively). If a male representative of our sample

works one additional month and earns his average monthly salary, the

number of violent incidents falls significantly. The negative

employment effect on violence more ti-an offsets the positive income

effect.

     This strong employment effect contrasts sharply with the vast

majority of work on the relationship between crime and

employment.16 Our work in this study suggests that the weak

results in the literature may stem from: (1) inadequate measures of

income, (2) use of a 1/0 (employed vs. unemployed) measure rather




                                 19
than a continuous measure for employment, or (3) use of too simple a

ntional form.
      The effects of changes in the female's income and employment do

not parallel the effects of such changes for the male. For values

of the independent variables at the median for our sample, neither

changes in the female's employment nor changes in her income have a

significant effect on violence. changes in the female's income

significantly affect violence only when the income level of the male

and female differ markedly. For example, if the male's income is

low (at or below the median), then further increases in the female's

income serve to increase violence significantly. in contrast, if

the male's income is high and the female's low, then increases in

her income may serve to lower significantly the frequency of

violence.

      Changes in the female's employment significantly affect

violence for only two types of families:      (1) high income families

and (2) low income working families. in very high income families,

an increase in the time the woman spends working is associated with

a significant increase in the frequency of violence. In low income

worki'g families, an increase in employment (and accompanying

changes in her income) serve to lower violence. One possible

interpretation of our finding is that increases in female employment

may   only   have beneficial effects if the need for income is pressing.

      A comparison of the effects of changes in employment for the

male and female provides some insights concerning the reason for the

strong employment effect for ma.es. Increases in employment have a

number of potential effects on violence: (1) income effects,


                                     20
(2) psychological effects, (3) physical effects, and (4) time

effects. As we are contrclliflg for income, we know that the effect

of employment we observe is not an income effect. Our quite

different results for the effects of employment for the male and

female also suggest that the major cause of the strong effect of

male employment does not arise mainly from the reduced time together

for employed couples (i.e., the time at risk' factor). We are left

with the conclusion tl-t increases in male employment serve to

decrease violence primarily because of beneficial psychological

effects (e.g., increased self—esteem) or because of physical effects

(e.g., increased fatigue).

     Approximately 30 percent of the families in our sample receive

AFDC payments. For these families increases in AFDC payments, or in

the victim's income from any other sources, serve to lower the

number of violent incidents. Other results described previously for

nOn—AFDC families tend to be even stronger for AFDC families. The

one difference in results involves the victim's employment.     FO
AFDC families, increases in the female's employment are more likely

to be associated with higher violence.

     Since the noneconomic variables enter the model linearly our

results for these variables are more easily summarized. in terms of

the male's and female's ages (AGEM and AGEF), we find that older men

beat more frequently, holding other variables including the woman's

age constant, and that younger women are beaten more often. Like

men who earn less than their partners, men who are older than their

partner tend to inflict more violence. Note also that the

coefficient on MARRIED is insignificant. Our results provide no


                                  21
support for the claim that the marriage license is a hitting

license.

     As mentioned previously, the level of violence is less (3.3

incidents less per six months) if the woman has family, friends, or

an affordable motel where she can stay (STAY) when she feels

threatened by her partner. This finding is consistent with our

theoretical model and our choice of empirical technique. In terms

of the theoretical model, it does appear that the male offers the

female a better domestic situation when she has an immediately

available housing alternative. Also, with a means of escape from

the potentially violent situation, the woman is able to avoid the

threatened outbursts against her. The immediately available escape

seems to provide more real protection for the female involved in a

violent romantic relationship than the longer term security and

independence that a higher income level might seem to offer. The

policy implication would seem to be that providing short-term

shelters for victims of domestic assaults may be more effective in

lowering the frequency of the violence than general income

assistance payments.

     Our results for the children variables clearly show a

relationship between family characteristics and violence.

Specifically, our results suggest that the relationship will,

ceteris paribus, be more violent if the couple has patented more

children together. At first glance this result miht be interpreted

as supporting the common hypothesis that a 'trapped victim with

other responsibilities is more ready to tolerate violence. Note,

however, the coefficient on the variable for the number of her and


                                 22
their young children (CHIL.D>6). With more young children in the

family setting, there is less violence. Generally, this result

together with the finding that higher income women may suffer more

rather than less violence, contradicts the common notion that

violence is more prevalent when the woman has fewer financial

resources of her own and more financial responsibilities. Not

unsurprisingly, the presence of children from other relationships

(STEPCHLD) is associated with more violence.

     As shown by the coefficients on the racial/ethnic variables, we

find no difference in the frequency of violence across racial/ethnic

groups. Whatever differences there may be in the characteristics of

the groups in regard to domestic violence may be exactly balanced by

differences in the perceived probability of criminal justice system

actions across the groups. Recall from the previous section that

black males and males married to minority females are more likely to

be arrested for domestic violence, other things equal. Thus, it may

be that the insignificant coefficients on the racial binaries are a

 result of offsetting direct effects (e.g., differences in behaviors

 and attitudes) and indirect effects (i.e., differences in the

 perceived probability of arrest).

      We also estimate models of rule—setting and disobedience. We

 use a maximum likelihood ordered logit procedure since the dependent

 variable consists of a series of ordered categories. Having

 discovered anomalous residuals for our violence equation we checked

 for but found no similar pattern in the rule setting and

 disobedience equations. This lends considerable support to the




                                     23
contention that the anomalous residuals in the violence equation are

due to the non—normality of the distribution of the endogenous

variable since other specification and response errors should appear

in or rule setting and disobedience equations as well as our

violence equation.

     The rule—setting and disobedience models explain much less of

the variance in the data than does t,e violence model.

Specifically,, the likelihood ratio statistic for our model of

rule—;ettiflg is OfliY significant at the .40 level; the comparable

statistic for our model of disobedience is .14.

     In the rule—setting equation the only economic variable that is

significantly related to the extent of the male's rule—setting rt

the .05 level or better is the portion of time the male works. An

increase in the fraction of time the male is employed tends to

decrease the extent of his rule—setting, other things equal. This

result seems to support our finding for the violence equation where

the male was also found to be less physically abusive as the

proportion of time spent working increases. The number of the

couple's own children is the only other variable that is significant

at the .05 level or better. The male tends to set more rules if the

couple has parented more children together.

     Non—economic rather than employment and income variables are

significantly related to the female's disobedience. A woman is more

likely to disobey her partner's rules if the couple has had more

children, particularly if the children are still young. Further,

Hispanic and younger men are less likely to be disobeyed, other

things equal. Note that Hispanic men are not perceived to set


                                  24
significantly more or less rules, but the rules they do set are less

likely to be disobeyed.


VI. Conclusions

     We believe that our theoretical ant empirical work offer

interesting and valuable insights. For example, since opportunities

outside the relationship significantly affect the level of violence,

it appears that a bargaining model, such as ours, more closely

represents decision 7naking for violent couples than do traditional

neoclassical models. Also, our findings suggest that violence may

be a resource that the male uses to maintain control when

disadvantaged or challenged in other ways (e.g., relatively lower in

economic status or older than the female). There is a literature

which views individuals as using physical as well as other resources

to maintain control in relationships (e.g., Scanzoni, l979)

however, we know of no work incorporating this effect for violent

relationships.

     Prom a purely theoretical perspective, we believe that our

model provides an interesting extension of principal—agent and other

bargaining models of relationships. in contrast to existing

dictatorial bargaining models and principal—agent models, we do not,

in our model, impose the assumption that the dominant partner

provides the ot!.er individual with the minimum utility level

necessary to perpetuatethe relationship. Rather, we see one

partner as uncertain as to the other's behavior and opportunities.

This partner, in making his or her decisions, accepts some




                                  25
probability that the relationship will be terminated. We believe

that this approach provides an interesting alternative to current

models that allow relationships to be terminated (e.g., models of

divorce).




                                26
                             FOOTNOTES


     'Becker has been a dominant force in economic analyses in
many non—market areas. For examples see Becker and Landes (1974)
and Becker (1981). Although work in non—market areas has been
dominated by Becker and the Chicago school, it has not been limited
to Chicago. For examples of work by individuals not directly
associated with the Chicago school see Heineke (1978), Manger and
Brown (1980), McElroy and Homey (1981) Pollak (1983), and Schmidt
and Witte (1984). Even work outside the Chicago school has,
however, been greatly influenced by the Chicago approach.

     2As far as we are aware There has only been one previous
attempt by economists to analyze domestic violence —— Long, Witte
and Karr (1983).

     3Nationai concern about domestic violence has been apparent
in the popular press. However, it •was not until 1983 when Attorney
General William French Smith established a Task Force on Family
Violence charged with identifying the scope of the problem of
family violence in America and of making suitable recommendations
(William L. Hart, et al., 1984, vi—vii) that the issue received the
concentrated attention of the federal government.

     4For historical and legal perspectives on domestic violence,
see Davidson (1978), Dobash and Dobash (1979), and Martin (1976).
For surveys of the family violence literature see Gelles (1980,
1982) and Straus, Gelles and Steinmetz (1980).

     5For surveys of the theoretical literature see Heineke (1978)
or Schmidt and Witte (1984). For surveys of the empirical
literature see Blumstein, Cohen and Nagin (1978) or Cook (1980).

     6See Pollak (1984) for a survey of models of family decision
making.

     7$ee Straus, Gelles and Steinmetz (1980) and Yllo (1983) for
evidence concerning dominance in violent relationships.

     8See Berk and Sherman (1983), Novack and Galaway (1982), and
U.S. Department of Justice (1980) for evidence'that suggests that
the male is the assailant in 93 to 95 percent of the incidents of
domestic violence.

     9See Levinger (1966) and Pagelow (1981) for evidence.

     10This property of the nonstochastic model is analogous to
the well—know property of principal—agent models when the agent's
effort can be observed accurately. In the case of the
principal—agent model, the fee is structured so that the agent
receives a very low reward unless the optimal effort is
forthcoming. In the- nonstochastic family violence model, the male
threatens a high level of violence and low utility for the female,
if she disobeys. As in the principal—agent models, the constraint
upon the !ale's rule—setting is that the female (agent) may leave
the relationship if the rules are too strict. The optimal structure
for the rules is such that purely •instrumental violence for
disobedience of the rules is never observed.

     11This may seem odd at first glance, but it is the nature of
bargaining models that the characteristics of each participant may
affect all decisions.

          felt that male rules with which the female agrees were
non--binding and, thus, irrelevant for the purpose of testing our
mocl.

     '3See Tauchen, Witte and Long (1984) for details of the
analysis of the probabiUty of arrest.

     14rhese Monte C-rlo experiments were conducted by Donald
Waidman of the Univerity of Colorado and David Guilkey of the
University of North Carolina. Details can be obtained from Donald
Waldman.

     l5In particular, variables measuring the length of the
relationship and reporting stresses had coefficients that were
insignificantly different from zero.

     '6See Long and Witte (1981) or Freeman (1983) for surveys.
                            P IBLIOGRAPHY


Becker, G.S. 1968. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,"
     Journal f Political Economy, 76 (March/April) 169—217.

Becker, G.S. 1973.    A Theory of Marriage: Part I," Journal of
     Political EconOuff, 81 (July/August) 813—846.

Becker, G.S. i974. "A Theory of Marriage: Part ii," journal of
     Political Economy, 82 (March/April) 511—526.

Becker, G.S. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA:
     Harvard University Press.

Becker, G.S. and W.M. Landes (eds.). 1974. Essays in the Economics
     of Crime and Punishment. New York: Columbia University Press.

Belsley, D.A., E. Kuh, and R.E. Welsch. 1980. Regression
     Diagnostics. New York: John Wiley and Sons.

Berk, R.A. and L.W. Sherman. 1983. "Police Responses to
     Family Violence Incidents: An Analysis of an Experimental
     Design with Incomplete Randomization," Working Paper,
     Department of Sociology, University of California, Santa
     Barbara, CA.

Blumstein, A., J. Cohen and D. Nagin (eds.). 1978. Deterrence and
     Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects of Criminal Sanctions
     on Crime Rates. Washington, DC: National Academic of of
     Sciences.

Cook, P.J. 1980. "Research in Criminal Deterrence: Laying the
     Groundwork for the Second Decade" in N. Morris and M. Tonry
     (eds.). Crime and Justice: An Annual Review of Research, Vol.
     2. Chicago: University of Chicago press. 211—268.

Davidson, 1. 1978. Conjugal Crime: Understanding and Changing the
     Wifebeating Problem, New York: Hawthorn Press.

Dobash, R.E. and P. Dobash. 1979. VolenCe Against Wives: A Case
     Against PatriarchI. New York: The Free Press.

Ehrlich, I. 1975. "The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: A
     Question of Life and Death," American Economic Review 65 (June)
     397—417.

Finelhor, D., R.J. Celles, G.T. Hotaling and M.A. Straus. 1983.
     The Dark Side of Families: Current Family Violence Research.
     Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Freeman, R.B. 1983. 'Crime and the Labor Market' in J,Q. Wilson
(ed.). Crime and Public Policy. San Francisco: Institute for
Contemporary Studies.

Gelles, R.J. 1980. 'Violence in the Family: A Review of Research
     in the Seventies,' Journal of Marriage and the Family 42
     (November) 873—885.

Gelles, R.J. 1982. 'Domestic Criminal Violence,' in ME. Wolfgang
     and N.A. Weiner (eds.). Criminal Violence. Beverly Hills,
     CA: Sage Publications. 201—235.

Hart, W.L., et al. 1984. Final Report: Attorney General's Task
     Force on Family Violence. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
     J.. St ice.


Heineke, J.M. (ed.). 1978. Economic Models of Criminal Behavior.
     Amsterdam: North—Holland.

Krasker, W.S. and R.E Welsch. 1982. 'Efficient Bounded—
     Influence Regression Estimation,' Journal of the American
     Statistical Association, 77 (September) 595—604.

Levinger, G. 1966. 'Sources of Marital Dissatisfaction Among
     Applicants for Divorce,' American Journal of Orthopsychiatry,
     26 (October) 803—892.

Long, S.K. and A.D. Witte. 1981. 'Current Economic Trends:
     Implications for Crime and Criminal Justice,' in Kevin H.
     Wright (ed.). Crime and Criminal Justice in a Declining
     Economy. Cambridge, MA: Oelgeschlager, Gunn and Ham. 69-143.

Long, S.K., A.D. Witte and P. Karr. 1983. 'Family Violence: A
     Microeconomic Approach,' Social Science Research, 12 (December)
     363—3 92.

Manser, M. and M. Brown. 1980. 'Marriage and Household Decision—
     Making: A Bargaining Analysis,' International Economic Review,
     21 (February) 31—44.

Martin, D. 1976. Battered Wives. San Francisco: Glide.

McElroy, M.S. and M.J. Homey. 1981. 'Nash—Bargained Household
     Decisions: Toward a Generalization of the Theory of Demand,'
     International Economic Review 22 (June) 333—349.

 Novack, S. and B. Galaway. 1982, 'Domestic Abuse Intervention
      Project: Six Month Research Report,' Social Development
      Associates, Duluth, MN.

 Pagelow, M.D. 1981. Women Battering: Victims and Their
      Experiences. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Pollak, R.A. 1984.    A Transaction Costs Approach to Families and
     HouseholdS, Working Paper, Departmentof Economics, University
     of Pennsylvania.

Samuelson, P.A. 1956.    A Social Indifference Curve,' Quarterly
     Journal of Economics. 70 (February) l—22.

Scanzoni, J. 1977.    Social Process and power in Families, in
     W.R. Burr, R. Hill, F.I. Nye and I.L. Reiss (eds.).
     Contemporary Theories About the Family. New York: Free ress.

Straus, M.A., R.J. Gelles and S.K. Steinmetz. 1980. Behind closed
     Doors: Violence in the American Family. New York: Anchor
     Books.

Tauchen, H.V., S.F. Long and A.D. Witte. 1983.    ECOnOmiC Issues in
     Family violence: Violence as a Control Mechanisrfl, Working
     Paper, Department of Economics, University of North Carolina,
     Chapel Hill, NC.

Tauchen, H.V., A.D. Witte and S.F. Long. 1984.    Violence in the
     Family: A Non—Random Affair, Working Paper #89, Department     of
     Economics, Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA.
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. 1980.
     Intimate Victims: A Study of Violence Among Friends and
     Relatives. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Yllo, K. 1983.    Sexual Equality and Violence Against Wives in
     )merican States, Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 14
     (Spring) 67—86.
                                       Table 1

             Symbols, Definition, Mean Values and Standard Deviations
                              of Empirical Variables

                                                                          Standard
Symbol                      Definition                        Mean        Deviation
                                                                     (N=125)

Endogenous Variables:

     VIOL                   The number of violent incidents
                            in the six months prior to
                            incident that led to the
                            interview                           10.56          28.67

     RULES                  The number of aresa in which
                            the male has strong ides
                            on a particular topic and the
                            female disagrees                     4•70b          2•74b

     DISOBED                The   number of areas8 in which
                            the   male has strong ideas
                            and   the female both disagrees
                            and   disobeys                       119b           127b

Exogenous Variables:

     Economic:

     INCM                   Male's weekly income from
                            all sources except AFDC           $231.81      $211.20

     INCF                   Female's weekly income from
                            all sources except AFDC           $127.14      $128.27

     WORKM                  The fraction of the year that
                            the male was employed                0.69           0.38

     WORKF                  The fraction of the year that
                            the female was employed              0.56           0.42

     AFDCC                  Family'sweekly receipt of AFDC
                            payments                       3    27.78      $ 49.67
                              Table 1
                            (continued)

                                                                     Standard
                     Definition                         Mean         Deviation
Symbol
                                                               (N=125)

     Non—Economic:

     AGEM            The male's age in years             30.61         7.02

     AGEF            The females age in years            27.68         6.71

     CHILDTG         The number of children from the
                     relationship                         0.92         1.06

     CHILD<6         The number of her and their
                     children who are less than six
                     years old                            0.78         0.85

     STEPCHILD       The number of his or her
                     children living with her             0.38          0.79

     HISPANM         A binary variable equal to
                     one if the male is Hispanic
                     and zero otherwise                   0.33          0.47

     BLACKM          A binary variable equal to
                     one if the male is black
                     or other non—Eispanic minorityd
                     and zero otherwise                   0.14          0.35

     MNRTYF          A binary variable equal to one
                     if the female is minoritye and
                     zero therwise                        0.26          0.45


     MARRIED         A binary variable equal to one
                     if the male and female have ever
                     been married and zero otherwise      0.72          0.45

     STAY            A binary variable equal to one
                     if the victim had a place to
                     stay if she left the relat ion—
                     ship and zero otherwise              0.73          0.45
                              Notes to Table 1


     aThere are twelve areas in which we discerned the males rule-setting
behavior and the female's reaction to the rules set. The areas are: working
outside the home, having a bank account, having credit cards, handling
household finances, giving her money to the male, taking responsibility for
household work and child care, seeing her women friends, seeing her relatives,
talking on the phone, calling or seeing the male during the day, and sexual
relations.

     bThe sample size used when calculating thesenumbers was 99, not 125,
due to missing values in these variables.

     CWe did not attrbute APDC payments to either the male or female since
California has an AFDc—U program and, thus, payment often went to the family
unit. There was very little income other than AFDC that was received jointly
by the victim and assailant.

     dThe racial/ethnic group denoted BLACKM includes black, Indian, Asian,
and other males.

     eThe racial/ethnic group denoted MNRTYF includes Hispanic, black,
Indian, Asian, and other females. There were too few minority females to
allow us to create two binaries as we did for the males.
                               Table 2

    Results of the Analyses of the Nzmber of Violent Incidents
                       (t—ratios in parentheses)
                                (Nl25)



Exogenous Variables                      OLS          Regression

Economic Variables

     I!CM                           0.2904*         0.0715***
                                   (1.94)           (2.76)
     (INCM)2                        0.36x104       _0.36x104**
                                   (0.27)          (—2.52)
     INCF                          —0.0996          0.0012
                                  (—0.77)           (0.05)
     (INCF)2                        0.27xl04         0.32x104
                                    (0.09)          (1.12)
     (INCM)*(INCF)                 —0.64x104       —0.23x10'4
                                   (—0.22)         (—1.16)
     AFDC                           —0.2668          0.1164***
                                   (—0.82)          (2.68)
     (Aprxa2                        0.13x102        _0.15x102***
                                   (—0.37)         (—2.81)
     (AFDC)*(INCM)                   0.l3x103        0.22xl03***
                                    (0.16)          (2.70)
     (AFDC)*(INCF)                   0.39x103       —0.25x103
                                    (0.28)         (—1.29)
     WORXM                        _129.165**         4.5418
                                   (—2.50)          (0.48)
     (WORKM)2                      195.313*          5.5197
                                    (1.73)          (0.24)
     (WORKM)*(INcM)                 _0.3377*        _o.0733**
                                   (—1.88)         (—2.26)
     (WORPI)*(INCF)                  0.0091         —0.0254
                                    (0.O6          (—1.31)
     (WORXM)*(AFDC)                  0.1729         _0.1199***
                                    (0.56)         (—3.16)
     WORP                          —15.5875         11.3832
                                   (—0.37)          (1.48)
     (WORKF)2                      —15.9357        _20.7678*
                                   (—0.21)         (—1.65)
     (WORF)*(WORM)                  21.85.9        —10.8166
                                    (0.50)         (—1.43)
      (WOR,F)*(INCP)                 0.0904          0.0260
                                    (0.63)          (1.13)
                                     0.0349          0.0288**
      (WORIF)*(INCM)
                                    (0.45)          (2.55)
      (WORKF)*(AFDC)                 0.3007          0.0420
                                    (1.00)          (1.08)
                              Table 2
                            (continued)


                                                   Bounded Influence
Exogenous Variables                    OLS            Regression

Non—Economic Variables:

     AGEM                          0.7256           0.2899***
                                  (1.21)           (2.68)
     AGEF                        _j4799***         _O.5848***
                                 (—2.23)          (—4.79)
     CHILDTG                       2.9830           l.9600***
                                  (0.80)           (3.51)
     CHID<6                        1.2618          _2.4086***
                                  (0.27)          (—2.79)
     STEPCHLD                      5.4283           3.2112***
                                  (1.33)           (3.86)
     HISPANM                      —2.1330           1.4748
                                 (—0.28)           (1.19)
     BLACKM                        4.4899           1.1317
                                  (0.54)           (0.73)
     MNRTYF                        9.3299           1.0943
                                  (1.27)           (1.10)
     MARRIED                      —7. 9140         —0.7438
                                 (—1.17)          (—0.67)
     STAY                        _13.9232**        _3.2$80***
                                 (—2.23)          (—2.98)
     CONSTANT                     74.6947***        77493***
                                  (3.36)           (2.58)

Test for significance of model     1.48            14•73a
(significance level)              (>.078)          (>.001)

R2                                 0.32             082b

     *Indicates that the coefficient is significantly different from
zero at the .10 level, two tailed test.
     **Indicates that the coefficient is significantly different
from zero at the .05 level, two tailed test.
     ***Indjcates that the coefficient is significantly different
from zero at the .01 level, two tailed test.

     aThS statistic is based on the Wald test and is distributed
F30194 under the null hypothesis that the coefficients on all
independent variables are jointly equal to zero.
                                 Table 2
                               (continued)


                                               that in OLS the
     bThjs R2 figure was calculated by noting
likelihood ratio test statistic used t test the joint significance
                               is:
of the explanatory variables

              =   (N—p/p—i) (R2/l_R2)
                                    estimated and N is sample size.
where p is the number of parameters
                        obtain for our bounded influence regression
The F_statistic that we
would imply an R2 of .82.
