                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            VALUING THE BENEFITS OF SUPERFUND SITE REMEDIATION:
          THREE APPROACHES TO MEASURING LOCALIZED EXTERNALITIES

                                      Shanti Gamper-Rabindran
                                        Ralph Mastromonaco
                                        Christopher Timmins

                                         Working Paper 16655
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16655


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            January
Support for this research at the Triangle RDC         2011(ITR-0427889) is gratefully acknowledged.
                                               from NSF
 Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent
the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have
been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. Other information provided
in this document was funded by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) under Purchase
Order Number EP09W001911 to Applied Planning Corporation. The results contained herein have
undergone Agency’s peer and administrative review. We thank Anna Alberini, Trudy Cameron, Justin
Gallagher, Michael Greenstone, Bert Grider, James Hamilton, John Harris, Joel Herndon, Robin Jenkins,
 Katherine Kiel, Nicolai Kuminoff, Alex Marten, Sriniketh Nagavarapu, Stephen Newbold, Dan Phaneuf,
Glenn Sheriff, Hilary Sigman, Kerry Smith, Mark Thomas, Laura Taylor, Patrick Walsh, Randy Walsh,
Jeffrey Zabel, and seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon University, Duke University, University
of Madison-Wisconsin, North Carolina State University, University of Pittsburgh, University of Rome
Tor Vergata, the Olin School at the Washington University in St. Louis, the EPA National Center for
Environmental Economics and the California Workshop in Environmental Economics provided helpful
comments and criticisms. We gratefully acknowledge use of data compiled and published by Michael
Greenstone and Justin Gallagher. Funding from the University of Pittsburgh’s Center on Race and
Social Problems and University Center for Social and Urban Research is gratefully acknowledged.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Shanti Gamper-Rabindran, Ralph Mastromonaco, and Christopher Timmins. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Valuing the Benefits of Superfund Site Remediation: Three Approaches to Measuring Localized
Externalities
Shanti Gamper-Rabindran, Ralph Mastromonaco, and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 16655
January 2011
JEL No. Q5,Q51,Q53

                                               ABSTRACT

We apply three complementary approaches designed to identify the localized effects of Superfund
site remediation under the CERCLA, examining data at the level of (i) the census tract (paying attention
to within tract heterogeneity), (ii) the census block, and (iii) individual house transaction. Our analysis
of the within-tract housing value distribution detects statistically and economically significant appreciation
in the lower tails resulting from hazardous waste cleanup; deletion of a site raises tract-level housing
values by 18.2% at the 10th percentile, 15.4% at the median, and 11.4% at the 60th percentile. These
tract results are confirmed by (i) house transaction data that show cheaper houses within each tract
are more likely to be exposed to waste sites within one kilometer, explaining their greater appreciation
from site cleanup, and (ii) high-resolution census block data that show greater appreciation among
blocks lying closer to the cleaned sites. House-level repeat-sales data confirm results from our national
level census analysis by showing that deletion raises housing values relative to proposal in specific
markets, such as northern New Jersey, but they also uncover a great heterogeneity in the effects of
remediation across markets, with no statistical effects from deletion relative to proposal detected in
Los Angeles metro, southwestern Connecticut or Boston metro.


Shanti Gamper-Rabindran                               Christopher Timmins
Graduate School of Public and Intl Affairs            Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh                              Duke University
shanti@gspia.pitt.edu                                 209 Social Sciences Building
                                                      P.O. Box 90097
Ralph Mastromonaco                                    Durham, NC 27708-0097
Department of Economics                               and NBER
Duke University                                       christopher.timmins@duke.edu
PO Box 90097
Durham NC 27708-0097
ralph.mastro@gmail.com
1       Introduction

        In the late 1970’s, events at Love Canal and the Valley of Drums raised public concern
over the health and environmental risks associated with contaminated waste sites. In response to
these and other similar incidents, the US Congress established the Superfund program under the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) of 1980.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has since identified more than 47,000 hazardous
waste sites potentially requiring cleanup actions and has placed some of the most seriously
contaminated sites on its National Priorities List (NPL). By the end of fiscal year 2007, EPA had
classified 1,569 sites as NPL sites (GAO, 2008).

        While the costs of Superfund remediation can, in principle, be easily measured, the
benefits of these activities are much more difficult to quantify. In particular, there is no explicit
market for the clean-up of hazardous waste. Economists have therefore turned to a market where
proximity to hazardous waste is an attribute of a marketed commodity – i.e., housing.1
Controlling for housing and neighborhood attributes, covariation of market price (or owner’s
stated value) and exposure to Superfund sites at various stages of remediation can be used to
measure the change in housing values associated with these cleanup activities. In theory,
Superfund cleanup can cause appreciation in house prices by reducing public perception of
health or environmental hazards (Hamilton and Viscusi, 1999) and by spurring additional
development projects. However, a recent influential study that examines changes in census tract
median housing values in response to listing on or deletion from the NPL concludes that
Superfund cleanup (which costs an average of $40 million per site) fails to significantly raise
nearby housing values (Greenstone and Gallagher, 2008). Recognizing that resources are scarce
and that government action in one area (e.g., Superfund) might preclude cleanup activities in
another (e.g., water or air), an author of that study recommends a policy shift towards “reliance
on less ambitious clean-ups like the erection of fences, posting of warning signs around the sites,
and simple containment of toxics.”2

         Our study separately re-evaluates the benefits from three different phases of the
Superfund remediation process – proposal, listing, and deletion. Importantly, it is the deletion
stage that signals the end of the EPA’s cleanup process. We use three different approaches that
exploit variation in data at the level of (i) the census tract (paying particular attention to within-
tract heterogeneity), (ii) the census block, and (iii) the individual housing transaction. These
approaches are designed to identify localized effects of Superfund cleanup that may not be
detectable using census tract median housing values. Our census tract approach, using public
data, is able to discern separate effects at the lower percentiles of the housing value distribution
within each tract. This is important, because census tracts can be large, and Superfund sites are
1
  Our study is narrowly limited to benefits discernible from the hedonic property value models and is, hence,
conservative in its conclusions. Many benefits are outside the scope of our study (e.g., certain types of ecosystem
benefits). These benefits are discussed in a 2006 review by the Scientific Advisory Body (2006).
2
  Hirsch (2008) downloaded from http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2008/superfund-0805.html

                                                          4
not likely to be randomly distributed within them. If sites tend to be situated in low-value
neighborhoods, cleanup activities may only result in appreciation for cheaper homes. The
impacts of cleanup may, therefore, be imperceptible in the tract’s median value, and hard to
discern even at the mean. Our census block analysis, using restricted-access data, directly
addresses the problem of localized externalities by going inside the census tract and examining
median housing values at a very fine level of geographic precision.3 Our repeat-sales analysis,
using proprietary data from Dataquick Information Services, measures the effects of Superfund
cleanup activities at an even finer level of geographic and temporal precision, and makes use of
actual transaction prices instead of owners’ stated values.

         To identify the effect of site status on housing values in the tract and block analyses, we
compare changes in values between 1990 and 2000 to changes in exposure to (i) sites that are
deleted from the NPL, (ii) sites that were listed but not deleted, and (iii) sites that were proposed
but not listed. Our identification strategy relies both on our model and our sample restrictions.
First, our panel analysis, which is based on the standard hedonic model, helps identify the effect
of site status on housing values. By taking a first-difference between 2000 and 1990 data, we
control for time invariant unobservables that are correlated with site status. Second, we restrict
our analysis to neighborhoods that (i) lie within 3km buffers of NPL sites that received a
hazardous ranking score (HRS) in 1982 within a narrow interval,4 and (ii) do not lie near other
post-1982 NPL sites. The first sample restriction, proposed in Greenstone and Gallagher (2008),
can isolate the effect of site status because treatment (i.e., listing on the NPL) is discrete for sites
that exceed an exogenous HRS cutoff, while unobservables are likely to be continuous across
that regulatory threshold in that sample. The second sample restriction strengthens the first so as
to avoid the confounding effects from cleanup activities at other nearby NPL sites. The
empirical strategy for our third approach uses house-level repeat-sales data to control for both
time-invariant unobservable heterogeneity at the level of the house and time-varying
unobservable heterogeneity at the level of the census tract.

        Our results at these three levels of analysis reveal that deletion, which signals the end of
cleanup activities, significantly raises the value of nearby owner-occupied houses on average at
the national-level, but that there is considerable heterogeneity in this effect across metro-specific
housing markets. Our tract analysis finds that deletion of a site raises housing values
significantly at the lower deciles of the within-tract housing value distribution – by 18.2% at the
10th percentile, 15.4% at the median, and 11.4% at the 60th percentile. Greater appreciation of
housing values at the lower percentiles is compatible with NPL sites being in close proximity to
lower value houses within a tract. We confirm this spatial pattern in three of four housing
markets with transactions data describing individual houses. Results at the block level are

3
  Census tracts are often significantly larger than census blocks. There are as many as 350 census blocks in some
census tracts.
4
  For the sake of comparison with previous work that has used larger distances, we also check the sensitivity of our
results to 5km buffers.

                                                          5
compatible with the tract level, showing that the deletion of sites raises nearby housing prices by
19.0% and 5.8% for blocks lying < 1km and < 3km from the site.

        Our analysis of repeat-sales data uncovers evidence of significant heterogeneity in the
effects of Superfund site remediation across metro areas. We find that deletion (measured
relative to proposal) causes a sizable appreciation in housing values in northern New Jersey
(11.3%), but we find no statistically significant effect of deletion (measured relative to
proposal) for LA metro, southwestern Connecticut or metro Boston. While the appreciation
in New Jersey indicates that some neighborhoods do recover post-cleanup, the lower prices in
Boston at deletion relative to pre-discovery (-6.1%) suggest, conversely, that stigma against
contaminated sites and neighborhoods can also persist despite cleanup.



What can be learned from this study?

          Typically, researchers are only able to access publicly available census tract data.
Recognizing this fact, we demonstrate that our method, which accounts for within tract
heterogeneity, can detect benefits from cleanup that may be understated or missed by studies that
focus on median tract-level housing values. We then use block data to directly verify that our
tract results are not mere artifacts of our method. Indeed, our estimates at the tract and block-
levels are similar – the 18.2% appreciation at the 10th percentile of the within tract housing
values is comparable to the 19.0% for blocks lying within 1km. Moreover, we use house-level
transaction data to verify the story underlying our quantile approach in three out of four markets
– i.e., that it is the cheaper houses within each tract which are more likely to be exposed to NPL
sites. These results suggest that our quantile approach provides a practical method for estimating
the impact of localized externalities, even without access to proprietary or restricted access data.

        Nevertheless, our proposed method has its limits. Not all localized benefits detectable
with finer resolution block- and house-level data may be found by an analysis of the tract-level
housing price distribution. However, given the reality that many hedonic studies are forced rely
on tract-level data (Hanna, 2007; Greenstone and Gallagher, 2008; Grainger, 2010), the
advantages of which include accessibility and nationwide coverage, our extension avoids an
important source of bias that results from a narrow focus on the mean or median tract-level
housing values.

        We draw two conclusions from our results that are directly relevant for evaluating the
Superfund remediation program. First, the average effect of Superfund site remediation on
housing values across all markets is positive and significant. Moreover, we note that benefits
measured by appreciation in housing values provide only part of the overall benefits from
Superfund cleanup. Importantly, these results speak to the aggregate benefit of the Superfund
program, which could be compared with program costs in an efficiency analysis. It also provides
the strongest available information with which to perform a cost-benefit analysis of a particular

                                                 6
candidate site, in the absence of estimates from specific-metro areas or site-specific information.
Second, while Superfund remediation raises housing values on average at the national-level,
there is considerable variation in that effect across housing markets. This heterogeneity suggests
that to perform a cost-benefit analysis of a particular candidate site, metro-specific estimates,
which assess the remediation of multiple sites in the relevant regional housing market, would be
appropriate.



Outline

        The remainder of this study proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the main milestones
of the Superfund remediation process and provides a brief review of the literature. Section 3
describes our three alternative strategies for identifying the impacts of site remediation based on
tract-level, block-level, and house-level data. Section 4 describes the empirical specifications
used in each of these approaches. Section 5 discusses our data sets and Section 6 reports the
results of our analyses. Section 7 concludes and discusses some possible extensions to our work.
Appendices A1 and A2 provide details on the construction of variables. Appendix A3 provides a
comparison of our study with Greenstone and Gallagher (2008).



2       Benefits from Superfund cleanup

2.1     Superfund Milestones

         Our analyses focus on the three major milestones in the National Priorities List (NPL)
process, in which the EPA publicizes information about the site to members of the public by
entering information into the Federal Register and soliciting public comment. These three stages
are (i) proposal to, (ii) listing on, and (iii) deletion from the NPL. To measure the benefits from
Superfund site cleanup, we focus on deletion from the NPL, which signals that cleanup is
completed and no further response is required to protect human health or the environment.
While “construction complete” (a designation given to sites prior to deletion) has been often used
by EPA since 1990 as an indicator of successful remediation, we chose instead to use deletion
for this purpose.5 There are three reasons for this choice – (i) the construction complete
designation may be applied before final cleanup levels have been achieved, (ii) the deletion
designation is accompanied by a public announcement in the Federal Register and a major
newspaper, and (iii) relying on deletion instead of construction complete is a conservative


5
  See Probst and Sherman (2004) for a discussion of the construction complete designation. The use of construction
complete instead of deletion acknowledges an important reality of many Superfund sites – namely, that sites may
not actually be fully cleaned-up for decades following the completion of construction work associated with
remediation activities. This may be particularly true, for example, when groundwater has been contaminated. In
these cases, construction complete is a very important milestone from a policy-making perspective.

                                                        7
strategy for valuing the benefits of cleanup.6 In our census analyses, we recover values for each
of these three stages of the remediation process, but do not include “discovery” as it is not
identified under most of the sample cuts we use with census data. In our house-level analyses,
however, we are able to include the discovery designation as we do not need to rely on these
sample cuts for identification. Below, we describe these (and other) major milestones in detail.



Discovery, Preliminary Assessment, and Site Investigation

        A site is discovered when the EPA becomes aware of it from the general public or from
local and state environmental agencies. The EPA then conducts a preliminary assessment, which
is designed to distinguish, based on limited data, between sites that pose little or no threat to
human health and the environment and sites that may pose a threat and require further
investigation. If the preliminary assessment results in a recommendation for further
investigation, a site inspection is performed. Investigators collect environmental and waste
samples to determine what hazardous substances are present at a site, whether these substances
are being released into the environment, and if so, whether they have reached nearby targets.
Information collected during the preliminary assessment and site inspection is used to calculate a
Hazard Ranking System (HRS) score.7



Proposal and Listing on the NPL

        Based on the preliminary assessment and site inspection, the EPA proposes a site to the
NPL in the Federal Register. The EPA then accepts public comments on the sites for 60 days
and responds to public comments. The EPA will list the site on the NPL if it meets at least one
of three criteria – (i) the HRS score is of sufficient magnitude, (ii) the state environmental
authority designates the site to be a top priority, or (iii) the US Public Health Service
recommends removing all people in close proximity to the site.



Cleanup Process

        After the site achieves listing status on the NPL, the cleanup process commences in a
series of steps. The remedial investigation collects data to characterize site conditions, assess
risks to human health and the environment, and evaluate the potential performance and cost of
6
  In particular, if some of the benefits of cleanup are actually captured by construction complete but we lump that
designation in with listing, it will make it more difficult to find evidence of benefits associated with moving a site
from listing to deletion.
7
  The HRS score serves as a numerically based screening device that uses information from initial, limited
investigations. Sites with an HRS score of 28.5 or greater are eligible for listing on the NPL and require the
preparation of an HRS scoring package. The story behind the 28.5 cutoff is described in detail below.

                                                           8
alternative treatment technologies. The feasibility screening process develops and evaluates
alternative remedial actions. The EPA publishes the Record of Decision (ROD), a public
document that explains cleanup alternatives, and makes this document available to the public
through the EPA online ROD system.8 The technical specifications for cleanup remedies and
technologies are designed in the remedial design phase. The actual cleanup operations are
implemented in the remedial action phase.



Deletion from the NPL

        Deletion of a site from the NPL requires that the necessary actions for remediation have
been completed and the site no longer poses a threat to human health. Prior to deletion, the EPA
posts plans to delete the site in a local newspaper and solicits public comment. Once deletion is
deemed appropriate, the EPA will enter notification of deletion in the Federal Register.



2.2      Superfund Cleanup and Housing Market Effects

        At least three Superfund milestones – proposal, listing, and deletion – can influence
neighborhood housing prices. Proposal of a site to the NPL may reduce neighborhood housing
prices when this action provides new information to the housing market that contamination is
severe enough to warrant the potential listing of that site on the NPL (although, if the housing
market expects that proposal signals that the site is likely to be remediated, this countervailing
factor will dampen the extent of that depreciation). Housing prices have been found to decline
due to perceived health risks from a nearby site (Hamilton and Viscusi, 1999)9 and from the
stigma associated with that contaminated site.10 Listing of a site on the NPL is associated with
two countervailing forces; (i) it may reduce housing prices by confirming the severe nature
contamination of that site, but (ii) it may also increase housing prices by signaling that the site
will be remediated.



8
  A ROD contains site history, site description, site characteristics, community participation, enforcement activities,
past and present activities, contaminated media, the contaminants present, scope and role of response action and the
remedy selected for cleanup.
9
  Davis (2004) finds that information on health risks are capitalized into housing values. In particular, the
emergence of a cancer cluster of pediatric leukemia resulted in the depreciation in housing values in a Nevada
county relative to a nearby county.
10
   Stigma (Fischoff, 2001) can indirectly drive down housing prices even if well-informed buyers, who do not object
in principle to buying the houses in question, are willing to pay less because they expect future stigmatization to
reduce future demand for these houses. Messer et al (2006) describe “when residents or potential buyers are
extraordinarily fearful of a site, they may respond by shunning the site.… If risks are perceived as being excessive,
people replace calculations of risk versus benefit with a simple heuristic of shunning, the avoidance of the
stigmatized object.”

                                                           9
       Deletion from the NPL, which is the focus of our study, can increase housing prices
through two channels. First, cleanup directly reduces the health risks and disamenities from a
site. Second, cleanup may prompt further development in the area surrounding the site,
including the potential for re-zoning from a lower-value commercial use to higher-value luxury
development. Because cleanup does increase the likelihood that these development projects are
undertaken, we attribute housing price appreciation via this indirect channel to the cleanup
operations.

        As long as the development occurs conditional on cleanup being undertaken, our study
correctly attributes the benefits from that development as a component of the benefit from
Superfund cleanup. For example, the Empire Canyon Daly West Mine Superfund site in Utah
underwent extensive remediation under the Superfund program. After the remediation, the
landowners leased that site for the development of a luxury resort, including a hotel, spa and
condominium project (EPA, 2008). Such an outcome does not present a problem for our
analysis, but rather represents the sort of mechanism through which remediation is translated into
higher housing prices. An estimation problem would only arise if the causality went in the other
direction – e.g., landowners decide to build a luxury resort (which was going to raise nearby
housing prices regardless of EPA actions), and the EPA responds by moving the site through the
process to deletion. Our literature review has not uncovered evidence of such actions by the
EPA.



2.3      Benefits from Superfund Cleanup

    The appreciation of housing values is one dimension of the potential benefits from Superfund
cleanup. In particular, the appreciation of housing values will reflect the perceived reduction in
risk among homebuyers.11 Other potential benefits may not be accounted for by the local
homebuyers, such as downstream ecological benefits. To the extent that buyers do not fully
incorporate the reduction in risks in their valuation, the measured appreciation is a lower-bound
estimate.12 Other potential benefits include reduced health risks that are typically measured by
the value of a statistical life.



11
   Gayer et al (2000) find that residents around seven NPL and non-NPL sites in Grand Rapids Michigan update
their perception of risks when the EPA released their assessment of the sites. They find that consumers’ perceptions
of cancer risks are overestimated before the EPA releases a detailed estimate of the risks; those consumers therefore
pay a much higher premium for houses further from the site before the release of the report. They find that even at
the inflated perceived risk levels, the upper-bound for the willingness to pay for the six sites in the area to be cleaned
is about one-sixth of the remediation cost. However, one criticism of this study is its focus on one health outcome
alone (i.e., cancer understates the overall health risks).
12
   The appreciation of housing values will reflect the perceived reduction in risk and stigma among homebuyers.
Therefore, any reduction in risks that are not factored into the perceived risks, due to incomplete information or
individuals’ erroneous assessment of risks, will not be capitalized in housing values.

                                                           10
         Our tract and block analyses estimate the average appreciation in housing prices across
sites, though the rate of appreciation is likely to differ across sites. Variation in appreciation in
housing values may arise from the final use of the sites, the neighborhood attributes, and the
extent of cleanup (see Section 6.2, “Estimation Issue #2: Variation in extent of remediation” for
details). Cleanup in areas with high demand for housing or potential for development may lead
to greater appreciation in housing values than cleanup in sites that are surrounded by other
disamenities such as high crime rates and brownfields.13



2.4     Previous Studies

       The large literature that seeks to measure the value of Superfund site remediation has
been exhaustively reviewed in Schultze et al (1995), Kiel and Williams (2007), Sigman (2008)
and EPA (2009).14 First, we briefly describe the hedonic approach that examines median
housing values in locations that vary in the number or status of sites contained within. We then
provide a short summary of papers that use a second approach that considers a single site and
determines how proximity to it impacts the selling price of nearby homes. That effect is
measured with a distance gradient that typically varies with site status.



Hedonic Approach #1: Comparison of housing values across neighborhoods

        Greenberg and Hughes (1992) study seventy-seven communities in New Jersey and find
that sale prices of houses in Superfund communities appreciate by less than those in non-
Superfund communities. Noonan et al (2007) study the effect of Superfund remediation
activities on housing values measured at the block-group level using a national sample. Like our
analysis, they use fixed effects to control for time-invariant neighborhood unobservables. Unlike
our analysis, they compare those block groups that are close to waste sites with other block
groups across contiguous US.

       We build most directly upon Greenstone and Gallagher (2008), who examine how tract
median housing prices vary depending upon whether they contain a site that has been listed on
the NPL or one that has been proposed but not listed. Their study makes two important
methodological contributions. First, they argue that studies examining the impact of Superfund
cleanup should restrict their comparisons to only those neighborhoods that host NPL sites – in
other words, the approach taken in Greenberg and Hughes (1992) and Noonan et al (2007) may
13
   The Gowanus Canal in Brooklyn, which was listed on the NPL in 2010, is an example of an area of high
residential demand and development potential. In February 2009, the city of New York granted a rezoning request
for residential housing along the waterway (Navarro, 2010). Conversely, high crime and brownfields may limit the
housing price appreciation from cleanup at some sites. Nevertheless, equity considerations may still play a part in
the decision to support their cleanup.
14
   In particular, see Table 4 in Schultze et al (1995) and Tables 1 and 2 in EPA (2009).

                                                        11
lead to biased estimates. In particular, Greenstone and Gallagher argue that the comparison of
neighborhoods that host NPL sites (in the proposed or deleted phase) with those that do not will
yield biased estimates because unobservables will differ systematically across these two types of
neighborhoods.15

        Second, to control for unobservables that may be correlated with listing, Greenstone and
Gallagher apply a regression discontinuity (RD) design that draws on the early institutional
history of the NPL. In the first year of Superfund legislation, the EPA’s assessment process
identified 687 of the most dangerous sites. Budget constraints forced the EPA to choose only
400 sites to list on the NPL, and the EPA employed the HRS ranking to choose those sites that
posed the greatest risks. In the HRS ranking of these sites, it turned out that an HRS score of
28.5 served as the cutoff between the 400th treated and 401st untreated site. Greenstone and
Gallagher’s RD analysis examines 227 sites with HRS scores that were 12 points above or below
the 28.5 regulatory cutoff, thus exploiting the dichotomous treatment at the regulatory cutoff,
while assuming that the unobservables were continuous across that cutoff.16

        There are four aspects of Greenstone and Gallagher’s analysis that suggest a downward
bias in their estimates of the benefits from Superfund cleanup (Smith, 2006). First, to measure
the effect of Superfund cleanup on housing values, Greenstone and Gallagher examine the effect
of a variable that conflates two distinct milestones in the Superfund process – listing and
deletion.17 Conflation of these treatments is required in order for them to be able to implement
their instrumental variable strategy. Specifically, Greenstone and Gallagher use the 1982 HRS
score to instrument for the variable indicating that a site has been listed on (or deleted from) the
NPL by 2000; that one variable cannot separately instrument for the two milestones of listing
and deletion. However, one might worry that conflation of listing and deletion will bias
downward the estimated benefits from cleanup. In particular, listing has ambiguous overall
effects on housing prices, while deletion is likely to raise housing prices. In contrast, our study
measures the value of cleanup by examining the effect of deletion from the NPL on housing


15
   Table II in Greenstone and Gallagher shows that these two sets of tracts differ significantly in their observables
and by extension, are likely to differ in their unobservables.
16
   Greenstone and Gallagher (2008) note that the use of the regulatory cutoff at HRS equal to 28.5 is a good
empirical strategy for at least three reasons. First, the HRS scores assigned to the 1982 sample were established
before the 28.5 threshold was set. It is unlikely that scores were manipulated to obtain Superfund treatment,
particularly in the narrow range just above or below the cutoff. Second, the HRS score is a noisy measure of risk,
and thus, the true risk is likely to be similar around the 28.5 cutoff. Third, there was no evidence that the sites below
28.5 were “safe.”
17
   While their primary analysis deals with the values placed on owned housing, Greenstone and Gallagher also
examine the sensitivity of rental rates to Superfund site remediation. When looking at rental rates, they do separate
the effects of different Superfund milestones – (1) on the NPL but a ROD has not been issued, (2) a ROD and/or
cleanup has been initiated but not completed, and (3) construction complete or deleted from the NPL. They report
that the separate milestones do not influence rental rates. Our study focuses on owned housing and three Superfund
milestones - proposal, listing, and deletion, because EPA publication in the Federal Register and solicitation of
public comment at these milestones can provide information to the housing market resulting in the capitalization of
that information into housing values.

                                                           12
prices; this effect is measured separately from that of NPL listing.18 As we separately measure
listing and deletion, the 1982 HRS score instrumental variable (IV) strategy cannot be used in
our study.

        Second, to measure the effect of cleanup, we would ideally compare tracts exposed to
sites that are cleaned up to the counterfactual that those sites were not cleaned up. To serve as
the counterfactual (i.e., the “non-treatment” baseline), Greenstone and Gallagher use tracts
exposed to both sites proposed to NPL (but not listed) and sites that were never proposed to the
NPL (i.e., non-NPL sites). However, tracts that host non-NPL sites may have systematically
different unobserved attributes compared with tracts that host NPL sites. If non-NPL sites are
associated with “better” unobservables than sites proposed to (but not listed on) the NPL, this
would create an elevated baseline of housing values against which the benefit of treatment is
measured (thus biasing downward the estimated benefit from treatment). In contrast, our study
uses only tracts exposed to NPL sites in their pre-proposed stage as the “non-treatment” baseline;
these sites are more likely to be similar to the NPL sites that have progressed to deletion.
Appendix A3 describes in detail the differences in the construction of our data set and
Greenstone and Gallagher’s data set.

        Third, in defining the neighborhood over which the cleanup exerts a localized effect,
Greenstone and Gallagher consider attributes of tracts falling within buffers of three and five
miles around sites.19 However, panel data studies of the association between hazardous waste
sites and housing prices have detected effects at a maximum distance of 2 to 2.5 miles ( 3.2 to
4km) with a mean estimated price effect of 7.4% (reviewed in Jenkins et al, 2006). Greenstone
and Gallagher’s larger neighborhood definition may therefore encompass both houses that are
affected and unaffected by the effect of cleanup, which will dilute the estimated benefits of that
treatment. In contrast, we define the affected neighborhood using smaller buffers of 3 km (2
miles) around the sites and test the sensitivity of our results to larger buffers of 5km (3 miles).

         Fourth, Greenstone and Gallagher’s focus on the median housing value at the census tract
level may miss or understate the benefits from Superfund cleanup if such benefits are localized.
Given the fairly large size of many census tracts, we suspect that there may be significant within-
tract heterogeneity in housing values. In particular, we demonstrate that, within a tract, cheaper
houses are more likely to be located in closer proximity to sites, and that the cleanup of sites will
have a greater impact on the values of these subsets of houses. Therefore, to capture the impact
on these subsets of houses within the tract, we use two approaches. First, we examine the deciles
of the tract-level housing value distribution, not simply the median. Second, we examine
housing values at the level of the census block, which is a higher-resolution geographical unit
than the census tract, and therefore less prone to problem of within-unit heterogeneity.
18
   Other studies have measured the distinct effects of these various milestones (Kiel and Zabel, 2001; Cameron and
McConnaha, 2006; Kiel and Williams, 2007) and treated these milestones as distinct (Sigman, 2001).
19
   Greenstone and Gallagher’s choice of three miles is based on the EPA’s use of that distance in their HRS
calculations, as in most cases, contaminants can migrant to at least this distance (Greenstone and Gallagher, 2008).

                                                         13
        Appendix A3 provides the most direct comparison possible of our methodological
approach and that used by Greenstone and Gallagher (2008). First, we construct an “intersection
sample” (i.e., the intersection of our two data sets). Using that sample we then recover results
similar to Greenstone and Gallagher using their methodology. Finally, we show how those
results change (in particular, how significant effects of NPL deletion are realized) when we (i)
separately control for the listing and deletion site statuses, (ii) exploit panel variation to control
for time-invariant unobservable tract attributes, and (iii) look at points on the within-tract
housing value distribution besides the median.



Hedonic Approach #2: Distance from the disamenity

        The second approach is to take a known site, determine how distance from it impacts the
selling price of nearby homes, and determine how that distance gradient varies with site status.
This approach requires individual transaction data for each house sold in a given period and uses
hedonic pricing theory stemming from Rosen (1974), with distance from a site serving as the
main housing characteristic of interest. Papers employing the single-site “distance approach”
primarily rely on cross-sectional variation in house prices.20 Kiel and Zabel (2001) focus on the
two Superfund sites in Woburn, MA. They are interested in the premium paid for distance to the
nearest site but do not allow multiple sites to enter into the hedonic price function. While they
do not employ panel data, they do estimate the price function at several points in time. Kiel and
Williams (2007) similarly estimate separate hedonic price functions based on distance to the
closest site, repeating the process for each of 74 NPL sites spread across 13 US counties. They
find significant evidence of heterogeneity in the effect of Superfund remediation activities.

        The primary strength of the distance-based studies is that they allow for a great deal of
heterogeneity in calculating the benefits associated with site remediation. In particular, these
single-site analyses can recover a different set of estimates pertaining to the homes surrounding
each site. This flexibility, however, comes at a cost. First, sites do not exist in isolation – a
significant fraction of NPL sites are located in close proximity to other NPL sites, creating the
potential for important omitted variable bias.21 There may be other location-specific
unobservables (besides NPL sites) that will also bias the estimated impact of the NPL site in
question. For example, there is the potential for correlation between the location of hazardous
waste and economic opportunity to confound the disamenities of living near a site with the
relative appeal of living near what could be an employment center (Farber, 1998). Similarly, if
there is correlation between remediation decisions and unobserved neighborhood quality,


20
   A second subset of papers employing the “distance approach” use information in repeat sales of individual houses
to control non-parametrically for time invariant unobserved heterogeneity at the house level (Miller, 1982; Case et
al., 2006).
21
   37.7% of NPL sites in our data have another site within 4.59 km, which is the mean distance to a site in Kiel and
Williams (2007) plus two standard deviations.

                                                        14
estimates of the effect of hazardous waste cleanup could be upwardly biased. To the extent that
these unobservables do not vary over time, panel data distance analyses will be able to control
for them.

         A second potential problem arises in terms of how one should use these heterogeneous
marginal effects generated from a single-site distance analysis for policy. In particular, given a
newly proposed candidate site, it is not clear which of the many estimated heterogeneous
marginal effects one should apply to it. When single-site distance analyses are performed
separately on each of a number of sites (as in Kiel and Williams (2007)), the average effect that
one recovers is based on the characteristics of the sites that happened to be chosen, which may
not be representative of all sites. There is no reason to expect that this average would apply to all
sites in the program in general. With access to detailed site attribute data, one could match a new
candidate site to a previously valued site based on these attributes. However, with that sort of
data, we could allow for explicitly heterogeneous marginal effects in our multi-site analysis as
well.

        Do the methods described in the previous sub-section solve these problems? Not
necessarily. In particular, estimates from national analyses may not be accurate measures of the
hedonic price schedule in a particular region, since there is no reason to expect preferences for
environmental quality to be constant across the nation. There is, however, a trade-off – site-
specific analyses uncover idiosyncratic price gradients for specific sites in specific places, but
these estimates cannot be generalized to different sites in different locations. A more valuable
resource would be a set of estimates that are generalizable across many sites in a particular
region – i.e., a regional or city-level analysis that accounts for the idiosyncratic preferences of
the area while averaging over all hazardous waste sites the region. Imposing homogeneity on
hazardous waste sites in a region is a more palatable assumption than imposing homogeneity
over sites in a country, and the resultant estimates should be more applicable within the region
than estimates from the national sample.

        These concerns motivate our use of housing transactions data later in the paper.
Specifically, to uncover the regional implicit price for environmental quality as it relates to
Superfund sites, it is necessary to use the regional housing market, not simply housing
transactions in a radius around a site. However, a natural consequence of incorporating all sites
in a region is the potential for houses to be located near multiple sites. This problem is
exacerbated in regions where Superfund sites are clustered spatially. To address this problem,
we adopt an approach that incorporates all sites in a particular region into the analysis and treats
them homogeneously; the results should be interpreted as price effects from the “average site” in
the metropolitan area or region. That effect will differ, however, across regions.

        We would suggest that there is value in both multi-site, cross-neighborhood analyses and
single-site, distance-based analyses. Single-site analyses are particularly useful for recovering a
distribution of heterogeneous marginal effects, but may be prone to bias associated with

                                                 15
unobserved neighborhood attributes. A national model (like the one we estimate here) sacrifices
heterogeneity but does control for omitted variables better in deriving an unbiased estimate of
average program effects.



3 Estimation Method

3.1      Geographical Resolution: Tracts, Blocks and Houses

        We conduct our study at three different levels of geographic resolution – census tracts,
census blocks, and individual houses. A summary of the strengths and weaknesses of each of
these three approaches, along with the ways in which they complement one another, is presented
in Table 1.

        In our census tract analysis, we look for evidence that Superfund remediation, which we
expect to have highly localized effects, has greater impact at the lower percentiles of within-tract
house value distributions. The Decennial Census provides counts of houses with owners’ stated
values in various intervals, allowing us to calculate the discrete distribution of house values
within each tract. These intervals are described in Appendix Table A1. We use straight lines to
connect the midpoints of these intervals portrayed in a cumulative distribution function
histogram; we then read the cumulative distribution function of house values in each census tract
from those lines. Percentiles read off of these distribution functions are then used as dependent
variables in our empirical analysis.

         We expect Superfund remediation to have greater influence on house values in the lower
percentiles of the within-tract house value distribution if Superfund sites lie closer to the lower
value houses within each tract; we document, using proprietary housing transactions data, that
this is indeed the within-tract spatial distribution for three out of four housing markets. The tract
analysis takes snapshots of the NPL status in 1990 and 2000, and relates changes in percentiles
of the housing value distribution to changes in the status of the nearby NPL sites between 1990
and 2000.

        We also use restricted-access census block data to measure appreciation in house values
when these effects are highly localized. The block data directly improve upon the tract analysis,
as the coarse geographical resolution that accompanies census tracts may obscure potential
benefits from site cleanup.22 Like the tract analyses, the block analysis takes snapshots of the
NPL status in 1990 and 2000, and relates changes in housing values to changes in the status of
the nearby NPL sites between 1990 and 2000.



22
  The main advantage of the tract analysis is that it can be conducted with publicly available data. Use of the block
data requires special sworn status and project approval from the Census Bureau.

                                                         16
        Finally, repeat-sales data from Dataquick Information Services provide detailed
information for every housing transaction (i.e., sales prices, date of sale, housing characteristics,
and geographic coordinates) in a variety of metropolitan statistical areas (MSA’s). Pairing this
with information about every Superfund site in each of these MSA’s (and its status at each point
in time) allows for valuation of each stage of the remediation process. There are many
advantages of this approach over the tract and block analyses described above. (i) These data
provide even finer spatial and temporal resolution than do the restricted-access decennial census
block data. (ii) By using actual transaction prices, we overcome the problems of misreported or
biased self-reported stated values in tract and block census data.23 (iii) Working with one MSA
at a time, we are able to detect heterogeneity in the welfare effects of remediation across cities.
(iv) Considering one MSA at a time also allows us to use a more realistic definition of the
housing market confronting potential home buyers (i.e., a single MSA as opposed to the entire
county). (v) By tracking the same house across multiple transactions, we are able to account for
house fixed effects in a way that is not possible using repeated cross-sectional census data. The
main disadvantages encountered with repeat-sales data is that the sample of houses actually
taken to market more than once in the sample period may not be a random sample of the
underlying population of all houses, and that the sample of sites considered may not be
nationally representative. However, as seen in Table 5, the set of houses in our data that sell
multiple times are similar in terms of prices to houses that sell only once. It is also possible that
the house fixed effect assumption (i.e., that unobserved house attributes do not change over time)
may be violated, although we make sample cuts (described below) in an effort to avoid this
problem.



3.2      Identification Strategy: Tract and Block Analysis

        In our baseline specification, we examine tracts that lie in 3km buffers surrounding NPL
sites. Taking a conservative approach, a tract is included in a buffer if any part of it is found
using GIS software to intersect with the 3km buffer.24 The tract and block analyses take
snapshots of the NPL status of each tract in 1990 and 2000 and relate changes in percentiles of
the housing value distribution to changes in those site statuses. We compare changes in owner-
occupied housing values between 1990 and 2000 to changes in exposure to (i) sites that are

23
  Kiel and Zabel (1999) compare owner assessments and actual sale prices for three metropolitan areas over eleven
years. They find that, although owners generally overestimate their values by 5%, the differences in these two
values are not related to housing or owner characteristics other than tenure in the house. DiPasquale and Somerville
(1995) find that price series based on transaction prices and owner-reported values have very similar time-series
patterns, although they can differ near market turning points. They also report that owner estimates of value are
consistently higher than reported transaction prices.
24
  The disadvantage of this approach is that an entire tract can be quite large. An alternative approach would be to
examine only sub-segments of tracts that fall within the 3km buffer. However, doing so would necessitate an
assumption that each tract is internally spatially homogeneous, which we show to be untrue.

                                                         17
proposed for the NPL but not listed, (ii) sites that are listed on the NPL but not deleted, and (iii)
sites that are deleted from the NPL. Our tract and block analyses rely on two complementary
identification strategies: sample restrictions and modeling strategy.



Sample restrictions

        We delineate three samples of neighborhoods for comparison; the third is our strictest
and most preferred. First, in our “all-NPL” sample, we examine tracts that contain land inside
the buffers surrounding 1,722 sites that have been proposed to the NPL (before Jan 1, 2010);
many of these sites subsequently went on to further stages of remediation. Our assumption is
that the set of tracts in buffers surrounding sites are likely to be more similar to one another than
the set of all tracts in the country. The main difference among the tracts in our all-NPL sample is
with respect to their receipt of treatment – i.e., some of the sites in these neighborhoods were
listed on the NPL, and some of those sites were subsequently deleted from the NPL.

        In our second sample, we build upon the Greenstone and Gallagher regression
discontinuity (RD) research design. In our RD sample, we examine neighborhoods that host a
subset of the ever-proposed NPL sites (i.e., those that were scored in 1982 and whose scores lie
between 16.5 and 40.5). Our RD sample comprises 1,454 tracts surrounding 212 sites. While
the RD design aims to address the unobservables correlated with listing, we expect that the
balancing of unobservables across both sides of the treatment discontinuity may help control for
unobservables that are correlated with deletion as well.

        Our third sample corrects for one additional confounder – tracts in the RD sample may lie
in close proximity to other sites that can be quite heterogeneous. In particular, tracts in our RD
sample may lie near (i) sites with HRS82 < 16.5 and HRS82 > 40.5 and (ii) sites proposed to the
NPL in later years (which were not scored in the 1982 sample). We therefore assemble a strict
RD sample using only those tracts from the RD sample that are not themselves within 3km of
another site that was unscored in 1982 or whose 1982 HRS score lies outside the [16.5, 40.5]
interval. Deleting tracts that violate this rule leaves our strict RD sample with 818 tracts
surrounding 187 sites. Tables 3(a) and 3(b) summarize the differences between the RD and strict
RD samples.



Modeling strategy

        Our panel strategy controls for time-invariant unobservables that cause neighborhoods to
have an above or below average distribution of housing values both before and after their receipt
of treatment. We begin with the standard hedonic specification that relates tract or block housing
values with contemporaneous tract or block attributes. We then use panel data techniques,


                                                  18
differencing across the 2000 and 1990 specifications in order to control for time invariant
unobservables at the tract or block level.

        Summarizing our identification strategy, we rely on (i) the RD or strict RD samples to
ensure that sites which are listed, and those that are not yet in listed, are similar in their
unobservables, and (ii) panel methods to further control for time-varying unobservables. To
identify the effect of deletion, we rely primarily on the panel methods to control for time-
invariant unobservables.



4        Regression Models

4.1      Census Tracts – Main Specification

        We begin with a basic hedonic regression model relating owner-occupied housing prices
to the characteristics of the house and the neighborhood.

(1)           ,        ,   ,        ,    ,       ,    ,        ,    ,               ,


The subscript indexes tracts that lie within a 3km buffer of an ever-proposed NPL site. A tract
is included as long as any part of it falls within the 3km buffer.        , is the natural log of the
  th
     percentile of owner-occupied housing values in tract in year             1990, 2000 . is a
vector containing characteristics of the housing stock along with the socioeconomic and
demographic attributes of the tract. These variables and the housing value distributions are
summarized in Tables 3 (a) and (b) for our RD and strict RD samples.            are time-invariant
                                                        th
tract-level unobservables specific to houses in the        percentile, and , is a tract-percentile-year
unobservable.

        Our main variable of interest is the exposure of the tract in 1990 or 2000 to sites that are
deleted by that time period. Other variables of interest are exposure of the tract to sites that are
proposed or listed. Exposure is defined as the share of the land area in a tract that falls into 3km
buffers surrounding NPL sites.25 Specifically, we first use GIS to draw 3km buffers around each
NPL site. A tract’s exposure to NPL sites at each stage of remediation is then defined as the
ratio of its area of overlap with the 3km buffers drawn around sites at that stage to its total area.
Further detail on the calculation of tract exposures, including illustrative maps, is included in
Appendix A2. We also describe in more detail below how we handle situations in which a tract
is simultaneously exposed to multiple sites at the same stage of the remediation process.

25
  Note that EPA defines site location by the geocoordinates of the site’s centroid. Sites may vary greatly in size,
however, and we would expect the geographic “reach” of larger sites to be greater. Without specific GIS
information describing the boundaries of all sites, our best option is to use centroid geocoordinates to indicate
location.

                                                          19
        We use ,        to represent exposure of tract to sites that are deleted by 1 Jan 1990,
and ,       to represent the corresponding measure for 1 Jan 2000. ,          and ,       similarly
represent exposure of the tract to sites that are proposed by 1 Jan 1990 and 1 Jan 2000,
respectively. ,       and ,        correspond to listed status.

       Next, we take the difference between the 1990 and 2000 regression models (restricting
parameters to be constant over time), thereby removing the effect of time-invariant tract-
percentile unobservables.26

(2)             ,                 ,               ,             ,                 ,           ,

                                         ,            ,                   ,           ,              ,           ,


        The coefficient     provides a measure of the appreciation of housing values at the th
percentile resulting from deletion of the site relative to the pre-proposal baseline. Consider tracts
whose land area falls within the 3km buffer and suppose that the site status changes from listed
in 1990 to deleted in 2000. The variable measuring the share of the tracts’ exposure to deletion
goes from 0 to 1 for tracts that are fully within the 3km buffer, and from 0 to a positive value
(bounded at one) for tracts that are partially within the 3km buffer. Accounting for the natural
log in the dependent variable, a one-unit increase in exposure to deleted sites would imply that
                          th
house values at the            percentile appreciate by 100                                   1 . (Kennedy, 1981)
Because this transformation does not significantly change any of our results, we ignore it and
simply discuss parameter estimates in the text of this report in order to streamline the exposition.
Table 2 summarizes the interpretation of all the coefficients.

         The change in exposure to proposed sites and the change in exposure to sites in the final
listing stage similarly capture the change in house values associated with these steps in the
remediation process. When a site moves from being not proposed in 1990 to the proposed
category in 2000, the variable marking the change in exposure to proposed sites for a tract lying
fully inside the 3km buffer takes the value 1. A negative      indicates that the th percentile of
the housing value distribution drops in response to increased exposure to proposed sites. When
the site progresses from proposed status in 1990 to listed status in 2000, the change in exposure


26
   Our conservative interpretation of the coefficients in the panel analysis is that they measure the capitalization into
the housing values resulting from the cleanup (Kuminoff and Pope, 2010). Capitalization into housing values is in
itself valuable information for policymakers in judging the benefits from Superfund cleanup and affects the local
economy including the property tax base. If the coefficients are in fact stable over time, the estimates can be further
interpreted as measures of willingness-to-pay. To our knowledge, with two years of data, it is not possible to test this
assumption of stability of coefficients.
          Looking across deciles, we assume only that the tract-level unobservable affecting the θth percentile house
in 1990 has to be the same tract-level unobservable affecting the θth percentile house (whatever house that may be)
in 2000. We do not take the restrictive interpretation that the θth percentile house in 1990 has to be the same θth
percentile house in 2000.

                                                           20
to proposed sites for a tract lying fully inside the buffer takes the value -1, offsetting the original
change when the site was originally proposed.



4.3     Census Blocks

        The cross-section and panel regression models for census blocks are defined analogously
to equations (1) and (2), except that (i) block median values replace within-tract percentiles of
the house value distribution, and (ii) exposure is defined by a count of Superfund sites at each
stage of remediation lying within a certain distance of the centroid of each block. The baseline
sample is comprised of blocks contained in all census tracts that have some overlap with the 3km
buffer surrounding an NPL site. Table 4 summarizes the block data for the all-NPL sample.
Summary statistics for the RD sub-samples could not be released because of census clearance
rules.

        We run two separate regression specifications at the block level, each with a unique set of
variables of interest. In the first block-level regression model, we include the counts of NPL
sites located less than km from the centroid of census block at time that are proposed ( , ),
listed ( , ), and deleted ( , ). We use four distances (i.e., < 0.25, < 0.5, < 1, and < 3km) – one
appears in each of four separate specifications. In the second block-level regression model, we
include the counts of NPL sites located within various distance bands from the centroid of the
                                                       ,                       ,                       ,
census block    at time that are proposed (        ,       ), listed (         ,   ), and deleted (   ,    ). We
simultaneously use four distance bands (i.e, 0-1, 1-2, 2-3, and 3-5km) in a single specification.

        The interpretation of the coefficients on the count variables is as follows. Consider a case
in which a site is within 0.25km of the centroid of block . The site is listed on the NPL in 1990,
but is deleted before 2000. The variable measuring the change in the number of sites that are
deleted from the NPL lying within 0.25km from the centroid of the block takes the value 1, while
the variable indicating the change in the number of listed sites takes the value -1. The net effect
on house values in this block from the site being deleted relative to when the site was in the pre-
proposal stage is .



4.4     House Analysis

       In this part of the analysis, we turn our attention to repeat-sales household level data from
Dataquick Information Systems. In particular, we use information on how Superfund
remediation activity at nearby sites affects actual housing transaction prices. We begin our
discussion of the house-level model by considering the following hedonic price function:
                                    ′
(3)                         , ,         , ,    ,                         , ,


                                                           21
  indexes individual houses, indexes census tracts, and indexes times at which house is sold.
     , , measures the natural log of the transaction price,  , , represents a vector of Superfund
site exposure variables (in particular, the number of Superfund sites at various stages of
remediation – discovered, proposed, listed, and deleted – within 3km of house ), , is a scalar
neighborhood unobservable that is allowed to vary over time,27 and represents unobserved
time-invariant attributes of house . Similar to the census tract/block analysis, each coefficient in
this specification measures the effect of exposure to a site of a particular status relative to the
pre-discovery stage.

        Consider a house that sells at two points in time, and (in this analysis, we restrict
our attention to houses that sell more than once).28 Differencing the hedonic price function
across repeat sales:


(4)             , ,                , ,             , ,                     , ,       ′            ,       ,                                , ,             , ,
                       , ,                                     , ,                                    ,                                              , ,



While this procedure eliminates , we are still left with , (i.e., the change in neighborhood
unobservable between periods and ). Therefore, we proceed by taking the average of each
“~” variable across all houses in that sold in years and (denoted by the set Ω ):


(5)        ,                   ∑   Ω             , ,                       ,                  ∑       Ω       , ,       ,                  ∑          Ω      ̃,   ,



Differencing-out these average values:

(6)              , ,                     ,               , ,                     ,       ′            ,             ,       ̃,   ,               ,
                         , ,                                         , ,                                                             , ,



(7)              , ,               , ,       ′           ̂,    ,




OLS estimation of equation (7) controls for time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity at the house
level, and time-varying unobserved heterogeneity at the tract level. In other specifications


27
   In our analysis, we treat census tracts as neighborhoods, fitting with the definition of a tract used by the Census
Bureau.
28
   In our analysis, we pool multiple price differences for houses that sell more than twice in the same regression and
cluster standard errors at the level of the house. Table 5 reports summary statistics for the set of houses that sell
once along with the set of houses that sell multiple times. In general, the set of repeat-sales houses look quite
similar in most dimensions, although multi-sale houses do tend to be smaller and less expensive. See Gatzlaff and
Haurin (1997) for a discussion of sample selection bias in repeat-sales models.

                                                                                         22
designed to demonstrate the importance of these controls, we estimate the model using (i) only
house fixed effects, (ii) only tract-by-year fixed effects, or (iii) no fixed effects at all. In (i) and
(iii) we do include a set of year dummies to control for market-wide appreciation.




5          Data

5.1        Data Sources

        Census tract data are from Geolytics Neighborhood Change Database, which has
reapportioned census data from 1980, 1990 and 2000 into census tract boundaries that are fixed
in 2000. Restricted-access census block data for 1990 and 2000 are from the US Census Bureau
and were analyzed at the Triangle Census Research Data Center. Housing transactions data are
from Dataquick Information Systems, used under a licensing agreement with Duke University
Department of Economics. The EPA provided detailed data on all sites ever proposed to the
National Priority List. The HRS 1982 scores that we use to construct our RD and strict RD
sample of sites (described in section 5.4) are from the dataset compiled and published by
Greenstone and Gallagher (2008). We also use their dataset to construct the “intersection
sample” which we use to provide a comparison of our study with theirs (see Appendix A3). The
Consumer Price Index used to deflate housing prices is compiled by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics and is based upon a 1982 Base of 100.29



5.2        Construction of Compatible Tract and Block Samples

         To construct our sample of tracts, we use shapefiles from Geolytics to identify all tracts
that fall within 3km buffers of NPL sites. To identify the block sample, we begin with the
Geolytics tract identifiers from the tract sample. First, using these Geolytic tract identifiers, we
find the corresponding tracts in the restricted access data. The restricted data uses ESRI
shapefiles to create the crosswalks between the 1990 and 2000 data. The Geolytics and ESRI
shapefiles, while similar, are not identical. In particular, several tract identifiers exist in the
Geolytics tract data but not in the ESRI-based restricted access data. Second, after identifying
the relevant tracts in the restricted access data, we identify the corresponding blocks within those
tracts. Third, we calculate the distance between the centroids of these blocks and the NPL sites.
We then restrict our block sample to include only those blocks whose centroids fall within 5km
of the nearest NPL site. Doing so provides us with a natural treatment group (i.e., those blocks
falling within a 3km buffer around each site) and a corresponding set of control blocks (i.e.,
those blocks lying 3-5km from each site). This restriction leads to several blocks being dropped


29
     http://inflationdata.com/inflation/Consumer_Price_Index/HistoricalCPI.aspx?rsCPI_currentPage=1

                                                        23
due to their large sizes. Third, we compare our tracts and block samples, and find substantial,
though not complete overlap between the two. To summarize, the first difference stems from the
differences in the Geolytics and ESRI shapefiles. The second difference stems from dropping
blocks whose centroids lay > 5km from the nearest site.

        We end up with two tract samples – (i) the initial sample, which includes all tracts that
fall within 3km buffers around the NPL sites; and (ii) the final sample, which drops tracts that
are not represented by any corresponding blocks in the restricted access block sample.30 Our
report, which aims to compare tract and block results, provides regression results from this
second tract sample. Regression results based on the first tract sample, available from the
authors, are similar to those using the second tract sample.

        We repeat our analysis using a 5km sample. To construct that sample of tracts, we
identify all tracts that fall within 5km buffers of NPL sites. The corresponding construction of
the block sample drops blocks whose centroids lie more than 7km from the nearest NPL sites.



5.3      Construction of the House Sample

        The housing transactions dataset from Dataquick contains many observable
characteristics for each house (e.g. number of bedrooms, square footage, etc.) as well as the
transaction price, loan amount, transaction date, latitude and longitude coordinates and the year
2000 census tract identifier. Each property is uniquely identified in the data, which allows the
creation of a panel data set at the house-level. In an effort to remove outliers, houses observed in
the top and bottom 1% of the price and square footage distribution are dropped, as well as the top
1% of the distributions of the number of bedrooms and the number of bathrooms. Houses with
missing attribute or location data are also dropped from the dataset.

        An unfortunate feature of the transactions data is that Dataquick overwrites the
characteristics recorded for a given property in previous transactions if a newer transaction is
recorded with different and presumably updated information. However, in certain
circumstances, if the renovation is on the scale of a large addition or major construction, the
transaction will be flagged as having such an improvement. The implication for panel analysis is
an inability to observe some changes to properties, since any moderate change made to the
property is retroactively applied to all records in the data. As a result, all observable
characteristics will drop out of any repeat sales analysis. To combat the presence of homes that
likely have changed in substantial ways, homes that are observed to appreciate (depreciate) more
than 50% on an annualized basis, have the major construction data flag, transact with a loan

30
  To be specific, only few tracts are dropped. The strict RD sample contains 830 tracts that represented in both the
block and final tract samples, after dropping 19 tracts that were not represented in the block sample. The
corresponding figure for the RD sample is 1,482 tracts, after dropping 19 tracts that were not represented in the
block sample. The corresponding figure for the All-NPL sample is 10,062 tracts, after dropping 133 tracts.

                                                         24
amount greater than the transaction price by $5,000, or are observed to transact twice or more in
any 12 month span are dropped from the sample. This procedure, of course, runs the risk of
dropping any houses that appreciated precisely because of improvements made in response to
Superfund site remediation. This is, therefore, another way in which our valuation exercise is
conservative.

        Even with house fixed effects, concern still remains that properties with unobserved
changes are resident in the dataset. If changes in properties are not correlated in any way with
Superfund site exposure, then unobserved property improvements should not bias any results.
However, in a repeat-sales model, the price effects of proximity to Superfund sites are identified
by changes in site status. If, for example, there is a correlation between home improvement and
Superfund site remediation, the estimated price effects of hazardous waste cleanup will be biased
upwards as it will be impossible to distinguish between those paying for improved environmental
quality and those paying for improved housing. Mastromonaco (2010) checks for this
possibility, but finds no evidence that changes in Superfund site status (proposed, listed, deleted)
affects the likelihood of an improvement.

       We use data from four housing markets – northern New Jersey, the Los Angeles
Metropolitan Area, the Boston Metropolitan Area, and southwestern Connecticut. They were
chosen because Dataquick began collecting information in these housing markets prior to 1990.
Because much of the activity associated with the Superfund program occurred during the 1990’s,
having coverage back to this point is important for a successful analysis.



5.4     Construction of the Sample of Sites: All-NPL, RD and Strict RD

        We begin with all sites that have been ever proposed to the NPL (before Jan 1, 2010) in
the contiguous US. Of these, we excluded 10 sites that had been proposed to the NPL but whose
date of proposal was not recorded.31 Our all-NPL sample contains tracts surrounding 1,722 ever-
proposed sites. Our RD sample contains tracts surrounding 221 sites scored in 1982 whose HRS
scores are between 16.5 and 40.5. Our strict RD sample contains tracts surrounding 187 sites
from the RD sample that are not proximate to any other sites not contained in that sample. The
progress of these sites through the Superfund milestones is shown in the flowcharts in Figures 1-
3.32




31
  The only information we have on these 10 sites are they were eventually recorded as non-NPL sites.
32
  All but two sites had EPA verified geo-coordinates; for those two sites (NJN000206276, NYN000206282), the
EPA provided two sets of coordinates for each site were identical.

                                                     25
6      Results

6.1    Summary Statistics

Tables 3 (a) and (b) summarize the tract data. In particular, they report means and standard
deviations of tract attributes for the set of tracts surrounding the sites that we use in our RD and
strict RD samples. Table 4 reports summary statistics for the 323,682 census blocks that
correspond to the all-NPL sample. Table 5 reports sample sizes and average prices for the full
sample of housing transactions from four separate housing markets – the Boston and Los
Angeles metropolitan areas, northern New Jersey, and southwestern Connecticut.



6.2    Tract Analysis

Deletion of sites from the NPL – Main Results

        Our preferred estimates are from the panel analysis of tracts that are in the strict RD
sample. Recall that this sample and specification are designed to deal with several potential
confounders. The panel specification controls for time-invariant unobservables that are
correlated with sites’ statuses. The RD sample controls for unobservables (time-invariant or
time-varying) that are correlated with sites’ listing; the strict RD sample additionally controls for
heterogeneity associated with exposure to sites other than the 1982 sites that have narrow HRS
scores. Observations are weighted by tract counts of owner-occupied housing units, and robust
standard errors account for heterosekedacity.

         Table 6 shows results from the panel specification for the strict RD sample. The results
indicate that the deletion of a site from the NPL raises nearby housing values, but the
appreciation, in percentage terms, is more prominent at the lower deciles of the within-tract
housing value distribution. As seen in panel A, carrying a site through the remediation process
to deletion raises house values by between 17.4% and 20.0% between the 10th and 40th
percentiles, and by 15.4% at the median and 11.4% at the 60th percentile. All of these effects are
statistically and economically significant. The effects of deletion are not statistically significant
above the 60th percentile of the housing value distribution. The higher percentage appreciation
among the lower deciles of the housing value distribution is partly due to the lower absolute
value of these houses. Panel B presents the results using housing value levels as the dependent
variable. The appreciation amounts to $5,980 at the 10th percentile, $9,530 at the 30th
percentile, and $8,796 at the median. Deletion does not lead to a statistically significant
appreciation in housing values at the upper deciles of the within-tract distribution, though the
point estimate at the 70th percentile is significant at the 10% level.

        Table 7 shows results from the panel specification for the RD sample. The results mirror
those from the strict RD sample except the magnitudes of deletion effects are even greater.


                                                 26
Carrying a site through the remediation process to deletion from the NPL raises nearby housing
values, and the appreciation, in percentage terms, is more prominent at the lower deciles of the
within-tract housing value distribution. The appreciation amounts to 30.0% at the 10th percentile,
21.1% at the median, and 15.1% at the 90th percentile. Similar to the strict RD sample,
appreciation measured in levels in the RD sample is also concentrated at the lower percentiles.
The appreciation amounts to $9,924 at the 10th percentile and $8,622 at the 80th percentile.



Deletion of sites from the NPL – Other Specifications

        We examine a variety of alternative specifications for the strict RD sample and RD
sample. First, we estimate an unweighted specification for the strict RD sample and the RD
sample. Results from those regressions, presented in Table 8(a) columns 1-3 and 4-6 are
comparable to those from the weighted regressions. For the strict RD sample, we continue to
find that carrying a site through the remediation process to deletion raises housing values at the
lower deciles. In particular, the unweighted regressions indicate that house values appreciate by
20.8% at the 20th percentile and 16.8% at the median. For the RD sample, we find that deletion
raises housing values by 33.1% at the 20th percentile, 23.9% at the median, and 24.8% at the 80th
percentile.

         Second, to address the possibility that the errors are spatially correlated, we calculate
clustered standard errors. Ideally, we should cluster the standard errors over groups of tracts that
lie in close proximity to one another, as these errors are likely to be spatially correlated.
However, because the next available level of geographical identifier is the county, we take the
practical step of estimating standard errors clustered at the county level. The drawback of this
approach is that clustering on too aggregate a geographical region will lead to overly large
standard error estimates. Table 8(a) presents standard errors clustered at the county level,
estimated for the strict RD sample (columns 7-9) and the RD sample (columns 10-12). The
estimates for the RD sample are statistically significant, but the estimates for the smaller strict
RD sample are no longer statistically significant with clustering.

         Third, to explore the spatial extent of the effects of deletion, we repeat our analysis using
5km buffers when creating the strict RD and RD samples. Table 8(b) columns 1-3 reveals that
with the larger definition of neighborhoods near NPL sites, deletion no longer yields statistically
significant estimates of appreciation in housing values in the strict RD sample. Comparison of
these results with our earlier results from Table 6, where neighborhoods are defined narrowly
using 3km buffers, suggests that the larger neighborhood definition lumps nearby affected
houses with unaffected houses, thereby diluting the effects of deletion. For the RD sample, these
larger definitions of neighborhoods near NPL sites still yield results indicating that deletion leads
to statistically significant appreciation in housing values (Table 8(b), columns 4-6), but these



                                                 27
point estimates are less than half the magnitude of those measured with the narrower 3km
definition of neighborhoods in Table 7.

        Finally, for comparison, we show results from the all-NPL sample in Table 8(c) (with and
without weights). In contrast to the RD and strict RD samples, the all-NPL sample does not
control for unobserved heterogeneity between treated and untreated tracts. We find estimates
that are much smaller in magnitude in the all-NPL sample (i.e., 3.1% at the median and 3.4% at
the 80th percentile in the weighted regression and 3.1% at the 80th percentile in the unweighted
regression).



Listing of a site to the NPL

         Considering the estimates recovered from the tract strict RD sample in Table 6, we find
that listing does not have a statistically significant positive effect on housing prices. Using the
RD sample in Table 7, we find statistically significant effects in the lower deciles. There, when a
tract goes from zero to full exposure, housing values appreciate by 15.1% at the 10th percentile,
10.4% at the 30th percentile, and 7.5% at the median. The block analysis of the strict RD sample
finds smaller magnitudes of appreciation for listing than deletion, particularly within smaller
distances from the sites. As described in Table 10, reaching final listing status results in
statistically significant appreciation, ranging from 13.3% to 5.2% in blocks lying < 1km and <
3km from the site. In the block analysis using the RD sample, described in Table 11, the effect is
approximately 4% in blocks lying < 1km and < 3km from the site.

         The smaller magnitude of appreciation from listing compared to deletion can be
explained by the countervailing pressures on housing values that arise when a site is listed – final
listing reduces housing values by confirming the severe nature contamination of that site, but it
also increases housing values by signaling that the site will be remediated.33



Proposal of a site to the NPL

       Taken as a whole, our results indicate that proposal to the NPL results in the depreciation
of nearby housing values. The effect of proposal measured using the all-NPL sample ranges
from -7.2% to -8.9%, as seen in Table 8(c). The RD tract analysis, seen in Table 7, indicates that
proposal results in depreciation in housing values ranging from -$5,355 at the median to -
$11,648 at the 90th percentile. Estimates in percentage terms are not statistically significant.


33
  Note that, according to how we define Superfund remediation milestones, sites having achieved the “construction
complete” designation (without having been deleted from the NPL) will be coded as being in the listing stage. The
positive effects of listing that we find in the RD sample could be indicative of value that the housing market places
on the construction complete designation.

                                                         28
        Although the results in the strict RD samples suggest a much larger depreciation in
response to proposal on the NPL, we treat these results with caution. Only four sites (affecting 19
tracts and blocks therein), whose proposal status changed during the 1990’s, drive these results;
therefore, the results may not extend to other sites and tracts. The depreciation in the strict RD
tract sample ranges from -39.6% to -44.7% (see Table 6). Note that this problem of a few sites
driving the results does not affect the estimates pertaining to deletion and listing in the strict RD
sample because there exists fairly sizable variation in the exposure to listed and deleted sites
between 1990 and 2000 (as seen in Figure 1). Similarly, this issue does not arise in RD sample
(for proposal, listing or deletion).

        Depreciation in nearby housing values in response to the proposal of a site to the NPL
can be explained by two channels. First, the proposal of the site may have provided new
information to the market about the presence or severity of a harmful site. Second, even if the
market is already aware of the site and the extent of contamination, the proposal of site to the
NPL may further decrease housing values by stigmatizing the neighborhood (Messer et al, 2006).
Nevertheless, the proposal-induced depreciation is more than offset at the lower end of the
within-tract housing value distribution by the time the sites are deleted. As described earlier, the
estimated coefficients on deletion, which measure the effect of deletion on housing values
relative to values at the pre-proposal stage, indicate that the Superfund remediation process,
taken in its entirety, lead to an overall appreciation in housing values.

       The revelation of new information to the market by the proposal of the site to the NPL
and the subsequent depreciation in housing values is not a cost that is appropriately attributed to
the Superfund program. In contrast, depreciation resulting from stigmatization of the
neighborhood following the proposal of the site to the NPL can be viewed as a cost of the
program. Messer et al (2006) suggest ways in which the Superfund program can reduce the
stigmatization of neighborhoods, such as by expediting the remediation process.



Estimation Issue #1: Time varying observables and deletion status

        The estimation issue in identifying the effect of deletion is that the ever-proposed sites
that are eventually deleted in our study period may differ systematically from ever-proposed sites
that do not reach this milestone in our study period. While correlated unobservables are certainly
a legitimate concern, we find evidence in the literature that suggests they may not be a serious
problem in the current context. Sigman’s (2001) study of the pace of progress at Superfund sites
suggests that the impact of correlated unobservables on our estimate of deletion is likely to be
limited. In particular, our panel approach addresses variables (observed or unobserved) that are
time invariant. The following variables are modeled as time-invariant in Sigman (2001) –
socioeconomic characteristics, voter turnout, the technical complexity of the cleanup, and the
presence of potentially liable parties (PRPs) responsible for the cleanup. Our panel approach


                                                 29
controls for time-varying observables (listed in Table 3(b)), but any time-varying unobservables
could potentially create a problem for our estimation strategy. Factors modeled as time-varying
in Sigman’s study are, however, found to have little influence on sites’ progress. Public funding
does not influence the progress from listing to the Record of Decision (ROD), and legislative
influence does not affect the sites’ progress from listing through ROD to construction complete.
While public funding does influence the pace of progress from listing to ROD, Sigman (2001)
notes that most funding for cleanup at this stage comes from PRPs under their agreement with
the EPA.



Estimation Issue # 2: Variation in extent of remediation

        A related issue is whether sites that receive the cleanup treatment are likely to have
received systematically more intensive cleanup than comparison sites that have yet to receive
cleanup. If this concern is valid, then our estimates are larger on average than those that would
be realized by the cleanup of sites in general.

        Our estimation strategy addresses this issue by using fixed effects to control for time-
invariant unobservables, and by comparing sites that are as similar in terms of their HRS scores
(which reduces the possibility for variation in the extent of cleanup to arise from time-varying
unobservables). Moreover, previous studies suggest that the extent of cleanup does not vary
systematically based on neighborhood characteristics. The EPA did not choose less permanent
cleanup options for sites with lower median household income or with greater shares of non-
white residents at the zipcode level (Gupta et al., 1996). The expenditure to avert an average
cancer case in NPL sites was not influenced by mean income or minority population within a 1-
mile ring of NPL sites (Hamilton and Viscusi, 1999). Among the less hazardous sites, however,
variation can arise from constituents’ political activity (Hamilton and Viscusi, 1999).

        Hamilton and Viscusi (1999) note that although EPA’s directive set a baseline of cleanup
standards, cleanup is set at more stringent levels in states with stricter standards.34 However, the
state-level source of variation in the extent of cleanup would only bias our study if we were to
systematically compare cleanup in sites located in more stringent states with sites yet to be
cleaned that are located in less stringent states.


34
   Viscusi and Hamilton (1999) provide details on this point. The 1991 EPA directive set a baseline of cleanup
standards – the cumulative carcinogenic site risk to an individual based on reasonable exposure for both current and
future land use is less than 10-4 and the non-carcinogenic hazard quotient is less than one – but in practice the
cleanup goal is more stringent. In turn, variation in environmental cleanup targets can arise from state-level
variation in environmental standards. The 1986 Congress directed that remedial actions must meet federal standards
that are “applicable, relevant or appropriate” requirements (ARARs), and these actions must generally meet state
ARARs, if stricter than federal ones.


                                                        30
Estimation Issue #3: Defining exposure to overlapping sites

        Consider a tract that overlaps with the 3km buffers surrounding two NPL sites with the
same remediation status at a given point in time. Suppose that the tract contains three distinct
areas of overlap: (a) overlap with the buffer of the first NPL site, (b) overlap with the buffer of
the second NPL site, and (c) overlap with the area of intersection between the buffers of the first
and second NPL sites. We calculate the tract’s exposure as the sum of areas (a), (b) and (c). In
other words, we do not double-count the area of intersecting overlap (c). This approach limits
the maximum exposure for a tract to sites at any particular stage of remediation to be 1. The
drawback of this approach is that it does not account for the possibility that simultaneous
exposure to two deleted sites may have different implications for housing value appreciation
compared with exposure to one deleted site – it simply controls for share of a tract’s area that is
exposed to any deleted site. The alternative of simply adding together areas of intersection
between buffers of multiple NPL sites (so that the exposure variable could exceed 1) is, however,
equally arbitrary. One might suspect that the marginal impact of exposure to additional sites lies
somewhere between these two extremes, declining with additional sites.

         This potential problem turns out to be not much of a problem at all in our preferred
sample (i.e., strict RD). In particular, we examine the extent to which tracts in the strict RD
sample contain areas of overlap with intersecting buffers of two or more sites at the same stage
of remediation at the same point in time. As reported in Table A2.1, which can be found in
Appendix A2, this happens in very few tracts. Specifically, in only 5 instances out of 1,666 tract
x year combinations (i.e., 833 tracts observed in 2 years) do we find overlap with intersecting
buffers of deleted sites, and in only 12 instances do we find overlap with intersecting buffers of
listed sites.



Supplementary Analysis: Spatial distribution of Superfund sites in relation to cheaper houses
within the tract

        We find that the appreciation of housing values in response to site listing and deletion is
concentrated in the lower deciles of the within-tract distribution of housing values (particularly
when we consider our RD and strict RD samples). These results make sense if NPL sites are
located closer to the lower-value houses within each tract. We directly examine whether this is
the case using transactions data from the four housing markets described in Table 5. We first
make housing transactions comparable over time by differencing from each the mean price
amongst all houses that transacted in the particular housing market in the same year. Within
each tract, we then calculate the percentiles of the distribution of demeaned prices (pooled over
time). We next determine the number of Superfund sites (across all stages of remediation)
within 1km of each house. Binning houses into within-tract deciles, we report the average
exposure of houses in each decile to sites at that distance. To facilitate the comparison across

                                                 31
different markets (which have different total numbers of sites), we normalize each exposure
variable by the average exposure to sites within that market (i.e., the line describing exposure in
each market is centered around one).

        The results are summarized in Figure 4. In three out of the four markets, there is stark
evidence that houses in the lowest deciles of the within-tract price distribution are more likely to
be exposed to NPL sites than are houses in the higher deciles. For metro LA, houses in the first
decile are 9.8% more likely than the average house in that market to be exposed to a site, while
houses in the second decile are 5.7% more likely. Houses in the ninth decile are 2.1% less likely
than the average to be exposed at this distance. For Boston and southwestern Connecticut the
pattern is even more severe. Houses in the first decile in Boston are 29.1% more likely to be
exposed to an NPL site, while the comparable number for southwestern Connecticut is 37.6%.
At the second decile, the numbers are 21.6% and 27.7%, respectively. Houses in Boston in the
ninth decile are 25.8% less likely than the average to be exposed at this distance, while the
comparable number for southwestern Connecticut is 20%. Of the four markets we consider, the
pattern is weakest in northern New Jersey. There, the highest likelihood of exposure comes at
the 2nd decile (5.5% more likely) while the lowest comes at the 6th, 8th, and 9th deciles, which are
all 4.7% less likely than the average to be exposed. These results provide strong confirmation
that the patterns we recover in the tract-level analysis are being driven by the heterogeneous
exposure across the within-tract distribution that we postulate.



6.3    Block Analysis

Deletion of a site from the NPL

        We directly investigate localized externalities from Superfund cleanup by examining
median housing values at a very fine level of geographic precision – the census block.
Analogous to our tract analyses, the panel estimates from the strict RD sample are our preferred
estimates, since that sample and specification address several potential confounders. Results
from the block analysis confirm our earlier results from the tract analysis. As seen in Table 10,
carrying a site through the remediation process to deletion from the NPL results in statistically
significant appreciation of median house values and the appreciation is larger in blocks located
closer to the site. Median housing values appreciate on average by 19.9%, 19.0% and 5.8% in
blocks lying < 0.5km, < 1km, and < 3km from the site. Median housing values in blocks lying <
0.25 km do not show statistically significant appreciation, most likely because few houses are
located within these short distances of Superfund sites, leading to imprecise estimates.
Considering the distance bands (all of which are included in each regression specification), we
find a similar pattern of greater appreciation in blocks closer to the site. Carrying a site through
the remediation process to deletion raises median house values by 19.4% in blocks lying 0-1 km
from the site, and by only 8.4% in blocks lying 2-3km from the site. The results for the strict

                                                 32
RD, which is likely to contain only a few houses within each block, unsurprisingly, are heavily
influenced by outliers. For example, the point estimate for the 1-2km distance band is negative
though statistically insignificant. Deletion raises median house values by 20.7% in blocks lying
3-5km from the site, possibly suggesting preferential sorting whereby those who choose to live
some distance from the site (3-5km) have greater willingness-to-pay for remediation.
Noteworthy, the magnitude of the appreciation for the median house value at blocks lying < 1km
away from the site (19.0%) is comparable with that for the lower deciles of the house value
distribution at the tract-level (17.4%-20.0% at the 10th to the 40th percentile). In addition, the
cross-sectional estimates from the strict RD sample (not shown) indicate that reaching deletion
causes depreciation of house values in blocks lying near the site; this highlights the importance
of differencing between 2000 and 1990 in order to remove correlated time invariant
unobservables.

        Next we compare our preferred estimates from the strict RD sample with those from the
RD and all-NPL samples. While the strict RD sample has the advantage of narrowing the
unobservables, the larger RD and all-NPL samples have the advantage of larger sample sizes and
thus their results are less prone to outliers. Results from the RD sample, presented in Table 11,
indicate a smaller magnitude of appreciation than those from the strict RD sample. In particular,
carrying a site through the remediation process to deletion from the NPL is associated with only
7.1% and 5.8% appreciation in median house values in blocks lying < 1km and < 3km from the
site. Similarly, reaching deletion is associated with appreciation of only 7.8%, 11.2%, 2.9% and
2.9% in blocks lying 0-1km, 1-2km, 2-3km and 3-5km, respectively.35 Results from the RD
sample indicate that the magnitude of house value appreciation from reaching deletion declines
as one moves further from the site. Results from the all-NPL sample in Table 12 are similar in
magnitude to those from the RD sample, ranging from 8.1% to 6.5% for blocks that lie < 0.5km
to < 3km from the site.

        As was the case in the tract-level analysis, results using block-level data and standard
errors clustered at the tract-level are comparable to those described in Tables 10-12. The
comparison of the 3km and 5km block results are similar to our earlier comparison of the 3km
and 5km tract results. Block results using the 5km strict RD sample are not statistically
significant, while estimates from the 5km RD and All-NPL samples are about half the magnitude
of the corresponding estimates from the 3km samples. These results underscore the localized
nature of the benefits from Superfund cleanup. These results are available on request from the
authors.




35
   Deletion causes smaller appreciation in median house values in blocks lying closer to the site (0-1km) than in
blocks lying slightly further away (1-2km). These results suggest preferential sorting whereby those who choose to
live closest to the site have a lower willingness-to-pay for remediation. These persons may choose to locate close to
the site because they work on the sites.

                                                         33
Proposal to and listing on the NPL

        For the strict RD sample, proposal to the NPL again results in large and statistically
significant depreciation of median house values ranging from -24.7% to -37.3% in blocks lying
<1km and < 3km from the site. As was the case in the tract analysis, this result is driven by
blocks in 19 tracts (described in Table 9) that were exposed to four sites in the strict RD sample
that changed proposal status during the 1990’s. As was the case in the tract analysis, this issue
does not affect any of the other strict RD block-level results.

       The estimates from the RD and all-NPL samples yield mixed results with respect to site
proposal. Results based on the RD sample suggest that proposal has small positive effects on
housing values, while the all-NPL sample yields small negative effects except at the farthest
distance.

        In contrast to our earlier strict RD tract results (which found no effect), reaching listing
status results in statistically significant appreciation using the panel specification and block-level
data. This effect ranges from 13.3% to 5.2% in blocks lying < 1km and < 3km from the site. In
this case, either (i) the promise of cleanup associated with final listing appears to outweigh the
effect of confirming a site’s contamination level, or (ii) the inclusion of construction complete in
with the listing status leads to appreciation.



6.4    House Analysis

        Using repeat-sales transactions data from Dataquick Information Services, we are able to
model the effect of exposure to NPL sites at various stages of the remediation process at a very
fine level of geographic and temporal resolution. In particular, seeing individual houses transact
on multiple occasions allows us to control for all time-invariant unobservable house attributes
with house fixed effects. Seeing houses at a fine level of geographic precision (i.e., latitude and
longitude coordinates) allows us to also control for time-varying neighborhood unobservables
using census tract fixed effects. Controlling for both of these forms of heterogeneity turns out to
be important for our results.

        We report results for each of the four housing markets discussed in Table 5 – the Los
Angeles and Boston metropolitan areas, northern New Jersey, and southwestern Connecticut. In
particular, Tables 13 (a) and (b) report results for each market using site counts within a 3km
radius of each house. For each market, columns (1) - (4) report results from different
specifications that are designed to illustrate the importance of each fixed effect control. Our
preferred estimates are presented in column (1) which includes both house fixed effects and
tract-by-year fixed effects, as specified in equations (7) - (11). Column (2) drops the house fixed
effects, but maintains the tract-by-year fixed effects. This specification will control for
neighborhood unobservables that may co-vary with Superfund exposure but will not control for

                                                  34
within-tract house-level unobservable heterogeneity. The opposite is true of the specification in
column (3), which controls for house fixed effects but omits tract-by-year fixed effects. The
specification in column (4) does not include either set of fixed effects. Note that, in
specifications (3) and (4), we do include a set of year fixed effects to control for market-level
price movements; in specifications (1) and (2), the tract-by-year fixed effects serve this role.

        Focusing first on the results in Table 13(a), we find evidence of benefits from Superfund
cleanup in both northern New Jersey and Los Angeles metro. In describing the benefits from
Superfund remediation in our house-level analysis, we focus on the changes in housing values at
deletion relative to the proposal stage. We do not focus on the value of deletion relative to pre-
discovery in order to avoid incorporating housing value appreciation at the discovery stage that
may be caused by other factors. Specifically, in New Jersey and Los Angeles, moving from pre-
discovery to the discovery stage, houses within 3km of a site sell for 15.8% and 3.2% more,
respectively, after that site is discovered. We do not interpret this appreciation in housing values
as a causal effect of the discovery process. Instead, we suspect that this pattern could arise when
sites are discovered because an area is experiencing new construction. That new construction
would cause both the appreciation and contribute at the same time to discovery of the
contaminated sites.

        Overall, deletion relative to the proposal stage raises housing values in northern New
Jersey and metro Los Angeles, by 11.3% and 1% respectively. Breaking these values into their
component parts, we see that in northern New Jersey, listing (measured relative to proposal)
causes a large increase – i.e., 12.8% in housing values. Deletion (measured relative to listing)
results in an additional 1% increase in house prices, suggesting that most of the benefits of
cleanup have already been capitalized at the listing stage, reflecting either market expectations
about cleanup or the role of the construction complete designation. In the Los Angeles
Metropolitan Area, we find smaller magnitudes of appreciation; listing relative to proposal
raising housing values by 0.7% and deletion relative to listing raises housing values by only
0.3%.

        We note that, housing values after deletion are higher than those at the pre-discovery
stage (29% in New Jersey and 5.1% in Los Angeles), but these entire values should not be
interpreted as the benefits from the Superfund program. As described, these values incorporate
some housing value appreciation that is due to confounding events, such as re-development, at
the discovery stage.

        Next we consider results in Table 13(b) for Boston and Southwestern Connecticut which
exhibit a different pattern of housing prices in response to Superfund milestones described earlier
for northern New Jersey and Los Angeles. In Boston, prices drop by 7.6% with discovery,
suggesting the discovery stage provides negative information to the housing market about the
presence of contamination. Proposal and listing have very little effect on housing prices, but
moving from listing to deletion does lead to a 1.6% improvement in housing values (although

                                                35
that effect is not statistically significant). In contrast to New Jersey and Los Angeles, housing
values in Boston after deletion are lower than those at the pre-discovery stage, suggesting stigma
against contaminated sites and neighborhoods can persist despite cleanup. Finally, we turn to
results from southwestern Connecticut where we fail to find evidence of significant effects at any
stage of the cleanup process.

        In order to demonstrate the role played by house and tract-by-year fixed effects in
controlling for unobserved heterogeneity, consider the results in columns (2) - (4) of each table.
We find that, without house fixed effects, the overall benefit of deletion decreases in Boston, Los
Angeles, and New Jersey. This suggests that, in these markets, it is the lower priced houses
within each census tract that receive Superfund treatment. This is consistent with the results of
the tract analysis, where it was the houses in the lower tail of the within-tract value distribution
that were disproportionately exposed to Superfund sites (and the remediation of those sites).
Without house fixed effects, the unobservables that make those houses “low-value” get
confounded with the remediation activity, biasing downward the value ascribed to it.

        Conversely, taking out tract-by-year fixed effects, our estimates will be biased by the
effect of changing unobserved neighborhood attributes. When the overall benefit of deletion
increases as a result of taking out these fixed effects (e.g., as in Boston), it suggests that
otherwise improving neighborhoods were the ones that received treatment. Indeed, failing to
account for correlation with changing neighborhood attributes would lead one to grossly
overstate the benefits of site deletion in Boston. The opposite is suggested, in terms of how
treatment was allocated, where the overall effect of remediation instead gets worse when tract-
by-year fixed effects are removed (e.g., as in New Jersey, Los Angeles, and Connecticut).

        Without any fixed effect controls (neither house nor tract-by-year), results are highly
variable but generally exhibit much less evidence of benefits from Superfund remediation. This
simply confirms that, on average, Superfund sites are located nearer to lower-value homes
(confirming one of the main conclusions of our census analysis) and cleanup activities tend to
take place in otherwise declining neighborhoods.

        In summary, while our national-level census results imply significant benefits from site
remediation when considering the Superfund program as a whole, our house-level results reveal
that these benefits vary considerably across housing markets. We find that deletion (measured
relative to proposal) causes a sizable appreciation in housing values in northern New Jersey
(11.3%), but we find no statistically significant effect of deletion (measured relative to
proposal) for LA metro, southwestern Connecticut or metro Boston. While the appreciation seen
in New Jersey indicates that some neighborhoods do recover post-cleanup, the lower prices in
Boston at deletion relative to pre-discovery (-6.1%) suggest, conversely, that stigma against
contaminated sites and neighborhoods can also persist despite cleanup.




                                                36
7      Conclusions

Benefits from Superfund cleanup

        Using three different but complementary approaches, our study finds that deletion of sites
from the NPL (which signals the completion of the Superfund cleanup process) raises owner-
occupied housing prices on average, but that there is considerable heterogeneity across specific
housing markets. Our national-level tract analysis finds that deletion of a site, measured relative
to the pre-proposal stage, significantly raises housing values – by 18.2% at the 10th percentile,
15.4% at the median, and 11.4% at the 60th percentile. This appreciation is concentrated at the
lower deciles; no statistically significant appreciation is detected above the 60th percentile.
Results at the block level indicate that the deletion of a site raises housing prices by 19.0% and
5.8% for blocks lying within 1km and 3km, respectively. Our tract and block results are
remarkably similar – the 17.4% to 20.0% appreciation at the 10th to the 40th percentile of the
within tract housing values is comparable to the 19.0% for blocks lying within 1km.

        Our repeat sales analysis reveals considerable heterogeneity across metropolitan areas.
We find that deletion (measured relative to proposal) causes a sizable appreciation in housing
values in northern New Jersey (11.3%), but we find no statistically significant effect of deletion
(measured relative to proposal) for Los Angeles, southwestern Connecticut or Boston. While the
appreciation in New Jersey indicates that some neighborhoods do recover post-cleanup, the
lower prices in Boston at deletion relative to pre-discovery (-6.1%) suggest, conversely, that
stigma against contaminated sites and neighborhoods can also persist despite cleanup.

        Our study and GG’s study reinforce each other in one important way – taken together,
they rule out the case that benefits from a cleanup, measured as capitalization into housing
values, extend across a large area. Our finding that benefits are highly localized within the tract
– relative to the case if benefits were diffused over a larger area – will make it more difficult for
aggregate benefits to exceed the costs of cleanup. Whether these benefits exceed cleanup costs
is, however, an empirical question to be addressed should good estimates of costs become
available (GAO, 2010).

         While our study focuses on the impact of deletion, we note that proposal to the NPL
results in moderate depreciation in housing values in both the tract and block analyses when
using the RD or all-NPL samples. Nevertheless, the depreciation associated with proposal is
more than offset at the bottom of the within-tract housing value distribution by the time the sites
are deleted. With regards to listing, the tract analysis finds no detectable effects in the strict RD
sample, while the block analysis finds that housing prices appreciate by 13.3% and 5.2% in
blocks lying < 1km and < 3km from the site. At the block level, the positive effect of final
listing in signaling that the site will be remediated appears to trump the negative effect of
confirming the severity of the contamination of that site.



                                                  37
How can the estimates from our study inform the evaluation of the Superfund program?

        Our two estimates – (i) national-level estimates from the tract and block analyses and (ii)
metropolitan area specific estimates from the house transaction analyses – provide
complementary information for the evaluation of the Superfund program. The national-level
estimate is useful for a benefit-cost analysis of the entire Superfund program. In particular, these
estimates indicate that the gross benefit of the Superfund program is positive; this gross benefit
could be compared with program costs in an efficiency analysis. The national-level estimate also
provides the best available information with which to perform a cost-benefit analysis of a
particular candidate site when estimates are unavailable for the specific housing market
containing that site. Conversely, estimates that assess the remediation of multiple sites in a
particular housing market are useful when performing a cost-benefit analysis of a specific site
within that market. These estimates capture features specific to that particular housing market,
while avoiding biases associated with estimates based on a single site. Estimates based on a
particular housing market, of course, would not be applicable to sites outside that market.



Methodological issues in estimating Superfund cleanup with census tract data

        Our analysis highlights a methodological issue that arises in assessing the impact of
Superfund site remediation on housing prices using the Decennial Census data, given the highly
localized nature of the externality in question. Most importantly, when using publicly available
census data, the analyst must consider within-tract heterogeneity, paying particular attention to
the lower deciles of the housing value distribution. Deletion from the NPL causes greater
appreciation of housing values at the lower deciles (in percentage terms) in part because NPL
sites tend to be situated near low-value houses within tracts. We show this explicitly for three
out of four markets using geo-coded housing transaction data. Directly addressing the question
of within-tract heterogeneity by using high-resolution census block data yields similar results.

        Nevertheless, our proposed method has its limits. Not all localized benefits detectable
with finer resolution block- and house-level data may be found by an analysis of the tract-level
housing price distribution. However, given the reality that many hedonic studies are forced rely
on tract-level data (Hanna, 2007; Greenstone and Gallagher, 2008; Grainger, 2010), the
advantages of which include accessibility and nationwide coverage, our extension avoids an
important source of bias that results from a narrow focus on the mean or median tract-level
housing values.




                                                38
Caveat: The role of non-NPL sites

        We raise one important caveat with respect to our results. We have assumed that only the
status of NPL sites influences house prices, and we have ignored changes in the status of other
nearby hazardous waste sites that were not placed on the NPL. Proximate non-NPL sites may
(or may not) have been cleaned-up by state or other federal agencies outside the Superfund
program. At present, the EPA does not maintain a list of verified coordinates of non-NPL sites
to use in creating controls for the confounding impact of these sites. While the EPA does
catalogue information on sites that had been discovered but never proposed for listing on the
NPL, the geo-coordinates for those sites have not been verified as reliable (in many cases,
numerous different geo-coordinates are recorded for a single site), and there is no information
about remedial actions that may have been taken by other state or federal agencies. Indeed, this
data limitation has constrained other studies (Greenstone and Gallagher, 2008; Kiel and
Williams, 2007; Noonan et al. 2007). It is difficult to sign the direction in which the presence of
non-NPL sites might bias conclusions about NPL sites. We highlight this as an important area
for future data collection efforts.



Bibliography

Bajari, P. and L. Benkard (2005). “Demand Estimation with Heterogeneous Consumers and
Unobserved Product Characteristics: A Hedonic Approach.” Journal of Political Economy
113(6): 1239-1276.

Bayer, P, R. McMillan, A. Murphy, and C. Timmins (2010). “A Dynamic Model of Demand for
Houses and Neighborhoods.” Nicholas Institute Working Paper.

Bishop, K. and C. Timmins (2010a). “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Consistently
Estimating the Marginal Willingness to Pay for Differentiated Products Without Instruments.”
Nicholas Institute Working Paper.

Bishop, K. and C. Timmins (2010b). “Recovering the Marginal Willingness to Pay to Avoid
Ozone: Using Panel Data To Easily Estimate Hedonic Inverse Demand Functions.” Nicholas
Institute Working Paper.

Case B., P. F. Colwell, C. Leishman, C. Watkins (2006). “The Impact of Environmental
Contamination on Condo Prices: A Hybrid Repeat-Sale/Hedonic Approach.” Real Estate
Economics 34 (1): 77–107.

Cameron, T.A. and McConnaha, I. (2006). “Evidence of Environmental Migration.” Land
Economics 82 (2): 273-290.



                                                39
DiPasquale, D. and Somerville, C. T. (1995). "Do House Price Indices Based on Transacting
Units Represent the Entire Stock? Evidence from the American Housing Survey." Journal of
Housing Economics 4(3): 195-229

Davis, L. W. (2004). "The Effect of Health Risk on Housing Values: Evidence from a Cancer
Cluster." American Economic Review 94(5): 1693–1704.

EPA (2006). “Review of “Superfund Benefit Analysis” Superfund Benefits Analysis Advisory
Panel.” EPA-SAB-ADV-06-002, 2006. Downloaded from
http://yosemite.epa.gov/sab/sabproduct.nsf/58ADDDF28999BAC18525710100554A0F/$File/su
perfund_sab-adv-06-002.pdf

EPA (2008). “Promoting Responsible Redevelopment at the Empire Canyon Daly West Mine
Superfund site.” EPA Publication 330-B-08-001.

EPA (2009). “Challenges in Applying Property Value Studies to Assess the Benefits of the
Superfund Program.” Office of Superfund Remediation and Technology Innovation . January,
2009 Downloaded from http://www.epa.gov/superfund/programs/recycle/pdf/PropertyStudy.pdf

Farber, S. (1998). “Undesirable Facilities and Property Values: A Summary of Empirical
Studies.” Ecological Economics 24(1):1-14.
Fischhoff, B. (2001) “Defining Stigma” in J. Flynn, P. Slovic and H. Kunreuther (eds). Risk,
Media, and Stigma.Sterling, VA, Earthscan Publishers: 361-368.
Gatzlaff, D. and D. Haurin (1997). “Sample Selection Bias and Repeat-Sales Index Estimates.”
The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 14(1-2): 33-50.
Gayer, T., J.T. Hamilton, and W.K. Viscusi (2000). “Private Values of Risk Tradeoffs at
Superfund Sites: Housing Market Evidence on Learning about Risk.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 82 (3): 439-451
General Accounting Office (2008). “Superfund: Funding and Reported Costs of Enforcement
and Administration Activities.” GAO-08-841R

General Accounting Office (2009) “Superfund: Litigation Has Decreased and EPA Needs Better
Information on Site Cleanup and Cost Issues to Estimate Future Program Funding
Requirements.” GAO-09-656
General Accounting Office, “Superfund: EPA's Estimated Costs to Remediate Existing Sites
Exceed Current Funding Levels, and More Sites Are Expected to Be Added to the National
Priorities List,” Publication GAO-10-380 (2010).
Grainger, Corbett A., “Do Renters Fully Pay for Cleaner Air?” Department of Agriculture and
Resource Economics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Working Paper, 2010.




                                               40
Greenberg, M. and J. Hughes (1992). “The Impact of Hazardous Waste Superfund Sites on the
Value of Houses Sold in New Jersey.” The Annals of Regional Science 26(2): 147-153.
Greenstone, M. and J. Gallagher (2008). “Does Hazardous Waste Matter? Evidence from the
Housing Market and the Superfund Program.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(3): 951-
1003.

Gupta, S., G. Van Houtven, and M. Cropper (1996). “Paying for Permanence: An Economic
analysis of EPA's Cleanup Decisions at Superfund Sites.” The Rand Journal of Economics 27(3):
563-582.
Hamilton, J.T. and Viscusi, W. K. (1999). “Are Risk Regulators Rational? Evidence From
Hazardous Waste Cleanup Decisions.” American Economic Review 89(4): 1010-1027.
Hanna, Bríd Gleeson, “House Values, Incomes, and Industrial Pollution,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 54 (2007), 100-112.
Hirsch, J. (2008). “Superfund may not be so super,” MIT News. Downloaded from
http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2008/superfund-0805.html
Jenkins, R., E. Kopits, and D. Simpson (2006). “Measuring the Social Benefits of EPA Land
Cleanup and Reuse Programs.” National Center for Environmental Economics, Working Paper
No. 06-03, 2006. Downloaded from http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/epa/eed.nsf/WPNumber/2006-
03/$File/2006-03.PDF
Kiel, K. A. and M. Williams (2007). “The Impact of Superfund Sites on Local Property Values:
Are all sites the same?” Journal of Urban Economics 61(1):170-192.

Kiel, K. A. and J. E. Zabel (1999). “The Accuracy of Owner Provided House Values: The 1978-
1991 American Housing Survey.” Real Estate Economics 27 (2), 263-298.
Kiel, K. A. and J.E. Zabel (2001). “The Economic Benefits of Cleaning Superfund Sites.”
Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 22 (2-3), 163-184.
Kennedy, P.E. (1981). “Estimation with Correctly Interpreted Dummy Variables in
Semilogarithmic Equations.” American Economic Review 71(4): 801.

Kuminoff, N.V. and J.C. Pope (2010). “Hedonic Equilibria, Land Value Capitalization, and the
Willingness to Pay for Public Goods.” Arizona State University Department of Economics
Working Paper.

Mastromonaco, R. (2010) "Hazardous Waste Hits Hollywood: Superfund and Housing Prices in
Los Angeles." Duke University Department of Economics Working Paper.

Messer, K.D., W.D. Schulze, K.F. Hackett, T. Cameron, and G. McClelland (2006). “Can
Stigma Explain Large Property Value Losses? The Psychology and Economics of Superfund. ”
Environmental and Resource Economics 33(3): 299-324.


                                              41
Miller, N.G. (1982), “Residential Property Hedonic Pricing Models: A Review, Research in Real
Estate, (2): 31-56.

Navarro, M. (2010). “Gowanus Canal Gets Superfund Status.” New York Times. 3/12/2010.
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/03/nyregion/03gowanus.html.

Noonan, D.S., D.J. Krupka, and B.M. Baden (2007). “Neighborhood Dynamics and Price Effects
of Superfund Site Clean-up.” Journal of Regional Science 47(4): 665-692.

Probst. K.N. and D. Sherman (2004). “Success for Superfund: A New Approach for Keeping
Score.” Resources for the Future, April 2004.

Rosen, S. (1974). “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition.” Journal of Political Economy 82(1): 34-55.

Schultze, W., G. McClelland, M. Doane, E. Balistreri, R. Boyce, B. Hurd, and R. Simenauer
(1995). An Evaluation of Public Preferences for Superfund Site Cleanup: A Preliminary
Assessment. Washington, D.C. Environmental Protection Agency / Office of Policy, Planning,
and Evaluation.

Sigman, H. (2001). “The Pace of Progress at Superfund Sites: Policy Goals and Interest Group
Influence.” Journal of Law and Economics 44(1): 315–344.
Sigman, H. (ed.) (2008). Economics of Hazardous Waste and Contaminated Land. Cheltenham,
UK: Edward Elgar.

Smith, V K. (2007). Methods for Estimating the Social Benefits of EPA Land Cleanup and
Reuse Programs, Summary Report of Workshop. September 28-29, 2006. Published on
4/13/2007 Downloaded from http://yosemite1.epa.gov/ee/epa/eerm.nsf/vwAN/EE-0506-
01.pdf/$file/EE-0506-01.pdf

Staiger, D. and J. H. Stock (1997). “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments,”
Econometrica 65(3): 557-586.




                                              42
Table 1 – Summary of the Tract, Block and House Analyses
                Tract                   Block                     House
Level           National level          National level            MSA-level

Goal            Estimate                Estimate                  Estimate metro-specific
                national level          national level            average benefits from
                average benefits.       average benefits.         multiple sites.

Accessibility Publicly available        Restricted access         Proprietary
                                        to Census Research        and expensive
                                        Data Centers

Spatial         Census tract            Census block              Individual houses
Resolution                              Finer geographical        Finer geographical resolution than
                                        resolution than tracts.   tracts and blocks.

Temporal        Decade                  Decade                    Annual
Resolution      (1990 & 2000)           (1990 & 2000)             Finer temporal resolution.

Prices          Stated values           Stated values             Sales value
                which are prone         which are prone           Overcomes the misreporting of stated
                to misreporting         to misreporting           values.

Housing         Assumes                 Assumes                   MSA-specific markets
market          national market         national market

                National-level          National-level            MSA-level analysis are more prone to
                analysis are less       analysis are less         local (time-varying) unobservables.
                prone to local          prone to local
                (time-varying)          (time-varying)
                unobservables.          unobservables.

                Less realistic          Less realistic            More realistic definition of housing
                definition of housing   definition of housing     of housing markets that buyers
                markets that buyers     markets that buyers       face.
                face.                   face.
                                                                  Detects the heterogeneity across
                                                                  markets.

Notes: Italics indicates strengths of the research design.




                                                  43
Table 2 – Interpretation of Coefficients
Change in treatment                 Estimated effect
Not Proposed to Proposed                  β1
Not Proposed to Listed                    β2
Not Proposed to Deleted                   β3
Proposed to Listed                       β2-β1
Proposed to Deleted                      β3-β1
Listed to Deleted                        β3-β2
No change in Status                  Omitted case




                           44
Table 3(a): Summary Statistics, Census Tract Analysis RD and Strict RD Samples
Sample                      Strict RD (n=881)                       RD (n=1,454)
Year                  1990        1990       2000     2000     1990      1990    2000      2000
Variables            Mean Std. Dev.         Mean Std. Dev.     Mean Std. Dev.    Mean Std. Dev.
Prices of owner-occupied housing at various percentiles
10th               $38,785 $27,747 $41,105 $24,449            $42,814   $31,497 $44,529    $27,999
20th               $46,998 $32,631 $48,959 $28,141            $51,582   $36,826 $52,877    $33,058
30th               $53,404 $36,540 $55,357 $32,008            $58,324   $41,027 $59,447    $37,352
40th               $59,486 $40,688 $61,447 $35,772            $64,565   $44,960 $65,589    $41,124
50th               $65,579 $44,759 $67,754 $41,856            $70,772   $48,787 $72,087    $46,254
60th               $72,513 $50,210 $74,849 $46,628            $77,860   $53,919 $79,102    $50,947
70th               $80,846 $56,785 $83,339 $52,647            $85,959   $59,291 $87,588    $57,341
80th               $91,830 $64,733 $95,564 $62,736            $96,770   $66,070 $99,556    $67,070
90th              $110,989 $77,747 $117,900 $82,793          $115,183   $77,336 $120,877   $84,360
Exposure to sites on the National Priority List
Proposal               0.01        0.08       0.00    0.02       0.05     0.19      0.01      0.09
Listed                 0.35        0.37       0.24    0.33       0.45     0.39      0.39      0.40
Deletion               0.02        0.10       0.14    0.30       0.02     0.12      0.13      0.28




                                                  45
Table 3(b): Summary Statistics, Census Tract Analysis RD and Strict RD Samples

Sample                              Strict RD (n=881)               RD (n=1,454)
Year                           1990      1990    2000  2000    1990      1990    2000   2000
Variables                     Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev.    Mean Std. Dev. Mean Std. Dev.
Covariates
% unit occupied                91.4        7.2   91.8   6.8     92.2         6.7   92.6      6.6
% owner occupied               67.5       20.3   68.0  21.2     66.1        21.4   66.6     22.2
Housing unit density         0.0006 0.0009 0.0006 0.0009      0.0006      0.0010 0.0006   0.0010
Population density            0.001     0.002 0.001   0.002    0.001       0.002 0.002     0.002
% Black                        11.4       22.6   13.3  23.7     11.8        22.6   13.8     23.3
% Hispanic                      3.8        8.0    5.9  10.7      5.4        10.5    8.1     13.5
% under 18 years old           25.2        5.7   25.1   5.8     25.1         5.8   25.1      5.8
% high school dropout          25.2       12.4   19.5  11.4     25.3        12.8   19.8     11.8
% college educated             18.6       13.4   22.2  15.5     18.5        13.1   22.5     15.5
% below poverty                13.0       11.6   12.8  10.7     12.7        11.7   12.3     10.5
% public assistance             8.0        7.3    8.6   7.3      7.8         7.2    8.3      6.9
% female headed HH             23.9       16.2   25.8  15.9     23.7        16.0   25.5     15.5
Mean HH income ($1,000s)        $37        $16    $53   $23      $38         $16    $55      $23
% attached homes                7.2       17.3    7.7  17.2      7.3        16.6    8.0     16.9
% mobile homes                  6.7       10.8    6.5  11.0      6.4        11.4    6.1     11.2
% 0-2 bedrooms                 28.5       16.1   28.1  15.9     28.4        16.1   28.1     15.8
% 3-4 bedrooms                 67.2       15.2   67.4  15.2     67.0        15.5   67.2     15.4
% units built within 5 years    8.6       10.8    7.5   9.7      7.9        10.4    7.1      9.2
% units built within 10 years 15.2        17.0   13.7  14.9     13.8        16.0   12.7     14.3
% same house in the            56.0       12.9   56.7  12.6     56.0        13.2   56.4     12.7
   last 5 years

Notes: Housing unit density and population density are in counts per m2




                                              46
Table 4 – Summary Statistics, Census Block Analysis (N=323,682)
                                                                 1990                  2000
                                                                      Std.
                                                        Mean         Dev.     Mean      Std. Dev
% Unit Occupied                                         0.945      0.082      0.948        0.082
% Owner occupied                                        0.719      0.243      0.732        0.244
Housing Unit Density                                    1.182      2.150      1.298        3.181
Population Density                                      2.911      4.181      3.193        6.493
% Black                                                 0.102      0.245      0.122        0.253
% Hispanic                                              0.039      0.112      0.114        0.212
% under 18 years old                                    0.245      0.099      0.246        0.102
% Female Head of HH                                     0.262      0.153      0.285        0.160
% living in the same house in the last 5 years           0.401      0.340      0.605       0.333
% 25 Years & High School Dropout                        0.176      0.218      0.140        0.200
% 25 Years & BA Degree                                   0.137      0.191      0.168       0.222
% Below Poverty Line                                    0.100      0.209      0.099        0.200
% Public Assistance                                     0.030      0.087      0.013        0.050
Mean Household Income                                   55212      45361      60443       52018
% Attached Homes                                        0.058      0.164      0.061        0.191
% Mobile Homes                                          0.042      0.141       0.034       0.157
% 0-2 Bedrooms                                          0.356      0.356      0.344        0.358
% 3-4 Bedrooms                                          0.608      0.357      0.617        0.361
% Units Built within 5 years                            0.063      0.180      0.040        0.152
% Units Built within 10 years                           0.116      0.249      0.076        0.210
Median Value of Housing Prices                         140531     115778     141817      129107
Counts of Proposed Sites within 2-5km                  0.0003      0.018     0.0001        0.010
Counts of Proposed Sites within 5km                     0.002      0.044      0.001        0.025
Counts of Proposed Sites within 1km                     0.010      0.100      0.003        0.056
Counts of Proposed Sites within 3 km                    0.082      0.307      0.028        0.165
Counts of Final Listing Sites within 2-5km              0.001      0.039      0.002        0.045
Counts of Final Listing Sites within 5km                0.008      0.090       0.011       0.104
Counts of Final Listing Sites within 1km                0.041      0.205       0.053       0.234
Counts of Final Listing within 3 km                     0.423      0.662      0.513        0.728
Counts of Deleted Sites within 2-5km                  0.00005       0.007    0.0004        0.019
Counts of Deleted Sites within 5km                     0.0002      0.015      0.002        0.044
Counts of Deleted Sites within 1km                       0.001      0.035      0.010       0.099
Counts of Deleted Sites within 3 km                     0.011      0.106      0.096        0.311




                                                 47
Table 5 – Summary Statistics, House Level Analysis

                                       Northern New Jersey        Los Angeles Metro           Boston Metro          Southwestern Conn
                                      One Sale    Multi Sale    One Sale    Multi Sale    One Sale   Multi Sale    One Sale   Multi Sale
Average Price                        $277,405    $252,952      $272,855    $252,836      $255,598    $245,787     $258,274    $260,317

Number of houses by repeat sales
  2 sales                                        101,751                    613,180                  163,295                  83,053
  3 sales                                        21,169                     274,527                  60,407                   30,134
  4 sales                                        3,619                      100.904                  19,001                   8,661
  5 sales                                        504                        30,737                   4,788                    1,831

Total Houses                         471,267     127,043       1,211,770    1,019,348    410,865     247,491      188,436     123,679
Total observations in final sample   471,267     284,005       1,211,770    2,607,242    410,865     607,755      188,436     300,307




                                                                       48
Table 6 – Panel Analysis (1990-2000) of the strict RD sample, i.e., all tracts within 3km buffer of the 221 NPL sites with 1982
          HRS score in [16.5, 40.5] and not within 3km of any other ever proposed NPL sites (weighted by the number of
          owner-occupied housing units).
Panel A: Dependent variable  Log Price of owner-occupied housing units
Percentile          10           20           30           40           50                      60            70          80          90
 Proposal          -0.432*** -0.396***       -0.412***    -0.405***    -0.420***               -0.447***     -0.441***   -0.403***   -0.417***
                    (0.148)      (0.115)      (0.111)      (0.112)      (0.112)                 (0.115)       (0.116)     (0.120)     (0.132)
 Listing           0.030        0.054        0.051        0.046        0.030                   0.001         -0.006      -0.018      -0.065
                    (0.078)      (0.052)      (0.051)      (0.052)      (0.050)                 (0.052)       (0.052)     (0.054)     (0.068)
                          *            ***          ***          ***
 Deletion          0.182        0.200        0.185        0.174        0.154**                 0.114*        0.098       0.086       0.034
                    (0.094)      (0.069)      (0.067)      (0.066)      (0.065)                 (0.067)       (0.067)     (0.068)     (0.080)
R-sqr               0.307        0.360        0.347        0.366        0.365                   0.364         0.369       0.375       0.332
Panel B: Dependent variable  Price Level of owner-occupied housing units
Percentile          10           20           30           40           50                      60            70          80          90
                            **            ***          ***          ***
 Proposal          -14,278      -15,325      -17,460      -18,661      -23,678***              -24,837***    -22,512**   -20,736*    -26,366*
                    (5,712)      (5,778)      (6,152)      (6,785)      (8,184)                 (9,001)       (10,270)    (11,350)    (13,669)
 Listing           2,034        3,546        3,595        3,478        2,270                   939           1,374       27          -6,982
                    (2,556)      (2,551)      (2,681)      (2,888)      (2,987)                 (3,438)       (3,865)     (4,319)     (6,364)
                          *            **           **           **
 Deletion          5,980        8,758        9,530        9,650        8,796**                 7,724         10,511*     10,605      3,456
                    (3,408)      (3,510)      (3,762)      (4,097)      (4,371)                 (4,919)       (6,169)     (6,821)     (8,662)
R-sqr               0.269        0.294        0.292        0.291        0.275                   0.259         0.320       0.304       0.226
Notes: Control variables are listed in Table 3(b). 818 observations. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
***
    significant at the 1% level, ** 5% level and * 10% level.




                                                                            49
Table 7 – Panel Analysis (1990-2000) of the RD sample, i.e., all tracts within 3km buffer of the 221 NPL sites
          with 1982 HRS score in [16.5, 40.5] (weighted by the number of owner-occupied housing units).
Panel A: Dependent variable  Log Price of owner-occupied housing units
Percentile   10         20          30          40         50         60                      70               80          90
 Proposal   0.037      0.004       0.011       -0.002     -0.014     -0.021                  -0.034           -0.036      -0.033
             (0.041)    (0.041)     (0.036)     (0.035)    (0.035)    (0.035)                 (0.036)          (0.034)     (0.034)
                   ***        ***         **          **         *
 Listing    0.151      0.112       0.104       0.088      0.075      0.069                   0.067            0.058       0.026
             (0.046)    (0.043)     (0.044)     (0.044)    (0.044)    (0.044)                 (0.044)          (0.042)     (0.041)
 Deletion   0.300*** 0.257*** 0.248***         0.228*** 0.211*** 0.200***                    0.194***         0.185***    0.151***
             (0.051)    (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.047)    (0.047)    (0.047)                 (0.046)          (0.044)     (0.044)
R-sqr        0.252      0.291       0.284       0.294      0.293      0.290                   0.293            0.301       0.277
Panel B: Dependent variable  Price of owner-occupied housing units
Percentile   10         20          30          40         50         60                      70               80          90
                                                                   *
 Proposal   1,057      -2,300      -1,685      -3,190     -5,355     -6,867**                -11,181**        -12,247**   -11,648**
             (3,177)    (3,661)     (2,450)     (2,695)    (2,951)    (3,339)                 (4,824)          (5,198)     (5,705)
                   ***
 Listing    5,066      3,233       3,149       2,187      1,331      256                     -1,425           -2,524      -7,987*
             (1,853)    (2,102)     (2,210)     (2,414)    (2,598)    (2,826)                 (3,314)          (3,484)     (4,334)
                   ***        ***           ***       ***        ***
 Deletion   9,924      9,359       10,373      9,822      9,381      8,769***                8,866**          8,622**     3,494
             (2,207)    (2,487)     (2,492)     (2,708)    (2,934)    (3,168)                 (3,715)          (3,963)     (4,902)
R-sqr        0.213      0.237       0.247       0.249      0.240      0.231                   0.251            0.244       0.204
Notes: Control variables are listed in Table 3(b). 1454 observations. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
***
    significant at the 1% level, ** 5% level and * 10% level.




                                                                     50
Table 8(a) – Panel Analysis (1990-2000) of the Strict RD and RD Tract Samples (Alternative Specifications)
           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)       (9)                  (10)     (11)      (12)
Dependent variable for all columns:     Δ Log Price of owner-occupied housing units
Sample                 Strict RD                          RD                            Strict RD                               RD
Weights                No                                 No                            Yes                                     Yes
Std Error              Robust                             Robust               Robust & Clustered on County            Robust & Clustered on County
Percentile 20          50           80          20        50        80         20       50        80                   20       50        80
                  ***          ***        ***                              *         **        **
 Proposal -0.479      -0.473       -0.452      0.020     -0.053    -0.058     -0.396   -0.420    -0.403**             0.004    -0.014    -0.036
           (0.139)     (0.118)      (0.125)     (0.040) (0.038) (0.034)        (0.165) (0.165) (0.170)                 (0.077) (0.073) (0.069)
                                                      ***       **        ***
 Listing 0.103        0.061        0.021       0.191     0.102     0.120      0.054    0.030     -0.018               0.112    0.075     0.058
           (0.065)     (0.056)      (0.059)     (0.048) (0.044) (0.042)        (0.097) (0.094) (0.100)                 (0.091) (0.092) (0.085)
                 ***          **                      ***       ***       ***
 Deletion 0.208       0.168        0.109       0.331     0.239     0.248      0.200    0.154     0.086                0.257** 0.211** 0.185*
           (0.079)     (0.070)      (0.074)     (0.054) (0.047) (0.046)        (0.123) (0.121) (0.123)                 (0.106) (0.105) (0.095)
R-sqr      0.256       0.310        0.322       0.206     0.245     0.258      0.360    0.365     0.375                0.291    0.293     0.301
Obs.       818         818          818         1454      1454      1454       818      818       818                  1454     1454      1454
                                                     ***
Notes. Control variables are listed in Table 3(b).         significant at the 1% level, ** 5% level and * 10% level.




                                                                               51
Table 8(b) – Panel Analysis (1990-2000) for Tracts Within 5km Buffer
              (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)                   (5)            (6)
Dependent variable:  log price of owner-occupied housing units
Sample                      Strict RD                                        RD
Percentile    20            50          80             20                    50             80
                    ***            ***        ***
 Proposal    -0.525        -0.516      -0.493         -0.037*               -0.042**       -0.050***
              (0.117)       (0.112)     (0.115)        (0.021)               (0.019)        (0.019)
                                   **         ***
 Listing     -0.032        -0.078      -0.119         0.065**               0.052**        0.041*
              (0.037)       (0.037)     (0.036)        (0.026)               (0.024)        (0.024)
 Deletion    0.033         -0.020      -0.068         0.129***              0.117***       0.102***
              (0.046)       (0.045)     (0.044)        (0.025)               (0.024)        (0.024)
Obs.          1131          1131        1131           2674                  2674           2674
R-sqr         0.371         0.359       0.357          0.271                 0.253          0.286
Notes: Control variables are listed in Table 3(b). Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
***
    significant at the 1% level, ** 5% level and * 10% level.




                                              52
Table 8(c) – Panel Analysis (1990-2000) of the All-NPL Tract Sample
             (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)                     (6)
Dependent variable:  Log price of owner-occupied housing units
Weights                  Yes                                     No
Percentile   20          50           80             20          50                      80
                    ***          ***          ***          ***
 Proposal -0.072        -0.081       -0.075         -0.084      -0.089***               -0.076***
             (0.013)     (0.012)      (0.012)        (0.013)     (0.013)                 (0.012)
 Listing    -0.002      -0.002       -0.004         -0.016      -0.015                  -0.020*
             (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.011)        (0.012)     (0.011)                 (0.011)
                               *            *
 Deletion 0.014         0.031        0.034          -0.013      0.021                   0.031*
             (0.019)     (0.019)      (0.018)        (0.020)     (0.018)                 (0.018)
Obs.         9674        9674         9674           9674        9674                    9674
R-sqr        0.228       0.243        0.245          0.134       0.175                   0.179
Notes: Control variables are listed in Table 3(b). Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
***
      significant at the 1% level, ** 5% level and * 10% level.




                                              53
Table 9 – Tracts in the strict RD sample that experienced non-zero change in
          exposure to proposed sites.

NPL Site         Site Status             Date         Tract          Share of Tract
                                                                         Exposed to
                                                                      Proposed Sites
COD007063530     Discovery               3/1/1978     08031000202                0.47
                 Proposal to NPL         5/10/1993    08031001101                0.30
                 Cost Recovery           6/27/2006
                 Bankruptcy Settlement   3/13/2009
MED980504393     Discovery               12/1/1979  23031005100                 -0.37
                 Proposal to NPL         6/24/1988  23031005200                 -0.09
                 Final listing on NPL    2/21/1990  23031005300                 -0.30
                                                    23031025100                 -0.01
ORD009051442     Discovery               7/1/1979   41051003100                 -0.01
                 Proposal to NPL         1/22/1987 41051003200                  -0.16
                 Final listing on NPL    2/21/1990 41051003301                  -0.60
                 Deletion                11/14/1994 41051003401                 -0.51
                                                    41051003501                 -0.14
                                                    41051003601                 -1.00
                                                    41051003602                 -0.94
                                                    41051003603                 -0.18
                                                    41051003702                 -1.00
                                                    41051003802                 -1.00
                                                    41051003803                 -0.84
PAD980692487     Discovery               6/1/1980   42039110600                 -0.12
                 Proposal to NPL         6/24/1988 42039110700                  -0.18
                 Final listing on NPL    2/21/1990



                                         54
Table 10: Block-Level Panel Analysis (1990-2000): Summary of Marginal Effects of Remedial Actions, Strict RD Sample

                         (1)             (2)              (3)                    (4)              (5)                 (6)                 (7)         (8)
Counts by                            Distance below a cutoff                                                                      Distance Bands
EPA action           0.25km              0.5km                1km                 3km            0-1km               1-2km              2-3km      3-5km
                                                                  **                   ***              ***                 ***              ***
Proposal                0.143            -0.305            -0.247            -0.373            -0.279              -0.465              -0.398      -0.175***
                     (-0.203)           (0.187)             (0.096)            (0.030)           (0.095)             (0.050)             (0.039)     (0.042)
Listing                 0.188             0.078            0.133***           0.052***          0.129***              -0.019            0.086***    0.209***
                      (0.139)           (0.085)             (0.047)            (0.018)           (0.047)             (0.030)             (0.024)     (0.029)
Deletion                0.121           0.199**            0.190***           0.058***          0.194***              -0.001            0.084***    0.207***
                      (0.248)           (0.100)             (0.054)            (0.020)           (0.054)             (0.033)             (0.027)     (0.031)
Notes: Obs=26,035. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** significant at the 1% level, ** 5% level and * 10% level.




                                                                                 55
Table 11: Block-Level Panel Analysis (1990-2000): Summary of Marginal Effects of Remedial Actions, RD Sample

                       (1)                 (2)              (3)                  (4)              (5)                (6)                  (7)       (8)
Counts by                             Distance below a cutoff                                                                    Distance Bands
EPA action           0.25km               0.5km                1km               3km             0-1km             1-2km               2-3km      3-5km
                                                                                       ***                                 ***              **
Proposal                0.211             -0.033              0.029           0.052                0.026          0.105                0.029      0.034***
                      (0.254)            (0.072)            (0.032)            (0.010)           (0.032)           (0.018)             (0.012)     (0.013)
Listing                 0.027              0.033             0.039*           0.038***           0.041**          0.077***              0.018*    0.033***
                      (0.069)            (0.040)            (0.021)            (0.008)           (0.021)           (0.013)             (0.010)     (0.010)
Deletion               -0.051              0.069           0.071***           0.058***          0.078***          0.112***             0.029**     0.029**
                      (0.116)            (0.050)            (0.027)            (0.010)           (0.027)           (0.016)             (0.012)     (0.013)
Notes: Obs=49,044. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** significant at the 1% level, ** 5% level and * 10% level.




                                                                                   56
Table 12: Block-Level Panel Analysis (1990-2000): Summary of Marginal Effects of Remedial Actions, All-NPL Sample

                       (1)                 (2)              (3)                 (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)       (8)
Counts by                             Distance below a cutoff                                                                Distance Bands
EPA action           0.25km               0.5km                1km               3km             0-1km             1-2km           2-3km      3-5km
                                                                  **                  **
Proposal                0.011             -0.010           -0.020             -0.006              -0.013            -0.005          -0.002     0.014***
                      (0.043)            (0.020)            (0.009)            (0.003)           (0.009)           (0.005)         (0.004)      (0.004)
Listing                0.061*           0.052***           0.037***           0.036***          0.043***          0.043***        0.033***     0.035***
                      (0.033)            (0.016)            (0.007)            (0.002)           (0.007)           (0.004)         (0.003)      (0.003)
Deletion                0.049           0.081***           0.061***           0.065***          0.072***          0.083***        0.059***     0.066***
                      (0.066)            (0.025)            (0.011)            (0.003)           (0.011)           (0.006)         (0.005)      (0.005)
Notes: Obs=323,682. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** significant at the 1% level, ** 5% level and * 10% level.




                                                                                  57
                                                           Table 13(a) – House-Level Analysis
                                                         Marginal Effect of Sites Within 3km Buffer



                                                     Northern New Jersey                                        Los Angeles Metropolitan Area

                                      (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)

Discovery                          0.158***         0.076***         0.008          -0.144***        0.032***        -0.028***        0.010**         -0.128***
                                   (0.032)          (0.015)         (0.014)          (0.009)         (0.012)          (0.005)         (0.004)          (0.003)
Proposal                           0.142***         0.198***        0.064***        -0.043***        0.040***        -0.015**         0.024***        -0.103***
                                   (0.031)          (0.023)         (0.015)          (0.013)         (0.014)          (0.007)         (0.006)          (0.004)
Listing                            0.247***         0.015***        0.156***        -0.032***        0.047***        -0.007**          0.000          -0.004**
                                   (0.027)          (0.004)         (0.011)          (0.002)         (0.013)          (0.003)         (0.005)          (0.002)
Deletion                           0.255***         0.108***        0.222***        0.093***         0.050***        -0.050***        -0.015**        0.283***
                                   (0.030)          (0.010)         (0.013)          (0.006)         (0.016)          (0.011)         (0.007)          (0.007)

Tract-by-Year Fixed                   Yes             Yes              No               No             Yes              Yes              No              No
Effects
House Fixed Effects                   Yes             No              Yes               No             Yes              No              Yes              No

Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** significant at the 1% level, ** 5% level and * 10% level. Note that columns (3) and (4) do contain year fixed effects to
flexibly control for trends in housing prices at the market level.




                                                                                   58
                                                             Table 13(b) – House-Level Analysis
                                                           Marginal Effect of Sites Within 3km Buffer


                                                   Boston Metropolitan Area                                             Southwestern Connecticut

                                       (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)            (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

Discovery                           -0.079***        -0.056***        0.051***             0.065***         0.014          0.011          -0.274***      -0.327***
                                     (0.030)          (0.008)         (0.017)               (0.006)        (0.036)        (0.016)          (0.013)        (0.009)
Proposal                            -0.077**         -0.095***         0.034*                -0.003         0.037         -0.049**        -0.275***      -0.397***
                                     (0.031)          (0.014)         (0.018)               (0.013)        (0.037)        (0.019)          (0.018)        (0.014)
Listing                             -0.077***        -0.060***        0.043***             -0.088***        0.018          0.001          -0.350***      -0.217***
                                     (0.030)          (0.004)         (0.017)               (0.003)        (0.032)        (0.007)          (0.012)        (0.005)
Deletion                            -0.061**         -0.083***        0.037**              -0.123***       -0.002         0.070***        -0.395***      -0.529***
                                     (0.031)          (0.011)         (0.017)               (0.006)        (0.036)        (0.025)          (0.016)        (0.022)

Tract-by-Year Fixed                   Yes              Yes                 No                 No             Yes             Yes             No              No
Effects
House Fixed Effects                   Yes               No                 Yes                No             Yes             No             Yes              No
                                        ***                                **                 *
Robust standard errors in parentheses.      significant at the 1% level,        5% level and 10% level. Note that columns (3) and (4) do contain year fixed effects to
flexibly control for trends in housing prices at the market level.




                                                                                         59
                                       Figure 1 – All-NPL Sites Progress Through Superfund Milestones36




         1990                             P                                      L                     D
                                         198                                    992                    25



         2000           R         P       L       D              R        P      L        D            D                    P       L      D
                        23        2      154      19             2              840      150           25                   54     191     5




36
  R=Removed from the NPL; P=Proposed; L=Listing; D=Deletion. The All-NPL samples also include 257 other sites were either (i) proposed to the NPL after
2000 and before 2010, or (ii) proposed to the NPL before 1990 and removed from the NPL before 1990.



                                                                           60
                                            Figure 2 – RD Sites Progress Through Superfund Milestones37



                    1990                      Proposal                   Listing                    Deletion

                                                  3                        196                         12

                                                                                                 
                    2000         Proposal     Listing    Deletion        Listing     Deletion       Deletion         Proposal      Listing
                                     0             2         1             152         44             12                1             3




37
     Note that 6 sites were proposed to the NPL and removed from the NPL before 1990. R=Removed from the NPL; P=Proposed; L=Listing; D=Deletion.


                                                                            61
                                        Figure 3 – Strict RD Sites Progress Through Superfund Milestones38




                  1990                        Proposal                   Listing                    Deletion

                                                  3                        165                         10

                                                                                                 
                  2000            Proposal     Listing    Deletion       Listing     Deletion       Deletion         Proposal      Listing
                                     0            2          1             128         37             10                1             2




38
     Note that 6 sites were proposed to the NPL and removed from the NPL before 1990. R=Removed from the NPL; P=Proposed; L=Listing; D=Deletion.


                                                                            62
       Figure 4 – Exposure to NPL Sites by Within-Tract Price
         Decile in Four Housing Markets (0 - 1km Exposure)


1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1
                                                      Los Angeles
 1                                                    Boston
0.9                                                   Southwestern CT
                                                      Northern NJ
0.8

0.7

0.6
      10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90




                                    63
Appendix A1: Price Intervals for Owner-Occupied Housing in the Decennial Census




                                           Table A1
                   Price Intervals for Counts of Owner-Occupied Housing in


                                                        Year
                       # Categories              1990              2000
                                1                <$15              <10
                                2                $15-20            $10-15
                                3                $20-25            $15-20
                                4                $25-30            $20-25
                                5                $30-35            $25-30
                                6                $35-40            $30-35
                                7                $40-45            $35-40
                                8                $45-50            $40-50
                                9                $50-60            $50-60
                               10                $60-75            $60-70
                               11                $75-100           $70-80
                               12                $100-125          $80-90
                               13                $125-150          $90-100
                               14                $150-175          $100-125
                               15                $175-200          $125-150
                               16                $200-250          $150-175
                               17                $250-300          $175-200
                               18                $300-400          $200-250
                               19                $400-500          $250-300
                               20                >$500             $300-400
                               21                                  $400-500
                               22                                  $500-750
                               23                                  $750-1mil
                               24                                  >$1mil
                       Notes: Values are in thousands of dollars




                                                64
Appendix A2: Construction of variables: Exposure to Deletion, Listing and Proposal


          In this appendix, we describe the construction of the tract-level variable measuring the
exposure of tracts to NPL sites at the three milestones of proposal, listing, and deletion. The
following two maps show the NPL sites in the Memphis Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) in
1990 and 2000, respectively.


Deletion
          Consider tract A which is completely enclosed within the 3km buffer of North
Hollywood Dump. North Hollywood Dump was in the listing stage in 1990 but reached the
deleted stage by 2000. The exposure of tract A to deleted sites in 1990 is zero and the exposure
of tract A to deleted sites in 2000 is the share of that tract which overlaps with the 3km buffer
surrounding North Hollywood Dump. Because tract A is completely enclosed in the 3km buffer
of North Hollywood Dump, this exposure amounts to 1. A comparison of the two maps indicates
that the change in exposure of tract A to deleted sites between 1990 and 2000 is also 1.
          Consider tract B which overlaps with a large segment of the 3km buffer surrounding
Gallaway Pits. Gallaway Pits was in the listing stage in 1990 and in the deleted stage in 2000.
The exposure of tract B to deleted sites is zero in 1990, but in 2000 it is the share of that tract
which overlaps with the 3km buffer surrounding Gallaway Pits.
          Finally, consider tract C which overlaps with the 3km buffer surrounding Chemet (a site
that appears in 2000). The exposure of tract C to deleted sites is zero in 1990, but in 2000 it is
the share of that tract which overlaps with the 3km buffer surrounding Chemet.


Listing
          Consider the exposure of tract A to listed sites in 1990. The exposure of tract A to listed
sites in 1990 is the share of tract A that overlaps with North Hollywood Dump (i.e., 1), and its
exposure to listed sites in 2000 is zero. Therefore, the change in exposure of tract A between
1990 and 2000 to listed sites is -1.
          Consider tract D which overlaps with Gurley Pit. Gurley Pit is in the listing stage in both
1990 and 2000. The exposure of tract D to listed sites in 1990 is the share of the tract that
overlaps with Gurley Pit. That exposure in 2000 is the same. Therefore, the change in exposure
of tract D to listed sites between 1990 and 2000 is zero.

                                                   65
Proposal
        Consider tract E which overlaps with Carrier Air Conditioning Company. The Carrier site
is in the proposal stage in 1990 and in the listing stage in 2000. The exposure of tract E to
proposed sites in 1990 is therefore the share of the tract that overlaps with Carrier, and exposure
to proposed sites in 2000 is zero. The change in exposure of tract E to proposed sites between
1990 and 2000 is then the negative of the share of tract land exposed in 1990.


Overlap
        Consider the case where the 3km buffer of two NPL sites with the same status at time t
overlap, and this overlapping area is enclosed in a tract. In calculating the exposure of the tract
to those two NPL sites, we include the overlap area only once in our calculation of exposure.
This is one extreme option in defining exposure, which maintains the exposure of the tract is
always at or below one. The drawback of this approach is that we do not account for the
possibility that exposure to two deleted sites may have stronger effects on the appreciation of
housing values than the exposure to one deleted site. Nevertheless, as seen in Table A2.1, in our
(preferred) strict RD sample of tracts, very few tracts intersect with areas of overlap between two
or more NPL sites. Specifically, only 5 and 12 tracts intersect with areas of overlap of sites that
are deleted or listed, respectively.
        At the other extreme of defining exposure, we could include the overlap area twice in our
calculation, resulting in some cases of exposure of the tract exceeding one. It is not clear,
however, that the marginal effect of multiple exposures to sites at the same level of remediation
should not be decreasing. In any case, the assumption we make about multiple exposures should
have little practical consequence for our strict RD results, given the numbers reported in Table
A2.1.




                                                 66
Table A2.1: Tracts in the Strict RD where buffers of two NPL
            sites with the same status overlap
                                                         Share of tract
Tract-ID                                                exposed to the
                                                              overlap
Panel A: Deleted sites (5 out of 1666 tracts x years)
10003016000                                                       39.8
42069112500                                                       14.2
42069112600                                                       88.5
42069112700                                                       99.3
42069112800                                                        8.1
Panel B: Listed sites (12 out of 1666 tracts x years)
18061060600                                                        0.5
21029021200                                                        0.3
21093000100                                                       33.5
21093000200                                                        1.1
21111012104                                                       10.0
21139040200                                                        3.3
21157950100                                                       15.7
34021004203                                                        1.8
36063022900                                                        4.9
42101032200                                                       47.4
42069112500                                                       10.6
42069112600                                                        5.2




                                  67
Memphis MSA 1990 NPL Sites




            68
Memphis MSA 2000 NPL Sites




            69
Appendix A3: Comparison with Greenstone and Gallagher (2008)

        The differences between our study and Greenstone and Gallagher (2008) are summarized
in Table A3.1. These differences include: (i) our focus on deletion as the milestone used to
measure of benefits from cleanup, (ii) the construction of our data (i.e., tracts as our observation
units, our sample of ever proposed NPL sites, our definition of exposure to NPL sites, and our
use of smaller buffers to define neighborhoods affected by NPL sites); and (iii) our method (i.e.,
measuring the effects of deletion separately from listing, applying a panel method to the RD
sample and examining the lower quantiles of tract-level housing values).


Comparison of our regression model with Greenstone and Gallagher (2008)

         As described in section 4.1, we begin with the standard hedonic specification that relates
tract or block housing values with contemporaneous tract or block attributes, and then difference
across the 2000 and 1990 specifications in order to control for time invariant unobservables at
the tract or block level. In contrast, Greenstone and Gallagher’s regression model relates 2000
tract median housing values to 1980 tract characteristics and 1980 tract median values; they
argue that 1980 tract attributes are correlated with the 2000 attributes, but are pre-determined
with respect to Superfund site status. Deriving the Greenstone and Gallagher regression
specification from 1990 and 2000 hedonic price functions, however, we find that the resulting
regression error will be correlated with the key variables appearing on the right-hand-side of the
regression, biasing parameter estimates. To illustrate this, begin with a hedonic price function
for each year:39

                                             1                   1

                                             1                   1

Noting that              0, we can multiply the second equation by                    and then difference these
two equations to obtain:

                                     1                  1

In order to convert this into the equation estimated by Greenstone and Gallagher, we need to (i)
add          to both sides of the equation, and (ii) move         into the regression error term:

                     1                   1


39
   For this illustration, we use Greenstone and Gallagher’s notation, where        refers to the median housing value
in census tract c in year 2000, 1              1 is an indicator taking the value 1 if that tract was exposed to either
a listed or deleted site in that year, and      is a vector of tract attributes).

                                                            70
where           . Note that the resulting regression error ( ) will contain the unobserved
determinants of the 1980 median house value (              , so that the 1980 median (or mean)
housing value will naturally be correlated with it, based on the original hedonic specification.
Because year 2000 covariates are relegated to the regression error, 1980 covariates (            will
likely be correlated with this component of the error term as well. Finally, the main variable of
interest (year 2000 NPL status) will be correlated with the regression error term if it is correlated
with year 2000 covariates, which we might also suspect to be the case. Greenstone and
Gallagher will therefore need to rely on their regression discontinuity and IV approaches to
eliminate any bias stemming from this correlation.



Direct comparison of our method with Greenstone and Gallagher (2008)

         We next provide a direct comparison of our method with Greenstone and Gallagher
(2008), to the extent possible given the limitations posed by our different samples and methods.
We can replicate most closely their RD specification which relates sites’ statuses to tract
attributes on which these sites are located. We begin by constructing an “intersection” sample
(i.e., the intersection of our data set and Greenstone and Gallagher’s). We continue to restrict
our sample to those sites that are ever proposed to the NPL. We exclude non-NPL sites because
including these sites amongst the “non-treatment” observations can lead to a downward bias in
the estimates of benefits from deletion. Therefore, a key difference between the samples is that
Greenstone and Gallagher (2008) include 65 non-NPL sites in their analysis of 227 sites, while
we exclude non-NPL sites from our “intersection” sample.

        The unit of observation in our main analysis is the tract, while Greenstone and
Gallagher’s unit of observation is the site. To be comparable with their analysis, we therefore
limit our intersection sample to include only tracts on which no more than one site is located.
For their covariates, Greenstone and Gallagher use tract attributes on which these sites are
located or the weighted average of values for tracts that intersect within their 3 mile buffers
around the sites. In doing so, Greenstone and Gallagher (2008) assume that exposure to the sites
is homogeneous across the housing distribution within the tract (i.e., the weighted average does
not allow for covariates to vary systematically within tracts). Table A3.2 describes the steps in
constructing our “intersection” sample and our variables.

        First, we apply Greenstone and Gallagher’s (2008) method – i.e., the use of
[HRS82>28.5] to define an instrument for listing on the NPL by 2000 ([NPL2000=1]) – to the
“intersection” sample. We find two problems with this IV approach. First, the instrument is
weak in the “intersection” sample; second, this single instrument cannot simultaneously address
two endogenous variables (i.e., listing and deletion). Listing and deletion are distinct Superfund
treatments that should be measured separately; listing has ambiguous effects on housing prices,
while deletion is likely to raise housing prices. Table A3.3 shows the first-stage relationship used

                                                 71
in the IV strategy, regressing the [NPL2000=1] indicator on the instrument and the other
exogenous variables. The relationship between the instrument and endogenous variable exhibits
insufficient statistical significance (i.e., a t-statistic of only 2.38) to avoid the “weak instruments”
problem. (Staiger and Stock, 1997). A weak instrument contributes to imprecise measurement
and results that are sensitive to the specification.

         We run regressions with housing prices at the qth decile as the dependent variable, using
[HRS82>28.5] as an instrument for [NPL2000=1], and employing the other 1980 control variables
as in Greenstone and Gallagher.40 Our analysis compares exposure to listing (i.e., which
includes all sites that have been exposed to either listed or deleted sites as of 2000) relative to
exposure to pre-proposed or proposed sites, while Greenstone and Gallagher’s analysis compares
the effect of listing (similarly defined) relative to the pre-proposal or proposal stages of NPL
sites or non-NPL sites. The regressions shown in our Table A3.4 (first row) correspond to
Greenstone and Gallagher’s results described in their Table IV (Panel A, seventh column). Our
coefficient at the median, shown in the third column, is similar to theirs. In particular, we find a
positive (0.403) but statistically insignificant (p-value = 0.612) effect of NPL2000 treatment at the
median. This insignificant point estimate is slightly larger than that estimated by Greenstone and
Gallagher. This difference may arise from our exclusion but their inclusion of non-NPL sites as
“non-treatment” sites; the latter leads to a downward bias in the estimate of benefits.

        Next we examine how these results vary across the housing value distribution. In Table
A3.4 (first row), reading across the columns, we see the effects of [NPL2000=1] at different
deciles of the housing value distribution, as estimated by regressions at the respective deciles.
While none of the effects are statistically significant, we do find large, positive point estimates at
the lower deciles. Unsurprisingly, given the presence of weak instruments, these results are
highly sensitive to model specification. The second row shows results when state fixed effects
are dropped from each specification. The wide fluctuations in point estimates associated with
[NPL2000=1] is indicative of a weak instruments problem.

        We next apply our method to this intersection sample. Our panel approach allows us to
measure separately the effects of listing and deletion, while controlling for time invariant
unobservables that are correlated with both listing and deletion. Time-varying unobservables
can still bias our results on listing and deletion, but the bias is likely to be limited. First, any
such bias on the listing coefficient is mitigated by using the RD sample (i.e., sites that are
proposed but not listed should be similar to sites that are listed). Second, Sigman (2001)
suggests that time varying unobservables are likely to assert only limited bias on the deletion
coefficient.41


40
   Our 1980 covariates, listed in Table A3.3, correspond to those used in Greenstone and Gallagher (2008) with one
exception – we were unable to include the percentage of households with air conditioning in our list.
41
   See the discussion in section 6.1.



                                                        72
         We apply our method in three progressive steps. (i) We introduce the panel approach,
but continue to measure exposure using a single treatment variable – i.e., listed on or deleted
from the NPL in 2000 (NPL2000) and listed on or deleted from the NPL in 1990 (NPL1990). (ii)
We move from the single treatment measure to two separate treatment measures – i.e., exposure
of the tract to listed sites and exposure of the tract to deleted sites in each year. Thus, we
examine the changes in exposure to listing (listed2000-1990) and changes in exposure to deletion
(deletion2000-1990). (iii) We examine not only the median, but also the upper and lower quantiles
of the tract-level housing value distribution. In all three steps, the 1980 covariates appear in the
differenced regression specification as we allow their coefficients to vary over time.

         The panel model using exposure measured with a single “listed on the NPL” variable
continues to yield statistically insignificant coefficients, as seen in the third row of Table A3.4.
These insignificant results are unsurprising, as this specification continues to conflate listing and
deletion into a single variable. Our final specification considers the two exposure variables
(listing and deletion) separately in combination with looking at the full distribution of housing
values within tract. The regression yields coefficients of 0.13 and 0.126 at the 10th and 20th
percentile respectively – these results are nearly statistically significant at conventional levels
with p-values of 0.11 and 0.114, respectively (note the small size of the intersection sample that
we use for this exercise; N = 158). There is, however, no statistically significant effect at or
above the 30th percentile. We therefore find evidence of greater appreciation from deletion at
lower quantiles (albeit at smaller magnitudes), but no such evidence at the upper quantiles.
These results are comparable to our main results (i.e., when we apply our method to our strict
RD and RD samples). Nevertheless, the magnitudes of appreciation in the lower deciles are
smaller in our “intersection” sample than in our main strict RD and RD samples.




                                                 73
Table A3.1: Comparison With Greenstone and Gallagher (2008); Data and Methods
                                This Study                                  GG (2008)
Research      The effect of Deletion (signalling the        The effect of Listing (an intermediate milestone
Question      end of cleanup) on housing values             in the Superfund process) on housing values
Data
Sites in      221 sites                                     227 sites
Regression    Begin with 1722 sites that are ever proposed Begin with 676 sites that were scored
Discontinuity   to the NPL by Jan 1, 2010 (i.e. NPL sites).    in 1982.
(RD) sample Restrict to 221 sites that received             Restrict to 332 sites that received
                16.5 HRS-82  40.5.                          16.5 HRS-82  40.5.
                                                            [95 out of 332 sites dropped due to
                                                                missing 1980 variables.]

Excluded      Excludes non-NPL sites.                    Includes non-NPL sites.
sites         (Non-NPL=not proposed to NPL by 1/1/2010)
              Rationale for excluding non-NPL sites:      [65 out of 227 sites are non-NPL sites]
              Tracts hosting NPL and non-NPL sites are
              likely to differ systematically, violating
              the spirit of the RD design.
              The strict RD sample (187 sites) further
              exclude tracts exposed to sites for which
              (i) HRS-82 < 16.5 & HRS-82 > 40.5 or
              or (ii) unscored in 1982, as these sites
              may confound housing prices.

Unit of       Tracts                                         Sites
observation   i.e. whose centroids fall within the           Housing and demographic attributes from
              buffer around the sites.                       (i) tracts on which sites are located, or
                                                             (ii) average attribute of tracts that overlap with
                                                             the buffer around the site, thus assuming
                                                             within tract homogeneity.

Affected     Buffer of 3km ( 2 miles)                       Buffer of 3 miles
neighborhood and 5 km ( 3 miles).                           and 5 miles.
             Rationale: Distance-based studies find
             hazardous waste sites are associated
             with depreciation in housing values
             within 3km of the site.

Exposure      Share of tract that overlap with               Binary indicator :
measure       buffers surrounding NPL sites                  1= site is "Listed" by 2000, 0= site "Non-listed".
              i.e. whether Proposed, Listed, or              "Listed" includes Listed, Construction Complete,
              Deleted.                                       Deleted; "Unlisted" includes Proposed, non-NPL.




                                                     74
Table A3.1 (continued): Comparison of this study and GG (2008) RD-tract-level analysis in their Data and Method
Estimation Method
Superfund      Measure the effects of Proposed,               Measure the effect of "Listed" vs. "Non-listed".
milestones     Listed, and Deleted relative to                "Listed"=Listed or beyond the Listed milestone.
examined       Pre-proposal as the omitted category.          "Non-listed"=Proposed or pre-proposed to NPL
               Rationale - these milestones are likely to       and non-NPL.
               have distinct effects of housing values.

Housing values Entire house price distribution                 Median tract-level housing values.
examined       at the tract level.
               Further analysis uses median block-level
               housing values.

Estimation     Sample restrictions to RD and strict RD         Sample restrictions to RD sample.
Strategy       samples.
               Panel analysis (1990-2000).                     IV for "Listed"/Non-listed" on the NPL
                                                               using HRS-82.

               Rationale: IV using HRS-82 cannot be            IV using HRS-82 can be applied to
               applied to three variables - Proposed,           to the one variable "Listed/Non-Listed"
               Listed and Deletion.                            on the NPL.




                                                         75
Table A3.2: Steps in creating a sample defined as closely as possible to GG's RD sample
                       Greenstone and Gallagher (2008)                                            Our study
Sample       Start with 687 sites scored in 1982.                    Start with 1722 sites ever proposed to NPL by 1/1/2010.
             Restrict to 332 sites that received                     Restrict to 221 sites that received
             16.5 HRS-82 40.5.                                     16.5 HRS-82 40.5.

Units of     Sites.                                                  Our study has used tracts as units of observation.
Obs.         The attributes related to the sites are from
             tracts on which the sites are located.

             GG is able to include 3 pair of sites In which each     For comparability with GG's sample, we restrict our sample
             pair occupies the same tract. E.g. a tract has          to 221 tracts occupied by sites. We further restrict our sample
             site A that is listed and site B that is proposed.      to 215 tracts occupied by no more than one site per tract
             The tract attributes enters as two rows of data         because can define HRS-82, used as the IV, for such
             corresponding to site A and site B, respectively.       tracts only.

Final        Only 227 sites with 1980 covariates                     Only 158 tracts with 1980 covariates
sample         - 65 non-NPL sites in sample                          - no NPL sites in sample

Treatment    NPL2000=1 if site Listed and 0 if site unlisted.        NPL2000=1 for tracts exposed to listed or deleted sites
definition   Listed=Listed or beyond the listing milestone.                         in 2000.
             Not-Listed=NPL site that is pre-proposed or             NPL2000=0 for tracts exposed to NPL sites proposed
             or proposed and non-NPL sites.                                   in 2000 or still pre-proposed in 2000.




                                                                76
Table A3.3 – First-Stage Regression, Greenstone and Gallagher IV Procedure
              (State Fixed Effects Included). Dependent Variable = NPL2000,
              N = 158, R2 = 0.506.
                                          Mean                   Std
1980-covariates                         in 1980 Coefficient      Error      t-stat
1[HRS-82>28.5]                             0.85       0.081 ** 0.034          2.38
% unit occupied                              94       0.002      0.004        0.57
% owner occupied                             71       0.002 * 0.001           1.66
Housing unit density                     0.0002      -133.4      329.5       -0.40
Population density                       0.0004         54.7     124.2        0.44
% Black                                       9      -0.001      0.001       -0.83
% Hispanic                                    3       0.005      0.004        1.14
% under 18 years old                         29      0.0008      0.004        0.21
% high school dropout                        36      -0.007 ** 0.003         -2.64
% college educated                           13      -0.003      0.003       -0.97
% below poverty line                         11      -0.005      0.004       -1.45
% public assistance                           8       0.006      0.004        1.37
% female headed HH                           17       0.001      0.003        0.44
                                                              -5                -6
Mean HH income                          $20,141      -1.2 x10 *      -6.2 x10        -1.97
% attached homes                              3          0.001       0.002            0.57
% mobile homes                                7        -0.0009       0.002           -0.48
% 0-2 bedrooms                               33         -0.003       0.004           -0.78
% 3-4 bedrooms                               63         -0.003       0.004           -0.88
                                                              -4
% units built within 5 years                  13      9.3 x10        0.003            0.31
% units built within 10 years                 25        -0.003       0.002           -1.30
% same house in the last 5 years              57        -0.002       0.002           -1.40
                                                              -6             -6
 Mean housing value                      $60,469       1.0 x10        1.0 x10        1.03
 Constant                                      1          1.561 ** 0.598             2.61
Notes: State fixed effects are included. Mean NPL2000= 0.981                                 *
statistically significant at the 10% and ** statistically significant at 5%.




                                            77
Table A3.4 – Comparison with Greenstone and Gallagher (2008); Results.
                                                [1]      [2]       [3]      [4]                      [5]  State
 Panel Method   Dependent Variable                              Percentile                                Fixed
                Variable      of Interest       10       20        50       80                      90    Effects
  A 2SLS        Log Price2000 NPL 2000        1.489     0.728    0.403     0.492                   0.204 Y
                              mean=0.981     (1.250) (1.002) (0.794) (0.895)                      (0.964)

   B    2SLS         Log Price2000 NPL 2000             0.032     -0.401     -0.310     -0.149    -0.486 N
                                   mean=0.981          (0.985)    (0.885)    (0.773)    (0.839)   (0.895)

  C     Panel OLS  Log Price        NPL              -0.108     -0.033     -0.124     -0.106    -0.169 Y
        1990-2000                   mean=0.019         (0.169)    (0.153)    (0.117)    (0.109)   (0.127)

  D     Panel OLS  Log Price        Listing           0.083      0.050     -0.044      0.030     0.043 Y
        1990-2000                   mean=-0.095        (0.086)    (0.078)    (0.060)    (0.056)   (0.066)
                                     Deletion         0.130†     0.126§     -0.010      0.026     0.036
                                    mean=0.190         (0.081)    (0.073)    (0.057)    (0.053)   (0.062)

Notes: All specifications include 1980 covariates correspond to those listed in Table 3(b). 158 observations.
†
  p-value=0.110 and §p-value=0.114. Standard errors in parenthesis.




                                                         78
