NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A STRUCTURAL APPROACH TO MARKET DEFINITION WITH AN APPLICATION
TO THE HOSPITAL INDUSTRY
Martin Gaynor
Samuel A. Kleiner
William B. Vogt
Working Paper 16656
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16656

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

Corresponding Author: skleiner@cornell.edu. We are grateful to Cory Capps, Rein Halbersma, R.
Forrest McCluer, Barry Harris and Misja Mikkers for their comments and suggestions and Rob Jones
for his computing assistance. All errors and opinions are the sole responsibility of the authors. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Martin Gaynor, Samuel A. Kleiner, and William B. Vogt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Structural Approach to Market Definition With an Application to the Hospital Industry
Martin Gaynor, Samuel A. Kleiner, and William B. Vogt
NBER Working Paper No. 16656
January 2011
JEL No. I11,K21,L1,L4
ABSTRACT
Market definition is essential to merger analysis. Because no standard approach to market definition
exists, opposing parties in antitrust cases often disagree about the extent of the market. These differences
have been particularly relevant in the hospital industry, where the courts have denied seven of eight
merger challenges since 1994, due largely to disagreements over geographic market definition. We
compare geographic markets produced using common ad hoc methodologies to a method that directly
applies the “SSNIP test” to hospitals in California using a structural model. Our results suggest that
previously employed methods overstate hospital demand elasticities by a factor of 2.4 to 3.4 and define
larger markets than would be implied by the merger guidelines’s hypothetical monopolist test. The
use of these methods in differentiated product industries may lead to mistaken geographic market delineation,
and was likely a contributing factor to the permissive legal environment for hospital mergers.

Martin Gaynor
Heinz College
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue, Room 241
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
and NBER
mgaynor@cmu.edu
Samuel A. Kleiner
Cornell University
College of Human Ecology
108 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
skleiner@cornell.edu

William B. Vogt
513 Brooks Hall
Department of Economics
Terry College of Business
University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602
william.b.vogt@gmail.com

Introduction
Market definition is pivotal to the antitrust process and a key part of merger
analysis (Baker, 2007). The assessment of the potential competitive effects of a merger
or acquisition rest so heavily on the definition of a relevant antitrust market that Robert
Pitofsky, the former chairman of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), noted that
“antitrust practitioners have long known that the most important single issue in most
enforcement actions—because so much depends on it—is market definition.” (Pitofsky,
1990, p. 1807). While there is an approximate consensus about how market definition
should be done in principle (Baker, 2007), there is wide variation in how it is
implemented in practice. A number of ad hoc methods have been used which, as we
show, do not correspond well to the agreed upon concept of an antitrust market.
Although these ad hoc methods have been widely criticized, to our knowledge they have
not been previously compared to empirical antitrust markets that are consistent with
economic theory.
It is clear that an antitrust market should be the set of products and locations that
exercise a significant competitive constraint on each other (Motta, 2004). The U.S.
antitrust authorities introduced the “SSNIP” test as a method for delineating markets
(Federal Trade Commission and U.S. Department of Justice, 1982), and this approach has
been adopted by competition authorities worldwide. The Small but Significant and Nontransitory Increase in Price (SSNIP) test begins by defining a narrow market and asking
whether a hypothetical monopolist in the defined market could profitably implement a
SSNIP (usually a 5 percent price increase for 1 year). If sufficient numbers of consumers
are likely to switch to alternative products so as to make the price increase unprofitable,

1

then the firm or cartel lacks the power to raise price. The relevant market therefore needs
to be expanded. The next closest substitute is added and the process is repeated until the
point is reached where a hypothetical cartel or monopolist could profitably impose a 5%
price increase. The set of products/locations so defined constitutes the relevant market.
While the conceptual exercise prescribed by the SSNIP is straightforward,
implementation in practice is not. This is in part due to data limitations, and in part due
to analysts’ failure to utilize econometric analysis. If one has reliable estimates of
demand in hand, the SSNIP test can be implemented in a clear-cut way that is consistent
with the conceptual exercise. In the past, data limitations precluded demand estimation.
In addition, modern econometric methods were not brought to antitrust until
approximately 20 years ago (Scheffman and Spiller, 1987). As a consequence, ad hoc
methods of market definition were developed that did not require either extensive data or
econometric methods (Elzinga and Hogarty, 1973, 1978; Harris and Simons, 1989).
These simple quantitative approaches to market definition have been widely used
in antitrust analysis, yet have been criticized for their static nature, simplifying
assumptions and internal inconsistencies that have the potential to affect the conclusions
drawn from the use of these methods (Baker, 2007; Capps et al., 2002; Danger and Frech,
2001; Frech et al., 2004; Katz and Shapiro, 2003; Langenfeld and Li, 2001; Varkevisser
et al., 2008; Werden, 1981, 1990).
The use of such ad hoc market definition methods has been particularly influential
for antitrust decisions in the hospital industry, where 1,425 mergers and acquisitions were
successfully consummated between 1994 and 2009.1 These mergers have resulted in

1

Kaiser Family Foundation http://www.kff.org/insurance/7031/print-sec5.cfm (accessed July 16, 2010) and
“Deals and Dealmakers: The Health Care M&A Year in Review” Norwalk, CT: Irving Levin Associates,

2

increases in the price of inpatient care (Keeler et al., 1999; Vita and Sacher, 2001; Capps
et al., 2003; Gaynor & Vogt, 2003; Dafny, 2009), no measurable increase in the quality
of care (Hamilton and Ho, 2000)2 and an estimated loss of $42 billion in consumer
welfare (Town et al., 2005).3 While the hospital industry has seen more merger litigation
in recent years than any other industry,4 the courts have denied all but one government
request to block hospital mergers since 1994,5 due largely to the inability of the antitrust
authorities to convincingly define a geographic market that supports their case.6 In the
eight cases brought to the courts since 1994, the primary reason given for denying the
government’s request in six of these cases centered on the markets delineation.7
This paper introduces a new method for market definition using a fully specified
structural model of consumer demand and firm behavior. The exercise prescribed by the
SSNIP can be performed exactly by using such a model. The use of these models has

Inc., 15th Edition, 2010, 14th Edition, 2009, 13th Edition, 2008, 12th Edition, 2007,
http://www.levinassociates.com/compallconfirm?sid=6050 (accessed July 16, 2010).
2
The Federal Trade Commission produced evidence in the Evanston Northwestern case that a hospital
merger had led to increased prices without any corresponding increase in quality (see Majoras, 2007).
3
See Town and Vogt (2006) for a recent survey on the effects of hospital consolidation.
4
Health Care Mergers and Acquisitions Handbook, Section of Antitrust Law (American Bar Association,
2003) p. 1
5
Evanston Northwestern Healthcare was decided in favor of the FTC in 2007. This case marked the first
time the FTC retrospectively challenged a fully consummated hospital merger .Although the case was
decided in favor of the FTC, no divestiture was mandated for the merging parties.
6
Product market definition has not been an issue in hospital merger cases, therefore all of the attention has
been focused on geographic markets.
7
The eight cases brought since 1994 are Ukiah [In re Adventist Health System/West and Ukiah Adventist
Hospital, 117 F.T.C. 224 (1994)], Joplin [FTC v. Freeman Hospital (1995, 911 F. Supp. 1213)], Dubuque
[United States of America v. Mercy Health Services and Finley Tri-States Health Group, Inc., 902 F.Supp.
968 (1995)], Grand Rapids [Federal Trade Commission v. Butterworth Health Corporation and Blodgett
Memorial Medical Center, 946 F. Supp. 1285 (1996)], Long Island [United States of America v. Long
Island Jewish Medical Center and North Shore Health System, Inc., 983 F. Supp. 121 (1997)], Poplar Bluff
[Federal Trade Commission v. Tenet Healthcare Corporation, 17 F. Supp. 2d 937 (1998)], Sutter
[California v. Sutter Health Sys., 84 F. Supp. 2d 1057 (N.D. Cal.), aff'd mem., 2000-1 Trade Cas. (CCH) U
87,665 (9th Cir. 2000), revised, 130 F. Supp. 2d 1109 (N.D. Cal. 2001)] and Evanston [In the Matter of
Evanston Northwestern Healthcare Corporation and ENH Medical Group, Inc.,
Initial Decision, Oct. 20, 2005, Docket No. 9315, available at http://www.ftc.gov/os/adjpro/d9315/
051020initialdecision.pdf.]. All but U.S. v. Long Island Jewish Med. Ctr and Evanston Northwestern
Health Care were lost due to failure to define a geographic market. Also, one of the cases was brought by
state antitrust enforcers without either Agency's involvement. See Sutter Health Sys., 84 F. Supp. 2d 1057.

3

been promoted in the past decade as a theoretically superior approach to merger analysis
in differentiated product industries, (e.g., Motta, 2004; Baker, 2007; Geroski and Griffith,
2004; van Reenen, 2004; Ivaldi and Lőrincz, 2009) however, such an approach has not
been commonly employed in antitrust analysis. Consequently little is known about the
differences in markets produced by these methods relative to methods used in actual
cases. We apply this method to the hospital industry and compare the markets implied by
this model to those produced by the ad hoc techniques that have been used in hospital
merger cases. We seek to better understand the extent to which currently employed
methods of market definition define markets that are consistent with the criteria for
merger analysis described in the merger guidelines.
Our results suggest that the market definition techniques that have been used in
antitrust enforcement of hospital mergers by and large incorrectly define (geographic)
markets as specified by the merger guidelines’ hypothetical monopolist test. Our analysis
of a large subset of hospitals in the state of California using 1995 data suggests that
markets implied by previously employed quantitative market definition methods are, in
the majority of cases, substantially larger than those that would be implied by a method
rooted in the principles set forth in the merger guidelines. Finally, our examination of
mergers in San Diego provides an illustration of the differences in implied market
concentration in a localized region of the state, and enables comparison of our approach
to an alternative market definition method for hospitals developed by Capps et al. (2003).
Our paper proceeds as follows. Part I provides background on the merger
guidelines and their application in the hospital industry. Part II discusses quantitative
approaches to market definition. Part III outlines our use of a structural model to define

4

geographic markets. Part IV details the simulation methods used for our comparison
methodologies, while Part V describes our data. Part VI presents our main results. Part
VII concludes.

I. The Merger Guidelines and Market Definition
The Merger Guidelines
The merger guidelines are a collaborative effort by the FTC and DOJ outlining
the enforcement policy of the agencies concerning horizontal acquisitions and mergers
subject to section 7 of the Clayton Act, section 1 of the Sherman Act, or section 5 of the
FTC Act.8 They are considered to be the foremost articulation of the government’s policy
regarding enforcement standards for horizontal mergers (Werden, 1997). Their purpose
is to convey the analytical framework by which the government is to go about
determining the extent to which a merger is likely to lessen competition.
Though the first guidelines were released in 1968 and modified as recently as
2010, the thrust of the criteria for market definition was pioneered largely in the 1982
version.9 The approach to market definition in the 1982 guidelines focused on the central
enforcement-related question of whether a merger would result in a price increase
through the use of the “SSNIP” criterion. In the SSNIP criterion, an antitrust market is
defined as a group of products and a geographic area in which a hypothetical profitmaximizing firm, not subject to price regulation, that was the only present and future
seller of those products in that area would impose a “small but significant and non8

Mergers subject to section 7 are prohibited if their effect “may be substantially to lessen competition, or to
tend to create a monopoly.” Mergers subject to section 1 are prohibited if they constitute a “contract,
combination or conspiracy in restraint of trade.” Mergers are subject to section 5 if they constitute an
“unfair method of competition.”
9
The FTC joined the DOJ in releasing joint guidelines beginning in 1992.

5

transitory increase in price” (SSNIP) above all prevailing or likely future levels holding
constant the terms of sale for all products produced elsewhere. As a general matter, it
defined a price increase as significant if it was at least 5% and lasted for one year.10 The
general idea in this process is to find the smallest group of products or firms for which
there are no close substitutes, thus allowing such a hypothetical monopolist to exert
market power.11
The development of this concept was notable in that the economic reasoning was
comprehensible to both attorneys and economists, and the methodology was operable.
Though economists and attorneys still differ on the implementation aspect of market
definition analysis, the basis for these disagreements is typically methodological rather
than the fundamental theoretical question of what defines a market (Scheffman et al.,
2002). To this day the SSNIP criterion continues to be the standard by which courts
define antitrust markets.
The determination of market boundaries using the SSNIP test provides the basis
on which any subsequent steps rest when evaluating a merger. As Miles (2005) details,

10

This was later refined in 1984 to ensure that 5% was not a rule, but 5% has nonetheless remained a
standard utilized in hospital merger cases by the courts. This was indicated in the Sutter case, as the court
requires a basis for deviating from this prescribed 5% figure. See California v. Sutter Health Sys., 84 F.
Supp. 2d 1057 (N.D. Cal.), aff'd mem., 2000-1 Trade Cas. (CCH) U 87,665 (9th Cir. 2000), revised, 130 F.
Supp. 2d 1109 (N.D. Cal. 2001).
11
It should be noted that although the SSNIP test mandates that other prices be held constant, the
assumption of Bertrand competition assumes that reaction functions of other firms are upward sloping in
the prices of all other firms, and thus other firms would raise prices in reaction to the increase in price by a
firm. For this reason, the sizes SSNIP estimates of geographic markets are most likely an upper bound. This
is because upward sloping reaction functions for competitors (and thus higher prices) would induce less
substitution away from the hospitals included in the SSNIP test, and thus would require a smaller number
of coordinated price increases in order to increase profit. For an alternative approach that asks whether the
candidates in the market would increase prices by at least 5% in equilibrium, see Ivaldi and Lőrincz (2009).

6

the court is required to follow a sequence of steps in determining the legality of a merger
consisting of12:
1. Definition of the relevant product market.
2. Definition of the relevant geographic market.
3. Identification of the competitors in the market defined from steps (1) and (2).
4. Calculation of market shares and Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index (HHI) of the
competitors in the market.
5. Calculation of merging firms’ post-merger market share and the level of post-merger
HHI. If this is too high, the merger is determined unlawful.
6. Consideration of other factors that indicate that the merger is unlikely to have
anticompetitive effects, such as ease of entry, ownership status, excess capacity and
efficiency gains.
The first two steps involved in merger analysis are pivotal to the process in each
subsequent step. The inclusion of many products will understate market concentration,
while failure to include relevant products will overstate concentration. Likewise, the
delineation of geographic markets is fundamental to the determination of the degree of
market power. The inclusion of an inappropriately large number of firms will overstate
the degree of competition, while failure to incorporate all firms involved will understate
the prevailing competitive environment.
Once the market boundaries have been set, the merger guidelines specify levels
and changes in the HHI which serve as a guide as to when mergers are likely to be anticompetitive.13 According to the 2010 guidelines, markets with a post-merger HHI below

12

The current (2010) guidelines offer more flexibility than in the past, in that “The Agencies’ analysis need
not start with market definition….although evaluation of competitive alternatives available to customers is
always necessary at some point in the analysis.” (FTC/DOJ, 2010, p. 7)
13
Because the thresholds set by the guidelines are intended to be a reference point, the FTC has been
flexible in their enforcement of mergers conforming to these exact HHI thresholds. See Merger Challenges

7

1,500 are said to be unconcentrated and are thus unlikely to have adverse competitive
effects. Markets with post-merger HHIs between 1,500 and 2,500 are regarded as
moderately concentrated and are likely to warrant scrutiny only if a merger will result in
an increase in the HHI of more than 100. Mergers resulting in a post-merger HHI of
above 2,500 are regarded as resulting in markets that are highly concentrated and thus
mergers producing an increase in HHI of between 100 and 200 are presumed to raise
significant competitive concerns, with increases of 200 points or more deemed likely to
enhance market power.

Application of the Merger Guidelines to Hospital Care
In the case of hospital care, the relevant product market has not been an issue of
contention in merger cases. The generally accepted product market definition has been to
“cluster” products, leading to a typical product market definition of “general acute care
hospital services.”14 In only one of the last eight cases brought by the government has
failure to convincingly define a product market been a deciding factor in a hospital
merger case. 15
The inability to convincingly define geographic markets for hospital care has,
however, been the primary determining factor in six of the government’s seven
consecutive unsuccessful merger challenges between 1994 and 1999. Table 1 presents a

Data, Fiscal Years 1999–2003, Issued by the Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Department of
Justice at http://www.ftc.gov/os/2003/12/mdp.pdf
14
Health Care Mergers and Acquisitions Handbook, Section of Antitrust Law (American Bar Association,
2003), p. 30
15
See United States of America v. Long Island Jewish Medical Center and North Shore Health System,
Inc., 983 F. Supp. 121 (1997).

8

list of the most recent cases challenged by the government, as well as the size of the
geographic markets and level of concentration in each market.16

II. Quantitative Approaches to Geographic Market Definition
As discussed above, market definition is pivotal to the antitrust process. Failure to
correctly define a market may have serious consequences in antitrust cases. However,
because the merger guidelines prescribe their methodology through a thought experiment
rather than a concrete methodology, there is no uniform approach for defining these
markets. As a result, numerous quantitative approaches have been suggested and applied
across many industries including beverages, software, hospitals and supermarkets. These
include approaches based on product shipments, methodologies incorporating
econometric methods and merger simulation, and analysis of consummated mergers.17
Since we are using the hospital industry as our example, and since market definition
issues in this industry have revolved around geographic, rather than product markets, our
discussion in what follows will focus on geographic markets. It should be understood,
however, that the methodological issues are essentially the same regardless of whether
the focus is on product or geographic markets.18

Shipments-Based Approaches
16

Only a fraction of the merger activity that has occurred has been challenged due to the issuance of the
Statements of Antitrust Enforcement Policy in Health Care which stipulated that mergers involving
hospitals with (1) less than 100 licensed beds, (2) less than 40 daily patients over the past 3 years, (3) a
merger that has been in existence for more than 5 years would not be challenged (see
http://www.ftc.gov/reports/hlth3s.htm).
17
Although market definition cases rely upon quantitative methods as a basis for merger evaluation, these
cases often use factual qualitative evidence as well, such as testimony from buyers of the relevant product.
18
Once can think of geographic location as a product attribute, in which case there’s no real difference
between product and geographic markets.

9

Shipments-based approaches have been commonly employed for geographic
market definition analysis in industries such as beer,19 photographic film20 and
software,21 and are, to the best of our knowledge, the only quantitative approaches
employed in hospital merger cases. The two methodologies most heavily utilized,
referred to as Elzinga-Hogarty and Critical Loss Analysis, rely on discharge (shipments)
data which are usually available from the hospitals themselves or from state reporting
agencies. Because of their utilization in the vast majority of hospital merger cases, we
focus mainly on these approaches in our analysis, as our aim is to examine market
definition methodology as it has been utilized in practice. Table 2 lists the market
definition methods used in actual hospital merger cases.

Elzinga-Hogarty
The Elzinga-Hogarty method, (Elzinga and Hogarty, 1973, 1978) uses shipments
information consisting of origin and destination data for delineating a market. Although
not originally developed for use in the hospital industry, as Table 2 indicates, it has been
utilized extensively in hospital merger cases. The Elzinga-Hogarty method determines
that a geographic area constitutes a market if that area satisfies a joint ratio of import and
export thresholds. The simultaneous satisfaction of these thresholds is evidence of the
self-sufficiency of the area for both demand and supply, and is thus a geographic market.
The method argues that if an area imports little of a particular product, it can be deemed a
market from a demand perspective. By similar logic, Elzinga and Hogarty argue that if an

19

United States v. Pabst Brewing Co., (1966)
United States v. Eastman Kodak Co. (1995)
21
United States v. Oracle Corp., (2004)
20

10

area exports little of a particular product, it can be deemed a market from a supply
perspective.
While Elzinga-Hogarty has frequently been acknowledged by the courts as an
acceptable method by which to define geographic markets, there are a number of
criticisms regarding the potential shortcomings of geographic markets defined using this
methodology, with particular attention devoted to its limitations for defining hospital
markets. 22 The first centers on heterogeneity by geography in quality or service. This
issue is particularly relevant in high-service, tertiary care urban hospitals which draw
large inflows of patients from rural areas. If a sufficient number of rural patients obtain
care at the urban hospitals, the Elzinga-Hogarty test could conclude that the urban and
rural areas are in the same geographic market, even though the price of care in the rural
region does not constrain the market power of the urban hospitals. As Werden (1990)
indicates, this scenario leads to markets that are larger than would be reasonable given
the hypothetical monopolist principle put forth in the merger guidelines.
Alternatively, the use of shipments data can underestimate the size of markets. As
Werden (1981) illustrates, two firms may be close substitutes for each other but have no
cross shipments between the regions in which they are located (due to consumers
optimizing based on transportation costs). In this case Elzinga-Hogarty would
erroneously conclude that each firm and its corresponding region constitute a market,
despite the competitive constraints present due to their high cross price elasticities.
Other critical assessments of the methodology’s implications for behavior focus on its
static nature which makes consumer behavioral assumptions based on the pre-merger
22

In the most recent hospital merger case (In the Matter of Evanston Northwestern Healthcare Corporation,
Docket No. 9315, FTC August 2007) Elzinga himself testified that the method is not appropriate for
hospital market definition.

11

rather than post-merger terms of sale, and the “silent majority” criticism of Capps et al.
(2001) which implicitly assumes that if some patients are willing to travel to a more
distant hospital to escape a price increase by the merging hospitals, other patients will do
so as well. 23

Critical Loss Analysis
Critical Loss analysis (Harris and Simons, 1989) has been widely employed in
merger analysis since its introduction in 1989 (Epstein and Rubinfeld, 2004). It seeks to
directly answer the question posed by the merger guidelines regarding the smallest set of
hospitals that would have to be included in the market to make a hypothetical price
increase of 5% profitable. Although it has been used less frequently than the ElzingaHogarty methodology, Critical Loss has played an important role in determining
geographic markets in industries such as chewing tobacco24 and supermarkets,25 and in
hospital cases such as the Dubuque, Poplar Bluff and Sutter cases detailed in Table 2. In
addition, in the Poplar Bluff case mentioned above, the circuit court gave substantial
weight to the defendant’s Critical Loss analysis in its reversal of the district court’s initial
ruling (Langenfeld and Li, 2001).
The Critical Loss test proceeds in three steps. For a given set of firms, the first
step is to determine, for a given price increase, the percentage reduction in demand that
would render such a price increase unprofitable. This percentage reduction is a function
23

For a summary of the arguments and evidence against the use of shipments based methods in the context
of a recent case, see “Brief of Health Care and Industrial Organization Economists as Amici Curia in
Support of Petitioners,” Little Rock Cardiology Clinic PA v. Baptist Health, No. 09-1183, in the Supreme
Court of the United States. http://www.scotusblog.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/09-1183_Amicusbrief-of-the-Health-Care-and-Industrial-Organization-Economists.pdf (accessed August 13, 2010).
24
FTC v. Swedish Match North America Inc., and National Tobacco Company, LP.
25
FTC v. Whole Foods Mkt., Inc. and Wild Oats Mkt., Inc.

12

of the proposed price increase (typically fixed at 5%) and the gross margin of the firm.
For a firm with high margins, the loss of relatively few consumers will significantly
impact profitability, while low margin firms would need to lose fewer customers in order
to impose the same impact on profitability. The second step involves calculating the
actual percentage of sales that a firm would lose were they to increase their price by a
given percentage. This is called the estimated loss. The third step entails comparing the
Critical Loss with the estimated loss. If the estimated loss is greater than the Critical
Loss, this area does not constitute a market as defined by the SSNIP test.26 The market is
then expanded to include firms that are viewed as the next closest substitutes for the
group of hospitals in question.
While the principles of Critical Loss rest upon sound economic reasoning, in
practice the implementation of Critical Loss has been subject to a number of criticisms.
One criticism concerns the classification of accounting cost data used for the
determination of the contribution margin, as the use of such data to calculate the
contribution margin allows for discretion in the classification of fixed versus variable
costs. An incentive exists for merging parties to classify a large portion of their costs as
fixed, since such classification reduces the scope of costs that can be determined as
variable, thus resulting in the determination of a high contribution margin and large
Critical Loss markets (Langenfeld and Li, 2001).
The implementation methods used in the determination of the estimated loss have
also been subject to criticism, particularly as they have been employed in hospital merger
cases. This is because in practice, determination of the estimated loss in hospital merger

26

Health Care Mergers and Acquisitions Handbook, Section of Antitrust Law (American Bar Association,
2003) p. 52-54

13

cases has entailed examining zip codes in which a significant percentage (e.g. 20% or
more) of patients already use other hospitals. It is then argued that given a price increase,
a significant number of patients in these zip codes would switch to an alternative hospital
and make such an increase unprofitable. Such claims are, however, disputed since the
high contribution margins claimed by analysts also imply that the actual loss sustained by
a firm would be small. This is because the presence of a large contribution margin
implies a low elasticity of demand and consequently, a small actual loss (Katz and
Shapiro, 2003; Danger and Frech, 2001). Furthermore, a paper by Simpson (2001)
argues that in areas deemed contestable (presumably indicating a high elasticity of
demand), price increases at nearby hospitals in actuality induce very small numbers of
patients to switch, thus indicating that demand is in fact less elastic in these contestable
zip codes than has been put forward in hospital merger cases.

III. Market Definition Using a Structural Model

Using the Structural Model for Market Definition
In what follows, we employ a structural model of market competition to
implement the SSNIP test method to define hospital markets in California. We then go
on to compare the markets obtained via the SSNIP test with those via the methods that
have been commonly employed in hospital merger cases (Elzinga-Hogarty and Critical
Loss).

14

The structural model estimates demand and supply relation parameters and builds
on the work of Baker and Bresnahan (1985), Scheffman and Spiller (1987), and Froeb
and Werden (2000). We employ a model based on Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes’s (2004)
model of differentiated product oligopoly and adapted for use in the hospital industry by
Gaynor and Vogt (2003). The model is well suited to the SSNIP criteria in that it is a
fully specified model of price and quantity determination and it allows for the calculation
of own-price and cross-price elasticities for each hospital in the data. In addition, it
allows for the determination of an initial equilibrium price and quantity for the market,
thus allowing for direct implementation of the thought experiment characterized by the
merger guidelines.
This structural model of differentiated product oligopoly models demand at the
level of an individual consumer using discrete choice techniques and micro data on
individuals. This allows demographic characteristics at the level of individual consumers
to explain hospital choice. In addition, its use of multinomial logit demand implies that
the use of the model for merger predictions will result in lower post-merger prices (and
thus larger antitrust markets) than would be produced by alternative specifications
(Crooke et al., 1999). While this section presents the basic constructs of the model, for a
full exposition, including parameter estimates, see Gaynor and Vogt (2003).
With a choice set of j (j=1,…..J) hospitals, the utility of consumer i(=1,….,N) is
assumed to be of the form:
ξ
where

is the hospital price,

(1)

is the marginal utility of income, X are observable

consumer characteristics, observable hospital characteristics and their interactions,

are

15

consumer and hospital characteristics interacted with price and
hospital characteristics. Assuming that

are unobservable

is an i.i.d. Weibull random variable, the

probability that consumer i attends hospital j can be written as:

∑

(2)

and the demand faced by hospital j charging price pj can be written as:

∑

where

(3)

is the quantity of hospital goods consumed by consumer i.
Because equation (1) contains an unobservable term ( ) that is correlated with

price, a set of hospital fixed effects are used to absorb this source of endogeneity, as
proposed by Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (2004). Since the use of this fixed effect
obfuscates identification of

, an additional regression of these hospital fixed effects on

hospital price and other observable hospital characteristics is used to recover this
parameter. Because price is also endogenous in this additional regression, exogenous
wages and predicted quantity (using only geographic distribution and exogenous
consumer characteristics) are used as instruments for price, thus enabling recovery of

,

the marginal utility of income.

16

In this model, firms are assumed to maximize profits à la Bertrand.27 Multi-plant
firms (called multihospital systems) are also common in this industry, necessitating a
model which accounts for substitution among plants and the coordination of pricing.
Letting θ represent a J×J matrix with θjk = 1 if hospitals j and k have the same owner and
θjk = 0 otherwise, the familiar Bertrand pricing equation used in the model is of the form:

Θ⊗
/

where

Q

(4)

is the J×J demand derivative matrix and ⊗ denotes an element-by-

element Hadamard matrix multiplication operator.
Of note for this model is that it allows for observed consumer heterogeneity via
varying distances from consumers to hospitals and thus does not exhibit independence of
irrelevant alternatives or the restrictive substitution patterns of the logit (Train, 2003).
Using the estimates obtained from this model, own-price and cross-price elasticities can
be calculated for each hospital in the dataset using the formulas:
∑

∑

1

(5)

(6)

where (5) corresponds to the calculation of the own-price, and (6) to the cross-price
elasticity.
27

Not-for-profit firms are common in this industry. Not-for-profit hospitals are assumed to value output
(e.g., community service, access to care). This makes not-for-profits, in essence, like for-profits with lower
marginal costs. The econometric model allows for marginal cost (and demand) differences between forprofits and not-for-profits.

17

We present a summary of the key model characteristics in Table 3.28 Hospitals
face a downward sloping demand curve, with average own-price elasticity of -4.57 and
an average price of $4,681 for a unit of care. Additionally, as the average cross-price
elasticities in the bottom of Table 3 show, hospitals physically close to one another have
higher cross-price elasticities than do hospitals far apart. For example, the average crossprice elasticity between a given hospital and its most proximate competitor (measured by
distance) is calculated as 0.60, while the cross-price elasticity with the fifth-closest
competitor is one-third of this magnitude. This implies that markets for hospital care are
largely local.

Adapting the Structural Model for SSNIP Market Definition
In order to define geographic markets that conform as closely as possible to the
Merger Guidelines using the structural model, we define the SSNIP test for a given
hospital as the smallest set of hospitals (inclusive of the hospitals for which we are
attempting to define a SSNIP market) for which a given price increase would be
profitable, holding constant price at all other hospitals. While a formal definition of our
SSNIP markets is included in Appendix B, intuitively, the SSNIP criterion states that for
a given hospital, j, a SSNIP market is the smallest set of hospitals for which an increase
in price at this set of hospitals (including hospital j) would increase the collective profits
in the systems of which these hospitals are members. This approach allows for the
definition of geographic markets that take into account system membership, making it
consistent with the current (2010) revision of the merger guidelines in its explicit

28

All coefficient estimates are available at
http://www.rje.org/abstracts/abstracts/2003/rje.winter03.gaynor.pdf

18

treatment of firms that own multiple plants in the same geographic area.29 To illustrate
the criterion, consider 4 hospitals, A, B, C and D, and let A and B be members of the
same hospital system. Suppose hospitals A and C act as a “hypothetical monopolist” and
engage in a coordinated price increase of 5% (holding the terms of sale constant at all
other locations), resulting in a decrease in demand at both hospitals and a decrease in
profits at the combined hospital entity of A and C. Suppose, however, that B is a
sufficiently adequate substitute for care at these hospitals so that the increase in profit as
a result of the increase in demand for hospital B’s services is greater than the decrease in
profits at the combined hospital entity of A and C. Hospitals A and C would be a market
under the SSNIP criterion, as the collective profits in the systems of which these hospitals
are members has increased. Likewise, if hospital D is a close substitute for the care
rendered at A and C while hospital B is not, hospital B would see little or no increase in
demand or profits and thus hospitals A and C would not be considered a market
according to the SSNIP criterion.
In the event that a price increase at a given location results in a reduction of sales that
would be large enough such that a hypothetical monopolist would not find it profitable to
impose an increase in price, the merger guidelines suggest adding the location from
which production is the next-best substitute for production at the merging firm’s location.
Because spatial differentiation is an important attribute of hospital care, when a SSNIP is
not profitable, we include additional hospitals in order of their geographic proximity to
the location of the merging hospital(s) in question. Our algorithm for implementing

29

The 2010 merger guidelines require that a hypothetical profit-maximizing firm that was the only present
or future producer of the relevant product(s) located in the region would impose at least a SSNIP from at
least one location, including at least one location of one of the merging firms. They also explicitly state that
a single firm may operate in a number of different geographic markets.

19

SSNIP markets using the structural Bertrand model (SSNIP Market Definition) is as
follows:

1. Begin with a hospital for which one would like to define a geographic market.
2. Find the hospital geographically closest to the hospital chosen in step 1.
3. Raise the price of only these hospitals by a given percentage (we use 5%) and
allow demand to change as a result of the price increase.
4. If the total difference in profits for the hospital system (given diversion to other
hospitals in the same system) is positive, this constitutes a market by the SSNIP
test. If it does not, we add the next hospital that is geographically closest to the
hospital in step 1.

We repeat this process until the increase in price for the chosen hospitals results in a
positive difference in profits.30

IV.

Comparison Methodology for Implementing the SSNIP Test
In our implementation of market definition, we employ the two versions of the

shipments-based techniques, Elzinga-Hogarty and Critical Loss, detailed in Section II.
Specifically, we seek to compare the geographic markets defined by the SSNIP criterion
using the structural model with the markets implied by the two most commonly
employed quantitative geographic market definition techniques for hospital merger cases.
30

Note that this algorithm allows for hospitals which are close substitutes and also members of the same
system to capture each others’ demand as the result of a price increase at one of the hospitals. Additionally,
because the current merger guidelines require only that a SSNIP be imposed at only one location, our
algorithm produces markets that are likely larger than would be implied by the current (2010) revision of
the merger guidelines.

20

In what follows we describe our implementation of market definition using these
methods.

Elzinga-Hogarty Simulation
As previously described, the Elzinga-Hogarty method of geographic market
definition uses shipments information consisting of origin and destination data for
delineating a market. It specifies the use of the “little in from outside” measure (LIFO) to
determine the geographic extent of demand while the “little out from inside” measure
(LOFI) determines the geographic extent of supply. The simultaneous satisfaction of a
given threshold for each of these measures is evidence of a geographic market. The
thresholds recommended in the original article are .75 for a “weak market” and .9 for a
“strong market.” With regard to hospital care, Elzinga-Hogarty can be thought of as a
joint ratio of import and export thresholds by which to judge the self-sufficiency of a
particular market. We define the “import” of health care as an individual leaving an area
in order to be treated, and the “export” of health care as an individual from another area
(other than the one being analyzed) being treated in the relevant area. Elzinga-Hogarty
posits that if an area imports little of its health care, it can be deemed a market from the
demand perspective, as few individuals see the need to leave the area to be treated. Thus
as the import ratio, defined as

import ratio

patient outflows from area of interest into any other area
total discharges from area of interest

21

gets increasingly small, 1-(import ratio) gets increasingly large. LIFO is thus defined as
1-(import ratio).
Similarly, Elzinga-Hogarty posits that if an area exports little of its health care, it
can be deemed a market from the supply perspective. Thus as the export ratio of
healthcare defined as
export ratio=

patient inflows from other areas into this area
total discharges from hospitals in this area

gets increasingly small, this is equivalent of 1-(export ratio) getting increasingly large.
LOFI is thus defined as 1-(export ratio).
There are numerous ways in which Elzinga-Hogarty markets can be calculated.
Specifically, the means by which one expands a market that does not meet the prescribed
LIFO and LOFI criteria can affect the size of the market determined for a given hospital.
Frech et al. (2004) propose six methods for expanding an Elzinga-Hogarty market based
on the geographic area from which a given hospital draws its patients. For our purposes,
we employ the method of expansion termed “contiguous search” to expand the market.
This version of Elzinga-Hogarty market definition proceeds in 3 steps: The first step in
expanding the market is to set a threshold at which the simultaneous satisfaction of this
threshold for both LIFO and LOFI constitutes a market. The contiguous search method
then proceeds by first choosing a zip code for which one would like to calculate an
Elzinga-Hogarty market. LIFO and LOFI are calculated for this zip code. If either LIFO
or LOFI is less than the prescribed threshold, one chooses the zip code that contributes
most to the minimum of LIFO and LOFI, from the universe of zip codes contiguous to

22

the zip code of interest.31 For each additional zip code, zj, that is contiguous to the
combination of zip codes already included in the service area from previous iterations, z-j,
zip code zi is added, one at a time if it satisfies (for each iteration):

max

,

, max

,

Zip codes continue to be added until both LIFO and LOFI equal the prescribed
threshold. For our analysis, we use the “weak market” criterion of 0.75 as our threshold.
As Frech et al. (2004) detail in their work, this method is one of the two approaches that
produce markets which are relatively compact and contiguous, and produce the most
realistic geographic markets. In addition, our choice of the weak market threshold of 0.75
rather than the strong market threshold of 0.9 is because in practice, it is virtually
impossible to obtain an Elzinga-Hogarty market for hospital care at a threshold of 0.9 for
some markets in our data, short of including most of the state.

Critical Loss Simulation
In Critical Loss analysis, for a given price increase, the percentage reduction in
demand, X, that would render a price increase unprofitable is given by Harris and Simons
(1989) as
X

Y
*100
Y CM

31

Because of data limitations, we use a fixed radius between zip code centroids to create the universe of zip
codes by which to expand the market, rather than shared zip code borders.

23

where Y is the proportion increase in price (5% in the case of the SSNIP test) and CM is
the contribution margin defined as

P‐AVC 32
.
P

This value of X is called the “Critical Loss.”

We employ a method based on previous cases for both the estimated contribution margin
as well as the estimated actual loss. Though calculation of contribution margins is
theoretically a straightforward exercise, in practice the calculation of these margins for
hospitals in merger cases is subject to the discretion of the analyst as to the definition of
fixed cost and variable cost. Consequently, our implementation of Critical Loss utilizes
approximations of these margins based on past merger cases rather than attempting to
extrapolate the classification of costs according to merging parties. The contribution
margin assumed in these cases has ranged from 41.4% in State of California v. Sutter
Health System to 65.9% in FTC v. Tenet. 33
For our simulation of the estimated loss, we employ a method of determining the
“contestable zip codes” for a market of hospitals, meaning the collection of zip codes in
which at least a fixed percentage of the patients travel to hospitals other than those
posited as a potential market. It is then hypothesized that for these zip codes, if a given
increase in price were to be implemented, the demonstrated willingness of individuals in
these zip codes to travel outside of the proposed market for care at the present terms of
sale is evidence that a sufficient number of substitutes exist. Thus it is put forward that a
SSNIP would induce a significant number of these patients to switch to hospitals not
implementing such an increase in price. Given that our goal is to approximate Critical
Loss markets as determined by previous cases, we utilize a method similar, although not
identical, to the contestable zip code method. Whereas the contestable zip code method
32
33

See Harris and Simons (1989) p. 212-215 for the derivation of these formulas.
Langenfeld and Li (2001) p. 325-329.

24

determines the contestable zip codes and then states the number from these zip codes that
would have to leave in order to make a price increase unprofitable, we instead impose a
fixed percentage that would leave contestable zip codes for a given price increase. This
step is necessary in order to implement an algorithm to find Critical Loss markets rather
than define an arbitrary market and then hypothesize about the behavior of the patients in
this area necessary to make this area a market of a given size. Though this actual loss
number is not clearly defined and could vary greatly by case, we base our actual loss
numbers on the determination in the Sutter case that suggested that the number of patients
traveling into the proposed market that would have to switch is between one-third and
two-thirds.
Given that the court ruled in favor of the defendant, we interpret this figure to be
indicative of the court’s conclusion of the likely substitution patterns of hospital
patients.34 In our calculation of Critical Loss, we apply a contribution margin of 55%
which would determine that the Critical Loss is approximately 8.3% for a 5% increase in
price. We define zip codes as contestable if 25% or more patients travel to hospitals other
than those being defined in a hypothetical merger. Finally, we assume that of the patients
that currently receive care at one of the merging hospitals, 30% of these patients from zip
codes deemed contestable (i.e. have at least 25% outflows under the pre-merger terms of
sale) would substitute to another hospital as a result of a 5% increase in price.35

34

We do acknowledge, however that the number of patients that were determined to travel into the market
accounted for only 15% of the total discharges in question. The set of contestable zip codes often does
constitute a larger subset of discharges than was determined “out of the market” in the Sutter case.
35
Our algorithm works as follows:
1) Start with a hospital and the hospital closest to this hospital.
2) Find the universe of Diagnosis Related Groups (DRG) served by the hospitals chosen.
3) Find the contestable zip codes given this universe of DRGs.
4) Calculate the actual loss by assuming that 30% of the patients currently attending the hospitals of
interest in the contestable zip codes acquire their care elsewhere.

25

V. Data
We use 1995 data from California’s Office of Statewide Health Planning and
Development (OSHPD) which maintains a variety of datasets on various aspects of health
care in the state.36 Below we briefly describe each of the particular datasets we draw upon
and the criteria for selecting subsets of the data.

Discharge data
Among the items collected by OSHPD for each discharge are patient
demographics, diagnosis, treatment, an identifier for the hospital at which the patient
sought care, the patient’s zip code of residence, and charges.

Annual and Quarterly Financial data
Annual financial disclosures are submitted each fiscal year and every time a
hospital changes ownership. From these data, we use information on location of the
hospital, ownership of the hospital, type of care provided by the hospital, whether the
hospital is a teaching hospital or not, and wages. Quarterly financial disclosures are
submitted by calendar quarters, so that they are synchronized both with the discharge data
and with one another.

Selections
5) Compare the loss calculated in (4) to the critical loss figure of 8.3% of original demand. If actual
loss is greater than critical loss, we add the next closest hospital and repeat steps 1-4. If not, the set
of hospitals is determined to be a market.
36
http://www.oshpd.state.ca.us/

26

For 1995, there are a total of 3.6 million patient discharges. For our analysis we
use only those discharges whose payment comes from private sources. These are
discharges in the HMO, PPO, other private, self-pay, and Blue Cross/Blue Shield
categories. This amounts to 1.47 million discharges. Our motivation in making these
choices is that for patients in these categories, some entity is making explicit choices
among hospitals, based, at least in part, on price. In the case of the various insurance
categories, insurers have discretion both over which hospitals to include in their networks
of approved providers and via any channeling of patients to less expensive hospitals.
We also eliminate patients with a DRG frequency of less than 1,000, patients with
missing values for any of the variables used in any of our analyses, patients with charges
less than $500 or greater than $500,000 and consumers with lengths of stay of zero or
greater than 30. After all the exclusions, there are 913,547 remaining observations.
Of the 593 total hospitals in the financial data, we exclude hospitals such as
psychiatric hospitals, children’s hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, and other specialty
institutions, as well as hospitals associated with staff model HMOs. In addition we
exclude hospitals with either missing or useless quarterly financial data (some hospitals
had larger deductions from revenue than they had gross revenue, for example). We also
exclude hospitals with fewer than 100 discharges for the year. Finally, we drop hospitals
whose closest competitor (in terms of distance) is in another state. This is because our
data precludes us from observing hospitals in neighboring states which could presumably
be reasonable substitutes for those hospitals located on a state border. This leaves us with
an analysis sample of 913,547 discharges and 368 hospitals.

27

VI. Results

Statewide Analysis
In order to compare markets delineated by using the three different methodologies
described above, we define markets using Critical Loss, Elzinga-Hogarty and the SSNIP
market definition using the structural model for all hospitals in our data.
Table 4 reveals substantial differences in the markets defined by the methodologies in
both the number of hospitals in each market, as well as the degree of concentration as
defined by the HHI measures. SSNIP market definition using the structural model
determines that the median hospital operates in a market of 3 hospitals with an HHI of
3,814.37 This is well above the threshold determined by the merger guidelines as being
highly concentrated. In contrast, our version of Critical Loss concludes that the median
hospital operates in a market with 16 hospitals and an HHI of 1,194. Elzinga-Hogarty
defines markets similar to Critical Loss, with the median hospital operating in a market
with 12 other hospitals and an HHI of 1,499. Thus under the merger guidelines, both the
Critical Loss and Elzinga-Hogarty methods would find that the median hospital exists in
a market that is unconcentrated.
Many health economics studies use political boundaries to define markets, such as
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA), or Health Service Areas (HSA), which are defined
based on commuting patterns and patient flows respectively (U.S. Census Bureau, 2007,
page 895; Makuc, 1991). Therefore we also examine the implications of using these
boundaries to define geographic markets. This produces the lowest concentration
37

We use available beds in our calculation of HHI by market. The correlation between beds, total
discharges and total patient days and other standard measures of hospital output is above .9 for all
measures.

28

measures of all market definition approaches. Using MSAs to define geographic markets
implies that the median hospital operates in a market with 18 hospitals and an HHI of
1,191, while defining geographic markets using HSAs infers that the median hospital
operates in a market with 15 other hospitals and an HHI of 1,191.
A more detailed breakdown of the hospitals by geographic area reveals a
substantial amount about the competitive environment for hospitals based upon their
location. Dividing the hospitals in the sample into hospital “density quartiles” based on
the number of hospitals within a 25-mile radius exposes the wide variation in the
methodologies’ market definition for urban and rural areas. Quartile 1 includes hospitals
with 0-5 other hospitals within a 25-mile radius, quartile 2 includes hospitals with 6-18
other hospitals within a 25-mile radius, quartile 3 includes hospitals with 19-70 other
hospitals within a 25-mile radius, while quartile 4 includes hospitals with 71-110 other
hospitals within a 25-mile radius. Figure 1 maps these hospital density quartiles while
Table 5 shows the characteristics of hospitals within these quartiles
As can be seen in Figure 1, the wide variability in the number of other hospitals
within a 25-mile radius is due to the difference in hospital density in urban and rural
areas. In particular, quartile 4 consists entirely of hospitals in Los Angeles County and
Orange County, while quartile 3 consists of hospitals from the Los Angeles (44.3%), San
Francisco-San Jose (37.5%) and San Diego (18.2%) metro areas. Quartile 1 consists of
mostly Northern California hospitals, hospitals in coastal towns and on the far outskirts of
metro areas, while quartile 2 comprises a mix of hospitals on the periphery of the 5 major

29

metro areas in California, as well as the hospitals located in the central part of the state
between San Francisco and Los Angeles.38
As would be expected, the size of the geographic markets using all three of the
methodologies indicates that markets are more concentrated in areas where there are
fewer nearby hospitals and less concentrated in areas where there are more hospitals
close by. The magnitude of the concentration difference, however, varies substantially
depending on the density quartile. In particular, in quartile 1, all methodologies indicate
that the mean level of market concentration is somewhat high, although the structural
model produces markets where the mean level of market concentration is higher than that
implied by both Elzinga-Hogarty and Critical Loss. However, in this quartile, ElzingaHogarty and Critical Loss agree with SSNIP market definition on the size of the market
in 22 and 10 of the 93 cases respectively, and produce smaller markets in some cases.
This stands in contrast to quartile 3 and 4 in which neither shipments-based methodology
produces markets of comparable size to markets defined using the structural model.
As is evident from Table 5, all three of the methodologies produce markets that
include more hospitals in areas with greater hospital density. However, though the change
in the level of concentration by market is directionally equivalent, the magnitudes of the
concentration levels differ substantially. This suggests that although the shipments-based
methods are consistent in their determination that antitrust markets encompass a larger
number of hospitals in areas with greater hospital density (i.e. urban areas), the difference
in market sizes determined by these methods are substantially larger than those implied
by the structural model, and these differences are greater as the number of surrounding

38

The 5 largest Metro areas in California are Fresno, Los Angeles, Sacramento, San Diego and San
Francisco.

30

hospitals increases. In Los Angeles, for example, in density quartile 4, Elzinga-Hogarty
must include an average of 50 hospitals (and over 100 zip codes) in order to produce a
market, whereas Critical Loss must include an average of 65 hospitals in order for the
loss from contestable zip codes to be sufficiently small so as to produce a market. In
contrast SSNIP market definition finds that the average hospital in this quartile operates
in a market with just 5 other hospitals. In quartile 1 on the other hand, Elzinga-Hogarty
specifies a market with an average of 7.19 hospitals and Critical Loss determines that an
average market in this quartile includes 5.8 hospitals. Market definition using the
structural model determines that in this quartile, the average hospital market consists of
just 2.78 hospitals
The bottom panel of Table 5 also reveals a great deal about the market
concentration according to the prescribed thresholds set by the merger guidelines.39
Across quartiles, both Critical Loss and Elzinga-Hogarty indicate that markets become
less concentrated as we move from quartile 1 to quartile 4. The percentage of hospitals
operating in markets with HHIs of less than 1,500 for Critical Loss increases from 8.6%
in quartile 1 to 100% in quartile 4. Likewise, for Elzinga-Hogarty, the percentage of
hospitals in markets with HHIs of less than 1,500 increases from 16.1% in quartile 1 to
100% in quartile 4. SSNIP market definition using the Bertrand model finds only five
markets with HHIs of less than 1,500 in any concentration quartile.
The number of markets considered highly concentrated (HHI greater than 2,500)
also show significant changes across concentration quartiles. The percentage of hospitals
operating in markets with HHIs of greater than 2,500 according to Critical Loss decreases

39

While the guidelines specify thresholds for post-merger market shares, the HHIs discussed below are premerger market shares. Nevertheless, we use them as reference points in our analysis.

31

from 68.8% in quartile 1 to 0% in quartile 4. Similarly, the Elzinga-Hogarty method
determines that 51.6% of hospitals operate in markets with an HHI of greater than 2,500
in quartile 1, while in quartile 4 no hospitals operate in a market with an HHI of such
magnitude. SSNIP market definition conversely shows all but three hospitals operating
in a market with an HHI of greater than 2,500 in quartiles 1 and 2, and just 12.5% and
48.4% of hospitals in quartiles 3 and 4 operating below the 2,500 threshold respectively.

Elasticities
The structural model allows for the calculation of the elasticity of demand for
each hospital. As shown in Table 3, the average own-price elasticity of demand for a
hospital in the sample is calculated as -4.57. Table 6 indicates that this elasticity varies
by density quartile, as the average elasticity of demand for hospitals increases (in
absolute value) from 3.55 in quartile 1 to 5.48 in quartile 4. This suggests that hospitals in
areas with more nearby competitors do in fact face stiffer competition than those with a
lower number of nearby hospitals. While this increase in own-price elasticity using the
structural model is notable in and of itself, as Table 5 indicates, both the Elzinga-Hogarty
and Critical Loss methodologies produce significantly larger markets in all density
quartiles, thus implying a much flatter demand curve for each hospital and consequently a
larger elasticity than estimated by the structural model.
Because the estimated consumer utility in equation (1) depends on price, all firmlevel elasticities are a function of the price parameter contained in the specified utility
function,

. Thus, the larger elasticities produced by the two comparison methodologies

are equivalent to consumers exhibiting more price sensitive behavior, or equivalently,

32

that the value of

in the utility function is of larger (absolute) magnitude than is

estimated in the structural model. Thus, if we solve for this value of

that produces

markets of equivalent size to our comparison methods, we can determine the elasticities
that would be required in order to produce markets of equivalent size to those implied by
Elzinga-Hogarty and Critical Loss for a 5% price increase.40
In the top portion of Table 7, we include a summary by hospital density quartile
of the average own-price elasticity in a hospital market determined by the ElzingaHogarty and Critical Loss methodologies according to the structural model. For example,
for the 93 hospital markets calculated using Elzinga-Hogarty in density quartile 1, the
average own-price elasticity as calculated using the estimated price parameter in the
structural model is -3.60. In the lower panel, we present the elasticities that would be
implied by the structural model in order to make the markets determined by ElzingaHogarty and Critical Loss consistent with the price elasticity assumptions of the structural
model. For example, for the same 93 hospital markets calculated using Elzinga-Hogarty
in density quartile 1, the value of this price parameter that would make consumers
sufficiently price sensitive so as to produce an equivalent market to that determined by
Elzinga-Hogarty would imply that the average own-price elasticity in these 93 markets is
-10.10. Thus the differences in these implied elasticities demonstrate that both ElzingaHogarty and Critical Loss implicitly substantially overstate the price sensitivity of
consumers with regards to hospital care. Looking across all quartiles, Table 7 shows that
Critical Loss overstates the magnitude of elasticities of a hospital in the median hospital
market by a factor ranging from 2.4 in quartile 1 to 3.4 in quartile 4, while Elzinga40

We solve for this value of
market.

which equates the two markets using a binary search algorithm for each

33

Hogarty overstates these elasticities by a factor ranging from 2.3 in quartile 3 to 2.6 in
quartile 1.
These elasticity differences also suggest that the implied markups for hospital
care using these informal methods are smaller than the markups that are assumed when
analyzing actual hospital merger cases. The commonly used Lerner Index,

,

relates elasticity to margins, implying that the determination of high margins indicates a
low elasticity of demand. In the calculation of Critical Loss, the contribution margin
defined in the previous section is equivalent to the left-hand side of a Lerner Index
(assuming constant returns to scale). Thus from our elasticity estimates in Table 7, we
can infer that the percentage markup over marginal cost implied by the Critical Loss
market size is lower than the 55% that was actually used in our definition of the Critical
Loss markets. As Table 7 indicates, even in the lowest hospital concentration quartile, the
markup for a hospital in the median hospital market using the Critical Loss methodology
is 12%, while in quartile 4, the implied markup in the market for the median hospitals is
5.4%. Although Elzinga-Hogarty in its implementation does not explicitly postulate as to
the implied markup, it suffers from similar shortcomings in that it suggests markups
ranging from 7.4%-9.9% for a hospital in the median hospital market, well below those
implied by the elasticity estimates in the structural model. Both of these findings suggest
that the market definition techniques used in previously decided merger cases are
inappropriate for hospital market definition; that is, using shipments based techniques
will by and large produce overestimates of the price elasticity of demand faced by
hospitals, thus resulting in substantially larger markets than intended in the merger
guidelines.

34

An Analysis of San Diego
To further demonstrate market definition under the SSNIP criteria, we examine
markets defined in a localized area of the state. Specifically, we perform market
definition in the San Diego area. Our selection of San Diego is strategic in that it is an
area with few geographic barriers and it contains a reasonable number of hospitals so as
to allow for methodological illustration while still being computationally feasible. It also
allows us to compare the markets defined by our structural model with those delineated
by a related, and influential, model of hospital competition developed by Capps,
Dranove, and Satterthwaite (2003) and applied to proposed consolidations in New York
State by Dranove and Sfekas (2009).
Capps et al. (2003) present a model (based on Town and Vistnes, 2001) in which
insurers bargain with hospitals and the market power of a hospital is based on the
willingness to pay (WTP) of a group of consumers for the use of that particular hospital.
This model is estimated on data from San Diego, so comparisons using this method are
restricted to that area.
A summary of the San Diego area hospitals is presented in Table 8, while a map
of the hospitals in the area is presented in Figure 2. San Diego contains hospitals that fall
into hospital density quartiles 2 and 3. The dominant systems in the area in our 1995 data
are the Scripps and Sharp systems, with each controlling 6 and 5 of the 23 hospitals
respectively. While 19 of the 23 hospitals were members of a multi-hospital system, 4 of
these hospitals, Alvarado, Harbor View, Mission Bay and Paradise Valley were owned
by corporations that controlled no other hospitals in the San Diego area. The other two

35

multi-hospital systems, University of California (UC) and Palomar Pomerado, each
controlled only two hospitals.
Table 9 presents the results of SSNIP market definition for the San Diego area for
each of our three market definition methodologies. As evidenced in Table 8, San Diego
County had a moderate degree of concentration in 1995, with a system-based HHI of
1,949.41 With the exception of Fallbrook Hospital, all methods produce a market which is
a subset of the hospitals in this county.42 Critical Loss in column one defines markets as
consisting of 13-38 hospitals, each of which comprise substantial subsections of the San
Diego area, and in the case of Fallbrook Hospital, portions of the Los Angeles Area.
Similarly, Elzinga-Hogarty market definition in column two determines that markets are
anywhere from 14-19 hospitals in size. The structural model in column three, however,
shows that SSNIP markets consist instead of small sets of no more than 4 hospitals, with
a median market size of two hospitals. This difference in methodology evidently affects
the degree of concentration implied in the San Diego area. Both of the comparison
methods produce markets with the majority of HHIs falling in the 2,000-3,000 range,
while no SSNIP market produced by the structural Bertrand model has a HHI lower than
3,000 and 18 of the 23 hospitals operate in a market with an HHI of more than 5,000.
Figure 3 illustrates the differences in markets produced by the three
methodologies, using as an example the definition of a market for Scripps Memorial
Hospital - Chula Vista (Scripps Chula Vista), a 159-bed hospital located in the southern
portion of the San Diego metropolitan area. Using the SSNIP market definition

41

This HHI measure takes into account system membership and is highly correlated (correlation of over .9)
with total discharges and total patient days.
42
In order to create a critical loss market for Fallbrook Hospital, the northernmost hospital in the sample,
the algorithm expands into the Southern section of the Los Angeles Metropolitan Area.

36

algorithm, Scripps Chula Vista and Community Hospital of Chula Vista, a 306-bed
hospital located in the same area represent a geographic market, with a HHI of 5,500.
Using Elzinga-Hogarty, a geographic market would include these two hospitals, as well
as 16 other facilities in the San Diego area, producing a market with an HHI of 2,228.
The market produced using Critical Loss shows a similar pattern, as a critical loss market
would include a total of 17 hospitals in the San Diego metropolitan area, implying that
Scripps Chula Vista operates in a market with an HHI of 2,692.

Comparison with the Willingness to Pay Model
The Willingness to Pay (WTP) model represents a promising method of analyzing
mergers (Capps et al., 2003; Town and Vistnes, 2001). Because both the structural
Bertrand model and WTP models are both rooted in a multinomial-logit demand
specification which includes both hospital and consumer characteristics and patienthospital distance, we present results from a comparison of merger simulations using the
structural Bertrand model to compare price increases implied by the WTP model (see
Appendix A for a brief overview of the WTP model).43 The main differences between
the models involves the determination of firm pricing behavior; firm conduct and price
determination are not modeled explicitly in the WTP model, rather the relationship
between WTP and hospital profits is identified using a regression of hospital profits on
WTP for each hospital. Mergers in the model are simulated by calculating the difference
in WTP for a combined entity of hospitals and the sum of the WTP for each separate
hospital in this combined entity. Using the relationship between a “unit” of WTP and
hospital profits (calculated from the regression of hospital profits on WTP), and assuming
43

Details of our estimation of the WTP model are included in appendix A.

37

no change in the cost of treatment, this difference in WTP is used to show the increase in
average revenue per patient brought about by the merger, leaving quantity unchanged.
The WTP model does not allow for market definition in a localized area where a
large hospital firm (system) controls multiple plants (hospitals). This is due to the
difficulty in allocating the willingness to pay measure across hospitals of the same system
affiliation. Consequently, we adapt the structural Bertrand model to simulate mergers
between individual hospitals, as well as individual hospital systems, thereby enabling
directly comparable merger effects for each model. For our estimates of the WTP, we
employ the same variables in our utility function as were used in Capps et al. (2003) with
minor exceptions.44 Furthermore, use of the WTP necessitates a different sample of
consumers than was used in that of Capps et al. (2003) as the original estimated WTP
utility function includes Medicare patients, indemnity patients and HMO/PPO. In order to
ensure the most direct comparison of the two methods, we include only indemnity and
HMO/PPO consumers.45
Table 10 includes the results of the mergers of 27 mergers of independent
hospitals located in the San Diego area.46,47 As Table 10 demonstrates, the two models
show merger effects on price that are virtually zero for the independent San Diego
hospitals. For the mergers in Table 10, for only one merger, that of Tri-City Hospital and

44

Instead of the “equipment intensity” variable, we use a “tech index” variable which is the sum over
dummy variables for the presence of 28 technologies reported in the annual hospital financial data (such as
presence of an MRI, open heart surgical suite, etc.). Also, instead of travel time, we use distance.
45
This corresponds to specification (4) in Capps et al. (2003)
46
We display the results of independent hospitals primarily because Capps et. al. do not prescribe a method
of calculating WTP for markets in which a hospital system controls multiple hospitals. Thus these are the
“cleanest” comparisons of the two methodologies.
47
We classify a hospital as independent for purposes of this analysis if the hospital had was not a member
of a hospital system or if the hospital was owned by a corporation that controlled only one hospital in the
San Diego area.

38

Fallbrook Hospital, do the methods differ on whether a merger would produce a SSNIP.
They are otherwise in agreement.
Calculation of WTP does not allow for isolation of unilateral merger effects;
rather it determines the aggregate price increase implied by a merger in a chosen market.
Thus we adjust the model to account for system membership; specifically we calculate
the WTP measure for each hospital separately and given these estimates, we can then
infer the WTP for an entire hospital system. The effect of a system merger can then be
identified using the difference in the aggregate WTP for both systems versus the WTP for
each system separately. Table 11 presents the results of the merger of 5 hospital systems
in the San Diego area.
In three of the five system mergers presented in Table 11, both models agree on
which mergers would result in a 5% increase in price.48 For the two mergers presented in
Table 11 in which the two methods do not agree, both of these mergers involve the
University of California, San Diego, a hospital which generates the largest WTP measure
of all hospitals in our data. As Capps et al. (2003) indicate in their paper, this could be
due to UCSD’s status as the only university hospital in the market. This fact, coupled
with UCSD’s service area overlap with Scripp’s Mercy Hospital (0.4 miles from UCSD)
and Sharp Memorial Hospital (3.2 miles from UCSD) in downtown San Diego most
likely accounts for the substantial increase in WTP (and thus price) induced by a merger
of UCSD with both Sharp and Scripps. In the structural Bertrand model, however, UCSD
Medical Center charges the highest price for a unit of hospital care in the San Diego

48

The correlation between the merger simulations and WTP model is 0.82. Furthermore, thought the
merger simulations allow for identification of individual merger effects, in order to facilitate a direct
comparison of the two methodologies, we weight the price increases produced by the structural Bertrand
model’s merger simulations by the demand at each hospital (pre-merger).

39

($5,827) area while also exhibiting the highest own-price elasticity (-5.99) of San Diego
area hospitals (with the exception of Villa View Hospital). This pattern is suggestive of
the UCSD Medical Center exerting market power in its pricing of hospital services.
Consequently, while a merger of UCSD with hospital systems in the area does produce
an increase in price using the structural Bertrand model, this increase is most likely not as
large as would be the case if UCSD were not already exerting market power. To the
degree that consumers and health insurers substitute to other health care providers as a
result of the prevailing high price at UCSD Medical Center, the observed elasticity may
account for the lower price increase implied by the merger of these systems in the
structural Bertrand model.
Overall, the results of the comparisons between these two methods reveal a
notable degree of similarity for hospital merger effects in the San Diego area. Though the
models differ in their assumptions about firm conduct, given that both models identify
demand-side merger effects via the intersection of patient market shares, such a result is
not surprising.

VII. Conclusion
Market definition is essential for merger analysis, and has played a pivotal role for
antitrust decisions in the hospital industry in the past two decades. The vast majority of
hospital merger cases have utilized ad hoc methods of geographic market definition that
rely heavily upon patient shipment data, with no explicit economic model used to justify
such methods. Our use of a fully specified structural model of hospital competition
compares commonly employed geographic market definition approaches used in actual

40

hospital merger cases to geographic markets rooted in the principles set forth by the
merger guidelines. This method explicitly models consumer and producer behavior, and
also accounts for firms operating at multiple locations, as required by the 2010 merger
guidelines.
We find that the use of approaches frequently utilized in previous cases largely
overstate the size of geographic markets for hospitals, particularly in areas with greater
hospital density. In addition, these informal approaches imply elasticities ranging from
2.4-3.4 times as large as those calculated from a structural model of hospital competition.
Furthermore, our analysis of the San Diego area is consistent with those implied by the
model of Capps et al. (2003).
The results have important implications for merger analysis in both the hospital
industry and other industries involving differentiated products. They illustrate the
importance of economic modeling for defining markets, and indicate that reliance on

imprecise methods of market definition has the potential to mislead the courts as to the
appropriate extent of geographic markets. The markets presented here are most
consistent with those identified in merger cases by plaintiffs rather than by defendants, in
contrast to the court’s frequent rejection of markets alleged by the antitrust authorities.
Thus the use of such an approach should be emphasized when assessing the extent of
market power in this and other differentiated product industries.

41

References
American Bar Association, 2003. Health Care Mergers and Acquisitions Handbook.
Chicago: ABA Publishing.
Baker, J., 2007. Market Definition: An Analytical Overview. Antitrust Law Journal, 74,
pp.129-173.
Baker, J. and Bresnahan, T., 1985. The Gains From Merger or Collusion in ProductDifferentiated Industries. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 33(4), pp.427-444.
Berry, S., Levinsohn, J. & Pakes, A., 2004. Differentiated Products From a Combination
of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car Market. Journal of Political Economy, 112(1),
pp.68-105.
Capps, C., & Dranove, D., 2004. Hospital Consolidation and Negotiated PPO prices.
Health Affairs 23(2), pp.175-181.
Capps, C., Dranove, D., Greenstein, S. & Satterthwaite, M., 2001. The Silent Majority
Fallacy of the Elzinga-Hogarty Criteria: A Critique and New Approach to Analyzing
Hospital Mergers. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. W8216.
Capps, C., Dranove, D., & Satterthwaite, M., 2002. Antitrust Policy and Hospital
Mergers: Recommendations for a New Approach. Antitrust Bulletin 47(4), pp.677-714.
Capps, C., Dranove, D., & Satterthwaite, M., 2003. Competition and Market Power in
Option Demand Markets. RAND Journal of Economics 34(4), pp.737-763.
Crooke, P., Froeb, L., Tschantz, S. & Werden, G.J., 1999. Effects of Assumed Demand
Form on Simulated Postmerger Equilibria. Review of Industrial Organization, 15(3), pp.
205 – 217.
Dafny, L. 2009. Estimation & Identification of Merger Effects: An Application to
Hospital Mergers. Journal of Law and Economics, 52(3), pp.523-550.
Danger, K. L. & Frech, H.E. III, 2001. Critical Thinking about Critical Loss in Antitrust.
Antitrust Bulletin, 46(2), pp.339-355.
Dranove, D. & Sfekas, A., 2009. The Revolution in Health Care Antitrust: New Methods
and Provocative Implications. The Milbank Quarterly, 87(3), pp.607–632.
Duan, N., 1983. Smearing Estimate: A Nonparametric Retransformation Method. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 78(383), pp.605-610.
Elzinga, K.G. & Hogarty, T.F., 1973. The Problem of Geographic Market Definition in
Antimerger Suits. Antitrust Bulletin, 18(1), pp.45-81.
42

Elzinga, K, and T. Hogarty. 1978. "The Problem of Geographic Market Delineation
Revisited: The Case of Coal." Antitrust Bulletin, 23 (1): 1-18.
Epstein, R.J. & Rubinfeld, D.L., 2004. Effects of Mergers Involving Differentiated
Products. Technical Report for Directorate-General Competition, European Commission
[Online]. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/competition/mergers/studies_reports/effects_mergers_involving_diffe
rentiated_products.pdf [Accessed 13 June 2010].
Federal Trade Commission and U.S. Department of Justice, 1992. Horizontal Merger
Guidelines, (issued 1992, revised 1997), http://www.ftc.gov/bc/docs/horizmer.shtm
(accessed December 7, 2010).
Federal Trade Commission and U.S. Department of Justice, 2010. Horizontal Merger
Guidelines, http://www.ftc.gov/os/2010/08/100819hmg.pdf (accessed December 5,
2010).
Frech, H.E. III, Langenfeld, J., & McCluer, R. F., 2004. Elzinga-Hogarty Tests and
Alternative Approaches for Market Share Calculations in Hospital Markets. Antitrust
Law Journal 71(3), pp.921-947.
Froeb, L. & Werden, G.J., 1992. The Reverse Cellophane Fallacy in Market Delineation.
Review of Industrial Organization, 7(2), pp.241-247.
Froeb, L.M. & Werden, G.J., 2000. An Introduction to the Symposium on the Use of
Simulation in Applied Industrial Organization. International Journal of the Economics of
Business, 7(2), pp.133–137.
Gaynor, M. & Vogt, W.B., 2000. Antitrust and Competition in Health Care Markets. In
A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse, eds. Handbook of Health Economics, Vol. 1B. New
York: North-Holland. Ch.27.
Gaynor, M. & Vogt, W.B., 2002. Competition Among Hospitals. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. W9471.
Gaynor, M. & Vogt, W.B., 2003. Competition Among Hospitals. RAND Journal of
Economics, 34(4) pp.764–785.
Geroski, P. and Griffith, R. 2004. Identifying anti-trust markets. International Handbook
of Competition, M. Neumann and J. Weigand (eds.), Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Hamilton, B. & Ho, V., 2000. Hospital Mergers and Acquisitions: Does Market
Consolidation Harm Patients? Journal of Health Economics, 19(5) pp.767-791.

43

Harris, R. & Simons J.J., 1989. Focusing Market Definition: How Much Substitution is
Necessary? Research in Law and Economics, 12, pp.207-226.
Hausman, J., Leonard, G. & Zona, J. D., 1994. Competitive Analysis with Differentiated
Products. Annales d'Economie et de Statistique, 34, pp.159-180.
Horowitz, I. 1987. Market Definition in Antitrust Analysis: A Regression-Based
Approach. Southern Economic Journal, 48(1), pp.1-16.
Ivaldi, M. and Lörincz, Sz. 2009. "Implementation Relevant Market Tests in Antitrust
Policy: Application to Computer Servers", Review of Law and Economics, forthcoming.
Katz, M., & C. Shapiro, 2003. Critical Loss: Let’s Tell the Whole Story. Antitrust, 17(2),
pp.49-56.
Keeler, E.B., Melnick, G., & Zwanziger, J., 1999. The Changing Effects of Competition
on Non-Profit and For-Profit Hospital Pricing Behavior. Journal of Health Economics,
18(1), pp.69-86.
Langenfeld J. & Li, W., 2001. Critical Loss Analysis in Evaluating Mergers. Antitrust
Bulletin, 46(2), pp. 299-337.
Leibenluft, R.F. Esq., 1998. Antitrust Enforcement and Hospital Mergers: A Closer Look,
[Online]. Available at: http://www.ftc.gov/bc/hmerg1.htm [Accessed 8 March 2010].
Luke R.D., Ozcan Y.A. & Olden P.C., 1995. Local Markets and Systems: Hospital
Consolidations in Metropolitan Areas. Health Services Research, 30(4), pp.555-75.
Makuc, D., B. Haglund, D. Ingram and J. Kleinman 1991. Health Service Areas for the
United States, Vital and Health Statistics, Series 2, No. 112 (National Center for Health
Statistics).
Majoras, D.P., 2007. “Opinion of the Commission,” In the Matter of Evanston
Northwestern Healthcare Corporation, Docket No. 9315,
http://www.ftc.gov/os/adjpro/d9315/070806opinion.pdf, accessed 7/6/2010.
Miles, J.J., 2005. Health Care and Antitrust Law. St. Paul, MN: West Group.
McCarthy, T.R. & Thomas, S. J., 2003. Geographic Market Issues in Hospital Mergers.
In American Bar Association Health Care Mergers and Acquisitions Handbook. Chicago,
ABA Publishing. Ch. 3.
Morrisey, M.A., Sloan, F.A., & Valvona J., 1988. Defining Geographic Markets for
Hospital Care. Law and Contemporary Problems, 51(2), pp.165-194.

44

Motta, M. Competition Policy: Theory and Practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Peters, C., 2006. Evaluating the Performance of Merger Simulation: Evidence from the
U.S. Airline Industry. The Journal of Law and Economics, 49(2), pp. 627-649.
Pitofsky, R., 1990. New Definitions of Relevant Market and the Assault on Antitrust.
Columbia Law Review, 90(7), pp.1805-1864.
Scheffman, D. & Spiller, P., 1987. Geographic Market Definition Under the U.S.
Department of Justice Merger Guidelines. Journal of Law and Economics, 30(1), pp.123147.
Scheffman, D., Coate, M., & Silvia, L., 2002. 20 Years of Merger Guidelines
Enforcement at the FTC: An Economic Perspective. Federal Trade Commission,
[Online]. Available at: http://www.justice.gov/atr/hmerger/11255.pdf [Accessed 8 March
2010].
Shrieves, R.E., 1978. Geographic Market Areas and Market Structure in the Bituminous
Coal Industry. The Antitrust Bulletin, 23, pp. 589-625.
Simpson, J., 2003. Geographic Markets in Hospital Mergers: A Case Study.
International Journal of the Economics of Business, 10(3), pp.291-303.
Spiller, P. T. & Huang, C. J., 1986. On the Extent of the Market: Wholesale Gasoline in
the Northeastern United States. Journal of Industrial Economics, 35(2), pp. 131-45.
Stigler, G.J & Sherwin, R.A., 1985. The Extent of the Market. Journal of Law &
Economics, 28(3), pp.555-85.
Strunk, B.C., Devers, K. & Hurley R.E., 2001. Health Plan-Provider Showdowns on the
Rise” Issue Brief, [Online]. No. 40. Available at:
http://www.hschange.org/CONTENT/326 (Center for Studying Health System Change)
[Accessed 8 March 2010].
Town, R. & Vistnes, G., 2001. Hospital competition in HMO networks. Journal of
Health Economics, 20(5), pp.733-753.
Town, R., Wholey, D., Feldman, R. & Burns, L. R., 2005. The Welfare Consequences of
Hospital Mergers. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12244,
Cambridge, MA.
Town, R. and Vogt, W., 2006. How has hospital consolidation affected the price and
quality of hospital care? Research Synthesis Report No. 9, Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, Princeton, NJ.

45

Train, K. (2003). Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
United States Census Bureau (2007). The 2007 Statistical Abstract: The National Data
Book.
Van Reenen, J. 2004. Is There a Market for Work Group Servers? Evaluating Market
Level Demand Elasticities using Micro and Macro Models. Centre for Economic
Performance, London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK
Varkevisser, M., Capps, C. S. & Schut, F.T., 2008. Defining Hospital Markets for
Antitrust Enforcement: New Approaches and their Applicability to the Netherlands.
Health Economics, Policy and Law, 3, pp. 7-29.
Viscusi W.K., Vernon J.M. & Harrington J.E., 2000. Economics of Regulation and
Antitrust. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vita, M.G., & Sacher, S., 2001. The Competitive Effects of Not-for-Profit Hospital
Mergers: A Case Study. Journal of Industrial Economics, 49(1) pp.63-84.
Werden, G.J., 1981. The Use and Misuse of Shipments Data in Defining Geographic
Markets. Antitrust Bulletin, 26(4) pp.719-737.
Werden, G. J. Simulating the Effects of Differentiated Products Mergers: A Practitioners'
Guide. In Caswell, J.A., and Cotterill, R.W., eds., Strategy and Policy in the Food
System: Emerging Issues. Food Marketing Policy Center, Storrs, CT, 1980, pp. 95-110.
Werden, G.J., 1992. The History of Antitrust Market Delineation. Marquette Law Review
76, 123-215.
Werden, G., 1990. The Limited Relevance of Patient Migration Data in Market
Delineation for Hospital Merger Cases. Journal of Health Economics, 8(4), pp. 363-76.

46

Appendix A: The Capps, Dranove and Sattherwaite Model of Option Demand

A.1 Consumers
Consumers are assumed to maximize ex post expected utility. Thus they maximize the
expected utility of obtaining treatment for a specific condition at a specific hospital, but
before treatment is actually obtained. The utility function is defined as
U ij = U ( R j , S j , Tij , Yi , Z i ) − γ (Yi , Z i ) p j + ε ij

where R j is a vector of hospital characteristics that are common across all patient
conditions, S j is a vector of variables that contain patient specific service offerings, Tij
is the travel time from patient i to hospital j, Yi is a vector of the patient’s socioeconomic
characteristics, and Z i is a vector of clinical attributes specific to patient i. Assuming that

γ (Yi , Zi ) is constant, individual i will select hospital j if for all hospitals j≠k,
U ( R j , S j , Tij , Yi , Z i ) − U ( Rk , S k , Tik , Yi , Z i ) > ε ik − ε ij .

Assuming ε is distributed i.i.d. extreme value, the probability sij that patient i chooses
hospital j is given as sij =

exp(U ( R j , S j , Tij , Yi , Z i ))

∑ exp(U ( R , S

k∈G

k

k

, Tik , Yi , Z i ))

where G is a network of hospitals

from which the patient chooses. The the parameter estimates for our calculation of the
utility function are included in Table A.1.
The patient’s interim expected utility is thus

{

]}

⎡
⎤
V IU = E max U ( R j , S j , Tij , Yi , Z i ) = ln ⎢∑ exp(U ( R j , S j , Tij , Yi , Z i ) )⎥ .
j∈G
⎣ j∈G
⎦

[

Given this result, hospital j’s contribution to individual i’s expected utility is
⎡
⎤
1
ΔV jIU (G , Yi , Z i , λ i ) = ln ⎢
⎥
⎢⎣1 − s ij (G , Yi , Z i , λ i ) ⎥⎦

47

where λi is the location of consumer i. Capps et al. then define the ex-ante willingness to
pay for patient i as

∫

ΔV jIU (G, Yi , Z i , λi )

γ (Yi , Z i )

Z

f ( Z i | Yi , λi )dZ i . Because this willingness to pay

is identified only up to the scale factor γ (Yi , Zi ) , summing over all consumers the
willingness to pay for hospital j is thus written as
ΔW jEA (G ) = N

⎡

∫ λ ln ⎢⎢1 − s

Y ,Z ,

⎣

⎤
1
⎥ f ( Z i , Yi , λ i ) dYi dZ i dλi .
ij (G , Yi , Z i , λ i ) ⎥
⎦

A.2 Pricing
After the willingness to pay measure is calculated for hospitals, Capps et al.
regress hospital profits on the willingness to pay measure (without a constant) and
recover the coefficient from this regression, â . This generates the predicted impact of
WTP on hospital profits. Using the average revenue and average cost per discharge at a
hospital, they then calculate a measure of profits per discharge at each hospital.

A.3 Merger Effects using WTP
The first step in using WTP to simulate merger effects entails calculating the
difference in willingness to pay for a merged entity versus the willingness to pay for each
entity independently. Defining

ΔW jEA
+ k (G ) = N

⎡

∫ λ ln ⎢⎢1 − s

Y ,Z ,

⎣

⎤
1
⎥ f ( Z i , Yi , λ i ) dYi dZ i dλi ,
ij (G , Yi , Z i , λ i ) − s ik (G , Yi , Z i , λ i ) ⎥
⎦

the increase in WTP as a result of a merger would thus be

EA
EA
ΔW jEA
+ k (G ) − ΔW j (G ) − ΔW k (G ) .

As Capps et al. detail in their paper, if two hospitals are far enough apart, then if hospital
j has a positive market share in market segment (Z i , Yi , λi ) , hospital k will likely have a

48

zero market share in that same segment. Thus the expression
EA
EA
ΔW jEA
+ k (G ) − ΔW j (G ) − ΔW k (G ) will be zero and thus a merger of hospitals j and k will

likely generate no increase in the market power of the two firms.
The second step in using WTP to simulate merger effects involves inferring the
increase in profits resulting from a merger of two firms. Capps et. al. do this by
calculating the increase in profits to the entity (j+k), Δπˆ j + k , as

[

EA
EA
Δπˆ j + k = aˆ ΔW jEA
+ k (G ) − ΔW j (G ) − ΔW k (G )

]

Profits are then calculated for the merged entity as π j + π k + Δπˆ j + k . Price increases are
then inferred as the price changes implied by the changes in profits, assuming quantity
does not change.

49

Appendix B: Definition of a SSNIP Market

SSNIP Definition
Formally, given demand for each hospital as a function of its price, the SSNIP market
for a hospital is defined as follows:
A SSNIP market for hospital j, is the set of hospitals, M, (of which hospital j is a
member), such that given a vector of pre-SSNIP prices p and post-SSNIP prices p’
1)

∑π

s

( p ' ) − π s ( p ) > 0 for hospital systems with at least one plant in M and

s

2) M is the smallest set of hospitals such that (1) holds
where p k' = (1.05) * p k if hospital k is a member of M and p k' = p k otherwise.

50

Table A.1 WTP Parameter Estimates
Conditional (fixed-effects) logistic regression
Number of obs = 1381200
LR chi2(68) = 126728.31
Prob > chi2 = 0.0000
Log likelihood = -119532.84
Pseudo R2 =0.3464
Coef.
std. error
z
fp
-0.546
0.109
-5.030
teach
0.984
0.069
14.210
transplant
0.372
0.015
25.150
nurs_int
-0.187
0.011
-16.620
tech_ind
0.104
0.006
18.710
distance
-0.275
0.004
-64.550
distXfp
0.013
0.001
13.270
distXteach
0.010
0.001
18.460
distXnurs
0.001
0.000
3.710
distXtech
0.001
0.000
10.330
distXmale
0.008
0.002
5.120
distXelderly
-0.043
0.002
-23.810
distXwhite
0.029
0.003
8.490
distXincome
0.000
0.000
-3.060
distXlengstay
0.000
0.000
3.260
distXpctravl
0.264
0.008
34.240
distXotherproc
0.005
0.001
7.750
distXotherdiag
-0.008
0.001
-13.900
maleXfp
-0.159
0.046
-3.490
maleXteach
-0.163
0.028
-5.880
maleXnursint
0.035
0.005
7.510
maleXtech
-0.002
0.002
-0.920
eldXfp
-0.021
0.051
-0.420
eldXteach
-0.696
0.031
-22.300
eldXnurs_int
0.083
0.005
15.590
eldXtech
-0.041
0.003
-15.120
whiteXfp
0.066
0.084
0.790
whiteXteach
0.670
0.059
11.320
whiteXnursint
-0.105
0.009
-11.440
whiteXtech
-0.007
0.005
-1.470
incomXfp
0.000
0.000
-6.050
incomXteach
0.000
0.000
-16.680
incomXnursint
0.000
0.000
7.410
incomXtech
0.000
0.000
14.350
lengsXfp
-0.059
0.004
-13.590
lengsXteach
-0.019
0.002
-9.150
lengsXnursint
-0.003
0.000
-10.030
lengsXtech
0.000
0.000
-1.110
pctraXfp
0.659
0.203
3.250
pctraXteach
-0.452
0.129
-3.500
pctraXnursint
0.476
0.024
19.800
pctraXtech
0.046
0.011
3.990
other_prXfp
-0.030
0.018
-1.610
other_prXteach
-0.017
0.012
-1.400

P>|z|
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.002
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.357
0.677
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.431
0.000
0.000
0.142
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.267
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.107
0.160

[95% Conf. Interval]
-0.759
-0.334
0.848
1.119
0.343
0.401
-0.209
-0.165
0.093
0.115
-0.283
-0.266
0.011
0.014
0.009
0.011
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.005
0.011
-0.046
-0.039
0.022
0.036
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.249
0.279
0.004
0.007
-0.009
-0.007
-0.248
-0.070
-0.217
-0.109
0.026
0.044
-0.007
0.002
-0.121
0.079
-0.757
-0.635
0.073
0.093
-0.046
-0.035
-0.099
0.231
0.554
0.786
-0.124
-0.087
-0.016
0.002
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
-0.067
-0.050
-0.024
-0.015
-0.003
-0.002
0.000
0.000
0.261
1.057
-0.704
-0.199
0.429
0.523
0.023
0.068
-0.066
0.006
-0.040
0.007

other_prXnursint
other_prtech
other_diXfp
other_diteach
other_diXnursint
other_diXtech
match_nerv
match_resp
match_card
match_obst
match_imag
distXdiag_endo
distXdiag_otol
distXdiag_resp
distXdiag_card
distXdiag_lymp
distXdiag_diges
distXdiag_urin
distXdiag_geni
distXdiag_obst
distXdiag_musc
distXdiag_inte
distXdiag_imag
distXdiag_nerv

0.018
-0.003
0.292
-0.105
0.020
-0.007
0.510
0.221
0.702
2.157
1.273
-0.019
-0.011
0.053
0.045
0.028
0.000
0.005
0.002
0.049
0.016
0.006
0.050
0.029

0.002
0.001
0.019
0.011
0.002
0.001
0.085
0.144
0.030
0.061
0.289
0.009
0.009
0.006
0.003
0.009
0.003
0.005
0.002
0.002
0.003
0.005
0.006
0.004

9.070
-2.720
15.580
-9.950
11.040
-7.690
5.970
1.540
23.070
35.420
4.400
-2.000
-1.280
9.610
15.140
3.280
0.120
1.120
0.850
19.860
5.860
1.260
8.440
6.370

0.000
0.006
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.124
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.045
0.202
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.908
0.263
0.394
0.000
0.000
0.207
0.000
0.000

0.014
-0.005
0.255
-0.126
0.016
-0.009
0.343
-0.061
0.642
2.037
0.705
-0.037
-0.028
0.042
0.039
0.011
-0.006
-0.004
-0.003
0.044
0.010
-0.003
0.038
0.020

0.022
-0.001
0.328
-0.084
0.023
-0.005
0.677
0.503
0.761
2.276
1.840
0.000
0.006
0.064
0.051
0.045
0.007
0.015
0.007
0.054
0.021
0.015
0.061
0.037

Table 1: Case Summary 1994-2005
Year
Case
Winner Primary Reason for Decision
2005 Evanston Northwestern Health Care
Merger substantially lessened
FTC
competition
1999 Sutter
Insufficient evidence of a
(California ex rel. Lockyer v. Sutter
Hospitals
relevant geographic market
Health Sys.)
1998 Poplar Bluff (Circuit)
FTC failed to identify a
Hospitals
(FTC v. Tenet Healthcare)
relevant geographic market
1999 Poplar Bluff (District)
FTC's prliminary injunction
(FTC v. Tenet Healthcare)
FTC request was granted but later
reversed (see above)
1997 Long Island
DOJ failed to identify relevant
(U.S. v. Long Island Jewish Med. Ctr.) Hospitals
product and geographic market
1996 Grand Rapids
(FTC v. Butterworth Health Corp)
1995 Dubuque
(United States v. Mercy Health Servs.)
1995 Joplin
(FTC v. Freeman Hosp.)
1994 Ukiah
(Adventist Health Sys./West)

Hospitals Not-for-profit merger
DOJ failed to identify relevant
product and geographic market
FTC failed to identify a
Hospitals
relevant geographic market
FTC failed to identify a
Hospitals
relevant geographic market

Hospitals

Market Size
Government: 3 hospitals
Defendant: 9 hospitals

Government's Alleged Pre-Merger Market Concentration
10,000

Government: 10 hospitals
Defendant: 29 hospitals
Government: 7 hospitals
Defendant: 22 hospitals

2,800-4,300

See above

See above

Government: 5-mile radius
Defendant: Nassau, Queens,
Western Suffolk and Manhattan
Government: 9 hospitals
Defendant: 9 hospitals
Government: 3 hospitals
Defendant: 19 hospitals
Government: 5 hospitals
Defendant: 17 hospitals
Government: 5 hospitals
Defendant: 16 hospitals

(no pre-merger info but allegations that the merging hospitals
would have 100% of the market post-merger)
Approx. 1,600-1,700

1,402
4,600 (3,196 on appeal)

Table 2: Geographic Market Definition Methodologies in Merger Cases (1994-2005)
Year
Case
Winner
Primary Method Used for Geographic Market definition
2005 Evanston Northwestern Health Care
Government: Managed care testimony,
FTC

1999 Sutter
(California ex rel. Lockyer v. Sutter
1998 Poplar Bluff (Circuit)
(FTC v. Tenet Healthcare)
1999 Poplar Bluff (District)
(FTC v. Tenet Healthcare)
1997 Long Island
(U.S. v. Long Island Jewish Med. Ctr.)
1996 Grand Rapids
(FTC v. Butterworth Health Corp)
1995 Dubuque
(United States v.
v Mercy Health Servs.)
Servs )
1995 Joplin
(FTC v. Freeman Hosp.)
1994 Ukiah
(Adventist Health Sys./West)

Hospitals
Hospitals
FTC
Hospitals
Hospitals
Hospitals
osp s
Hospitals
Hospitals

post-merger price increases
Defendant: Patient flow analysis (similar to Elzinga-Hogarty),
travel time, physician admitting practices
Government: Elzinga-Hogarty and Critical Loss
Defendant: Critical Loss (and "direct competitor test")
Government: Elzinga-Hogarty
Defendant: Critical Loss
See above
Government: Testimony of managed care witnesses
Defendant: Patient Origin data
Government: Elzinga-Hogarty
Defendant: Elzinga-Hogarty
Government: Elzinga-Hogarty
Defendant: Critical Loss
Government: Elzinga-Hogarty
Defendant: Elzinga-Hogarty
Government: Elzinga-Hogarty
Defendant: Elzinga-Hogarty

Table 3 Summary Data for the Structural Model
Consumer characteristics (N=913,547)
Quantity
HMO
PPO
Unscheduled
Distance to chosen hospital

Mean
1.24
0.50
0.31
0.53
11.60

Hospital Characteristics (N=368)
Price
% For Profit
% Not-For-Profit
% Teaching
Tech Index
% System Members
Beds
Demand
Own-Price Elasticity
Cross-Price Elasticity w/rspt to closest hospital
Cross-Price Elasticity w/rspt to 2nd closest hospital
Cross-Price Elasticity w/rspt to 3rd closest hospital
Cross-Price Elasticity w/rspt to 4th closest hospital
Cross-Price Elasticity w/rspt to 5th closest hospital

4681
28%
52%
21%
15.10
50%
192
3070
-4.57
0.60
0.40
0.30
0.21
0.19

Table 4
(N=368)

Method of Market Definition
Critical Loss Elzinga-Hogarty SSNIP Mkt. Def. HSA MSA/PMSA*

Number of Hospitals in a Market
26.75
25.63
16

22.43
20.54
13

3.78
2.06
3

54.38
56.18
16

41.83
40.62
18

89
2

78
1

14
2

130
1

100
2

Mean
std. dev
Median

1505
1511
875

1460
1392
1026

3874
1418
3683

1031
1377
832

1005
1070
714

Max
Min

6914
183

10000
211

8911
1054

10000
118

5947
158

Mean
std. dev
Median

1891
1716
1194

1899
1577
1499

3989
1442
3814

1386
1500
1191

1398
1260
1191

Max
Min

10000
356

10000
439

8911
1244

10000
327

10000
366

Mean
std. dev
Median
Max
Min
Hospital HHIs (beds)

Hospital System HHIs (beds)

* The number of MSAs in California is 24. The number of hospitals in the sample that are located in a MSA is 312.

Table 5
Market size by quartile of the number of hospitals
within a 25-mile radius

(N=93)
Quartile 1
(0-5 hospitals)
Critical Loss Elzinga-Hogarty SSNIP Mkt. Def.

(N=96)
Quartile 2
(6-18 hospitals)
Critical Loss Elzinga-Hogarty SSNIP Mkt. Def.

(N=88)
Quartile 3
(19-70 hospitals)
Critical Loss Elzinga-Hogarty SSNIP Mkt. Def.

(N=91)
Quartile 4
(71-110 hospitals)
Critical Loss Elzinga-Hogarty SSNIP Mkt. Def.

Number of Hospitals in a Market
5.80
5.51
4

7.19
4.69
6

2.78
1.24
2

10.79
9.19
8

9.51
5.55
8

2.80
1.17
2

26.27
11.77
24

23.73
15.30
18

3.64
1.30
4

65.47
13.50
67

50.37
15.18
50

5.96
2.42
5

Max
Min

46
2

22
1

10
2

48
2

26
1

7
2

76
11

73
7

7
2

89
28

78
9

14
2

Unique Markets

68

57

73

65

49

73

68

43

72

86

30

79

3.01
4.98
1

4.41
4.94
3

-

7.99
9.17
5

6.71
5.60
5

-

22.64
11.58
20

20.09
15.15
16

-

59.52
12.96
62

44.42
15.17
44

-

36
-3

20
-3

-

45
-2

23
-1

-

72
8

68
3

-

85
22

73
2

-

Mean
std. dev
Median

3471
1719
3448

3161
1920
2611

4694
1053
5047

2460
1636
2243

2510
1270
2290

4823
1198
5045

1065
750
770

1250
683
1134

3820
1441
3372

474
61
468

592
205
545

2552
675
2538

Max
Min

10000
524

10000
745

7381
1452

10000
392

10000
721

8911
2450

2769
356

2960
439

8362
1814

695
380

1367
442

5006
1244

8
15
64

15
30
48

1
1
91

24
39
33

18
40
38

0
1
95

72
6
10

61
24
3

0
11
77

91
0
0

91
0
0

4
40
47

Mean
std. dev
Median

Difference in Market Size from SSNIP Market Def.
Mean
std. dev
Median
Max
Min
Hospital System HHIs (beds)

Hospitals Operating within Guideline Thresholds
Premerger HHI <1500
1500  Premerger HHI  2500
2500<Premerger HHI
Number of Hospitals within 25 miles
Mean
std. dev.

2.40
1.61

10.71
3.54

36.15
16.60

93.10
9.93

Table 6
Own Elasticity by Hospital Concentration Quartile
Mean
std. dev
Median
Max
Min

Quartile 1
-3.55
1.51
-3.27
-1.01
-8.87

Own Price Elasticity
Quartile 2
Quartile 3
-4.24
-5.05
1.78
1.55
-3.88
-4.90
-1.75
-11.55

-1.67
-11.33

Quartile 4
-5.48
1.66
-5.27
-2.15
-10.36

Table 7 Elasticity by Hospital Density Quartile
Quartile 1

Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Quartile 4

Mean
std. dev
Median

-3.60
0.72
-3.51

-4.39
0.89
-4.29

-5.20
0.54
-5.39

-5.48
0.12
-5.47

Max
Min

-2.17
-6.35

-2.74
-8.55

-4.10
-5.84

-5.09
-5.84

Average Estimated Structural Elasticity in Elzinga-Hogarty Market
Mean
std. dev
Median

-3.89
0.91
-3.72

-4.26
0.69
-4.20

-5.28
0.65
-5.39

-5.41
0.14
-5.43

Max
Min

-1.01
-6.81

-3.22
-5.99

-4.14
-6.25

-4.92
-5.63

Quartile 1

Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Quartile 4

Mean
std. dev
Median

-10.10
7.02
-8.57

-13.84
6.86
-12.54

-17.27
6.31
-15.36

-18.65
3.58
-18.53

Max
Min

-2.27
-30.35

-2.74
-48.13

-7.76
-36.54

-10.51
-29.02

Average Implied Structural Elasticity in an Elzinga-Hogarty Market
Mean
std. dev
Median

-12.55
9.41
-10.15

-13.32
6.80
-10.97

-14.57
8.04
-12.16

-13.10
2.37
-13.60

Max
Min

-1.01
-37.40

-3.23
-34.81

-6.80
-32.85

-5.96
-15.47

Average Estimated Structural Elasticity in Critical Loss Market

Average Implied Structural Elasticity in a Critical Loss Market

Table 8 San Diego Hospitals
Hospital
ALVARADO HOSPITAL MEDICAL CENTER
SCRIPPS MEMORIAL HOSPITAL - CHULA VISTA
HARBOR VIEW HEALTH PARTNERS
THE CORONADO HOSPITAL
SHARP CABRILLO HOSPITAL
SHARP MEMORIAL HOSPITAL
SCRIPPS HOSPITAL EAST COUNTY
FALLBROOK HOSPITAL DISTRICT
GROSSMONT HOSPITAL CORPORATION
MERCY HOSPITAL
MISSION BAY MEMORIAL HOSPITAL
PALOMAR POMERADO HEALTH SYSTEM (Escondido)
PARADISE VALLEY HOSPITAL
SCRIPPS HEALTH - LA JOLLA
TRI-CITY HOSPITAL DISTRICT
UCSD MEDICAL CENTER
VILLA VIEW COMMUNITY HOSPITAL
COMMUNITY HOSPITAL OF CHULA VISTA
PALOMAR POMERADO HEALTH SYSTEM (Poway)
GREEN HOSPITAL OF SCRIPPS CLINIC
SCRIPPS MEMORIAL HOSPITAL - ENCINITAS
SAN DIEGO HOSPICE CORPORATION
UCSD LA JOLLA, THORNTON HOSPITAL

Ownership Teach Control
Tenet
N
FP
Scripps
N
NFP
Ornda
N
FP
Sharp
N
NFP
Sharp
N
NFP
Sharp
Y
NFP
Scripps
N
NFP
N
Munic
Sharp
Y
NFP
Scripps
Y
NFP
Columbia
N
FP
Palomar
N
Munic
Adventist
N
NFP
Scripps
N
NFP
N
Munic
UC
Y
NFP
N
NFP
Sharp
N
NFP
Palomar
N
Munic
Scripps
Y
NFP
Scripps
N
NFP
N
NFP
UC
N
NFP

Tech Index Beds
14
240
8
159
14
156
19
204
17
227
22
642
14
162
9
149
24
422
16
416
18
128
21
389
15
228
27
454
24
333
23
359
11
102
15
306
20
250
24
173
16
145
0
24
13
62

Price
3979
3931
3025
4007
2535
4238
3440
4133
3425
4282
2219
3874
3035
4211
2865
5827
5368
4383
4572
2357
4560
3741
4523

Demand Own Price Elasticity
2213
-4.48
1335
-4.23
1479
-3.50
562
-4.63
920
-2.96
15749
-3.92
485
-3.93
665
-3.92
9392
-3.29
8242
-4.30
613
-2.66
5247
-3.30
703
-3.55
10376
-3.98
5242
-2.10
4193
-5.99
26
-6.18
2557
-4.15
2819
-4.70
5202
-2.62
2219
-4.74
55
-4.33
1265
-5.02

# Hosps. Within 25 Miles
20
17
19
19
19
20
19
7
20
19
20
12
18
21
7
19
19
17
19
21
18
19
21

Table 9
Market Definition for San Diego

ALVARADO HOSPITAL MEDICAL CENTER
SCRIPPS MEMORIAL HOSPITAL - CHULA VISTA
HARBOR VIEW HEALTH PARTNERS
THE CORONADO HOSPITAL
SHARP CABRILLO HOSPITAL
SHARP MEMORIAL HOSPITAL
SCRIPPS HOSPITAL EAST COUNTY
FALLBROOK HOSPITAL DISTRICT
GROSSMONT HOSPITAL CORPORATION
MERCY HOSPITAL
MISSION BAY MEMORIAL HOSPITAL
PALOMAR POMERADO HEALTH SYSTEM (Escondido)
PARADISE VALLEY HOSPITAL
SCRIPPS HEALTH - LA JOLLA
TRI-CITY HOSPITAL DISTRICT
UCSD MEDICAL CENTER
VILLA VIEW COMMUNITY HOSPITAL
COMMUNITY HOSPITAL OF CHULA VISTA
PALOMAR POMERADO HEALTH SYSTEM (Poway)
GREEN HOSPITAL OF SCRIPPS CLINIC
SCRIPPS MEMORIAL HOSPITAL - ENCINITAS
SAN DIEGO HOSPICE CORPORATION
UCSD LA JOLLA, THORNTON HOSPITAL

Critical Loss Market
No. of Hospitals HHI
16
2769
17
2692
16
2696
16
2696
17
2692
18
2709
17
2500
38
775
16
2769
17
2692
17
2239
13
2083
17
2692
16
2464
19
1873
17
2692
16
2769
17
2692
14
2302
16
2464
15
1825
16
2696
16
2464

Elzinga-Hogarty
No. of Hospitals HHI
14
2960
18
2228
18
2228
18
2228
19
2454
19
2454
15
2861
14
2242
14
2960
18
2228
19
2454
14
2200
18
2228
19
2454
14
2033
18
2228
18
2228
18
2228
18
2228
19
2454
16
2064
18
2228
19
2454

SSNIP Mkt. Def.
No. of Hospitals HHI
3
4216
2
5500
4
3584
2
5089
2
5254
2
5400
2
5991
3
4306
2
5378
2
5027
4
6914
3
5496
2
5159
3
8362
2
5773
2
5027
4
3029
2
5500
3
5143
3
8362
3
5003
3
4739
2
7886

Table 10: Price Increases for Mergers of Independent San Diego Hospitals
Merger (distance between hospitals in parenthesis)
Mission bay & Alvarado (9.36 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Mission bay & Paradise Valley (11.14 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Mission bay & Harborview (6.27 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Alvarado & Paradise Valley (6.4 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Alvarado & Harborview (7.22 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Paradise Valley & Harborview (5.36 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Mission Bay and Fallbrook (39.84 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Mission Bay and Tri-City (26.68 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Mission Bay and Villa View (8.9 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Mission Bay and San Diego Hospice (5.24 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Fallbrook & Tri-City (13.85 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Fallbrook & Villa View (44.85 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model
Villa View & Tri-City (32.71 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model

Price increase Merger (distance between hospitals in parenthesis)
Price increase
Alvarado & Fallbrook (43.09 miles)
0.28%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.02%
0.41%
WTP Model
0.03%
Alvarado & Tri-City (31.36 miles)
0.14%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.14%
1.06%
WTP Model
0.22%
Alvarado & Villa View (2.32 miles)
0.39%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.04%
0.83%
WTP Model
0.34%
Alvarado & San Diego Hospice (6.62 miles)
0.43%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.05%
0.48%
WTP Model
0.12%
Paradise Valley & Fallbrook (48.82 miles)
0.61%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.00%
0.23%
WTP Model
0.03%
Paradise Valley & Tri-City (36.51 miles)
0.46%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.03%
0.67%
WTP Model
0.15%
Paradise Valley & Villa View (4.23 miles)
0.00%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.00%
0.24%
WTP Model
1.62%
Paradise Valley & San Diego Hospice (6.01 miles)
0.11%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.04%
0.75%
WTP Model
0.55%
Harborview and Fallbrook (45.58 miles)
0.00%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.01%
1.91%
WTP Model
0.03%
Harborview and Tri-City (32.70 miles)
0.01%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.08%
1.46%
WTP Model
0.14%
Harborview and Villa View (5.32 miles)
1.57%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.01%
5.30%
WTP Model
0.74%
Harborview and San Diego Hospice (1.25 miles)
0.00%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.05%
0.10%
WTP Model
0.30%
Tri-City & San Diego Hospice (31.5 miles)
0.00%
Structural Bertrand Model
0.00%
0.11%
WTP Model
0.05%

Villa View & San Diego Hospice (5.02 miles)
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model

0.00%
2.28%

Table 11: Price Increases for Mergers of San Diego Hospital Systems
System Merger
Scripps and Sharp

Price increase
Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model

16.11%
17.48%

Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model

3.48%
8.37%

Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model

3.70%
13.31%

Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model

5.40%
8.46%

Structural Bertrand Model
WTP Model

6.18%
9.43%

Scripps and UCSD

Sharp and UCSD

Palomar Pomerado and Scripps

Palomar Pomerado and Tri-City

Figure 1

Quartile 1

Quartile 2

Quartile 3

Quartile 4

Figure 2

San Diego Metro Hospitals (N=23)
Legend
Hospital Size

beds
FALLBROOK

24 - 102
103 - 173
174 - 306
307 - 454
455 - 642
0

3.5

Miles
7

TRI-CITY

PALOMAR ESCONDIDO

SCRIPPS ENCINITAS
PALOMAR POWAY

GREEN HOSPITAL
SCRIPPS LJ
UCSD LA JOLLA

SCRIPPS EAST

MISSION BAY SHARP MEMORIAL

UCSD
SHARP CABRILLOMERCY
SD HOSPICE

ALVARADO
GROSSMONT
VILLA VIEW

HARBOR VIEW
CORONADO

PARADISE VALLEY

SCRIPPS CV
COMM HOSP CV

14

Figure 3

Market Defintion for Scripps Chula Vista:
SSNIP Market Definition vs Elzinga-Hogarty
Elzinga-Hogarty

Market Defintion for Scripps Chula Vista:
SSNIP Market Definition vs Critical Loss

Legend

Critical Loss

Hospital Size
SSNIP Market
Definition

Elzinga-Hogarty:
18 hospitals
HHI=2,228

Legend
Hospital Size

SSNIP Market
Definition

beds

beds

24 - 102

24

103 - 173

25 - 162

174 - 306

163 - 240

307 - 520

241 - 306

521 - 663

307 - 663

PALOMAR ESCONDIDO

Critical Loss:
17 hospitals
HHI=2,692

SCRIPPS ENCINITAS

PALOMAR POWAY

GREEN HOSPITAL
SCRIPPS LA JOLLA

SCRIPPS LA JOLLA

UCSD LA JOLLA

UCSD LA JOLLA

MISSION BAY SHARP MEMORIAL

ALVARADO GROSSMONT

ALVARADO
SHARP CABRILLO

MERCY
UCSD
SD HOSPICE

VILLA VIEW

SHARP CABRILLO

HARBOR VIEW
CORONADO

SCRIPPS EAST

MISSION BAY SHARP MEMORIAL

MERCY
UCSD
SD HOSPICE

VILLA VIEW

HARBOR VIEW
CORONADO

PARADISE VALLEY

SCRIPPS CHULA VISTA
COMM HOSP CHULA VISTA

SSNIP Mkt. Def.:
2 hospitals
HHI=5,500

PARADISE VALLEY

SCRIPPS CHULA VISTA
COMM HOSP CHULA VISTA

SSNIP Mkt. Def.:
2 hospitals
HHI=5,500

