NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES MANAGEMENT MATTER? EVIDENCE FROM INDIA
Nicholas Bloom
Benn Eifert
Aprajit Mahajan
David McKenzie
John Roberts
Working Paper 16658
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16658

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011
Financial support was provided by the Alfred Sloan Foundation; the Freeman Spogli Institute, the
International Initiative and the Graduate School of Business at Stanford; the International Growth
Centre; IRISS; the Kauffman Foundation; the Murthy Family; the Knowledge for Change Trust Fund;
the National Science Foundation; the Toulouse Network for Information Technology; and the World
Bank. This research would not have been possible without our partnership with Kay Adams, James
Benton and Breck Marshall, the dedicated work of the consulting team of Asif Abbas, Saurabh Bhatnagar,
Shaleen Chavda, Karl Gheewalla, Kusha Goyal, Shruti Rangarajan, Jitendra Satpute, Shreyan Sarkar,
and Ashutosh Tyagi, and the research support of Troy Smith. We thank our formal discussants Susantu
Basu, Ray Fisman, Naushad Forbes, Vojislov Maksimovic, Ramada Nada, Paul Romer, and Steve
Tadelis, as well as seminar audiences at the AEA, Barcelona GSE, Berkeley, BREAD, Boston University,
Chicago, Columbia, Cornell, the EBRD, Harvard Business School, IESE, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Kellogg, the LSE, Maryland, the NBER, NYU, PACDEV, Stanford, TNIT, Toronto, UBC, UCL, UCLA,
UCSC, Wharton, and the World Bank for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Nicholas Bloom, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Management Matter? Evidence from India
Nicholas Bloom, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts
NBER Working Paper No. 16658
January 2011
JEL No. L2,M2,O14,O32,O33
ABSTRACT
A long-standing question in social science is to what extent differences in management cause differences
in firm performance. To investigate this we ran a management field experiment on large Indian textile
firms. We provided free consulting on modern management practices to a randomly chosen set of
treatment plants and compared their performance to the control plants. We find that adopting these
management practices had three main effects. First, it raised average productivity by 11% through
improved quality and efficiency and reduced inventory. Second, it increased decentralization of decision
making, as better information flow enabled owners to delegate more decisions to middle managers.
Third, it increased the use of computers, necessitated by the data collection and analysis involved in
modern management. Since these practices were profitable this raises the question of why firms had
not adopted these before. Our results suggest that informational barriers were a primary factor in explaining
this lack of adoption. Modern management is a technology that diffuses slowly between firms, with
many Indian firms initially unaware of its existence or impact. Since competition was limited by constraints
on firm entry and growth, badly managed firms were not rapidly driven from the market.

Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu
Benn Eifert
UC, Berkeley
benn@econ.berkeley.edu
Aprajit Mahajan
Stanford University
amahajan@stanford.edu

David McKenzie
The World Bank, MSN MC3-307
1818 H Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20433
dmckenzie@worldbank.org
John Roberts
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
roberts_john@gsb.stanford.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Economists have long puzzled over why there are such astonishing differences in productivity
across both firms and countries. For example, US plants in homogeneous industries like cement,
block-ice, white pan bread and oak flooring display 100% productivity spreads between the 10th
and 90th percentile (Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson, 2008).
A natural explanation for these productivity differences lies in variations in management
practices. Indeed, the idea that “managerial technology” affects the productivity of inputs goes
back at least to Walker (1887) and is central to the Lucas (1978) model of firm size. Yet while
management has long been emphasized by the media, business schools and policymakers,
economists have typically been skeptical about its importance.
One reason for skepticism is the belief that competition will drive badly managed firms
out of the market. As a result any residual variations in management practices will reflect firms’
optimal responses to differing market conditions. For example, firms in developing countries
may not adopt quality control systems because wages are so low that repairing defects is cheap.
Hence, their management practices are not “bad”, but the optimal response to low wages.
A second reason for this skepticism is the complexity of management, making it hard to
measure.1 Recent work, however, has focused on specific management practices which can be
measured, taught in business schools and recommended by consultants. Examples of these
practices include key principles of Toyota’s “lean manufacturing”, such as quality control
procedures, inventory management, and human resource management. A growing literature
measures many such practices and finds large variations across establishments and a strong
association between these practices and higher productivity and profitability.2
This paper provides the first experimental evidence on the importance of management
practices in large firms. The experiment takes large, multi-plant Indian textile firms and
randomly allocates their plants to treatment and control groups. Treatment plants received five
months of extensive management consulting from a large international consulting firm. This
1

Lucas (1978, p. 511) notes that his model “does not say anything about the tasks performed by managers, other
than whatever managers do, some do it better than others”.
2
See for example, Osterman (1994), Huselid and Becker (1996), MacDuffie (1995), Ichniowski, Shaw and
Prennushi (1998), Cappelli and Neumark (2001) and Bloom and Van Reenen (2007). A prominent early example is
Pack (1987), which, like the present study, deals with textile firms in developing countries. In related work, Bertrand
and Schoar (2003) use a manager-firm matched panel and find that manager fixed effects matter for a range of
corporate decisions. Lazear and Oyer (2009) and Bloom and Van Reenen (2010) provide extensive surveys.

1

consulting diagnosed opportunities for improvement in a canonical set of management practices
during the first month, followed by four months of intensive support for the implementation of
these recommendations. The control plants received only the one month of diagnostic consulting.
The treatment intervention led to significant improvements in quality, inventory and
production output. The result was an increase in productivity of 11% and an increase in annual
profitability of about $230,000. Firms also spread these management improvements from their
treatment plants to other plants they owned, providing revealed preference evidence on their
beneficial impact.
Given these results, the natural question is why firms had not previously adopted these
practices. Our evidence suggests that informational constraints were an important factor. Firms
were often not aware of the existence of many modern management practices, like inventory
norms and standard operating procedures, or did not appreciate how these could improve
performance. For example, many firms claimed their quality was as good as other local firms and
so did not need to introduce a quality control process.
We also find two other major impacts of better management practices. First, owners
delegated greater decision making power over hiring, investment and pay to their plant
managers. This happened in large part because the improved collection and dissemination of
information that was part of the change process enabled owners to monitor their plant managers
better. As a result, owners felt more comfortable delegating.
Second, the extensive data collection and processing requirements of modern
management led to a rapid increase in computer use. For example, installing quality control
systems requires firms to record individual quality defects and then analyze these by shift, loom,
and design. So modern management appears to be a skill-biased technical change (SBTC), as
increased computerization raises the demand for educated employees. A large literature has
highlighted SBTC as a key factor increasing income inequality since the 1970s. Our experiment
provides some evidence on the role of modern management in driving SBTC.3
The major challenge of our experiment is the small cross-sectional sample size. We have
data on only 28 plants across 17 firms. To address concerns over statistical inference in small
samples we implement permutations tests that have exact finite sample size. We also exploit our
large time series of around 100 weeks of data per plant by using estimators that rely on large T
3

See, for example, the survey in Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008).

2

(rather than large N) asymptotics. We believe these approaches are useful for addressing sample
concerns in our paper, and also potentially for other field experiments where the data has a small
cross-section but long time series.
This paper relates to several strands of literature. First, there is the long literature showing
large productivity differences across plants in dozens of countries. From the outset this literature
has attributed much of these spreads to differences in management practices (Mundlak, 1961),
but problems in measurement and identification have made this hard to confirm (Syverson,
2010). This productivity dispersion appears even larger in developing countries (Banerjee and
Duflo, 2005, Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). Despite this, there are still few experiments on
productivity in firms (McKenzie, 2010a) and none involving large multi-plant firms.
Second, our paper builds on the literature on the management practices of firms. There
has been a long debate between the “best-practice” view that some management practices are
universally good so that all firms would benefit from adopting these (Taylor, 1911) and the
“contingency view” that every firm is already adopting optimal practices but these differ firm by
firm (e.g. Woodward, 1958). Much of the empirical literature trying to distinguish between these
views has traditionally been case-study or survey based, making it hard to distinguish between
different explanations and resulting in little consensus in the management literature.4 This paper
provides experimental evidence that a core set of best practices do exist, at least in one industry.
Third, the paper links to the large theoretical literature on the organization of firms. These
papers generally emphasize optimal decentralization as driven either by minimizing learning and
information processing costs or by optimizing incentives.5 But the empirical evidence on
decentralization is limited, focusing primarily on de-layering in large publicly traded US firms
(Rajan and Wulf, 2006).
Fourth, the paper contributes to the literature on Information Technology (IT) and
productivity. A growing body of work has examined the relationship between technology and
productivity, emphasizing both the direct productivity impact of IT and also its complementarity
with modern management and organizational practices (e.g. Bresnahan et al. 2002 and Bartel et
al. 2007). But again the evidence has focused on survey data rather than experimental data. Our
experimental evidence suggests one route for computers to affect productivity is by facilitating

4
5

See, for example, the surveys in Delery and Doty (1996) and Bloom and Van Reenen (2010).
See the recent reviews in Garicano and Van Zandt (2010), Mookherjee (2010) and Gibbons and Roberts (2010).

3

better management practices, and this occurs simultaneously with the decentralization of
decisions.
Finally, recently a number of other field experiments in developing countries (for example
Karlan and Valdivia 2010, Bruhn et al. 2010 and Drexler et al. 2010) have begun to estimate the
impact of basic business training and advice in micro- and small enterprises. This research has
found significant effects of some forms of training on performance in smaller firms, supporting
our results on in larger firms.

II. MANAGEMENT IN THE INDIAN TEXTILE INDUSTRY
II.A. Why work with firms in the Indian textile industry?
Despite rapid growth over the past decade, India’s one billion people still have labor productivity
that is only 15 percent of U.S. productivity (McKinsey Global Institute, 2001). While average
productivity is low, most notable is the large variation in productivity, with a few highly
productive firms and a lot of low-productivity firms (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009).
In common with other developing countries for which data is available, Indian firms are
also typically poorly managed. Evidence from this is seen in Figure 1, which plots results from
the Bloom and Van Reenen (2010) surveys of manufacturing firms in the US and India. The
Bloom and Van Reenen (BVR) methodology scores firms from 1 (worst practices) to 5 (best
practices) on specific management practices related to monitoring, targets and incentives.
Aggregating yields a basic measure of the use of modern management practices that is strongly
correlated with a wide range of firm performance measures, like productivity, profitability and
growth. The top panel of Figure 1 plots these management practice scores for a sample of 751
randomly chosen US manufacturing firms with 100 to 5000 employees and the second panel for
similarly sized Indian ones. The results reveal a thick tail of badly run Indian firms, leading to a
lower average management score (2.69 for India versus 3.33 for US firms). Indian firms tend not
to collect and analyze data systematically in their factories, they tend not to set and monitor clear
targets for performance, and they do not explicitly link pay or promotion with performance. The
scores for Brazil and China in the third panel, with an average of 2.67, are similar, suggesting
that Indian firms are broadly representative of large firms in emerging economies.
In order to implement a common set of management practices across firms and measure a
common set of outcomes, we focus on one industry. We chose textile production since it is the

4

largest manufacturing industry in India, accounting for 22% of manufacturing employment. The
fourth panel shows the management scores for the 232 textile firms in the BVR Indian sample,
which look very similar to Indian manufacturing in general.
Within textiles, our experiment was carried out on 28 plants operated by 17 firms in the
woven cotton fabric industry. These plants weave cotton yarn into cotton fabric for suits, shirts
and home furnishing. They purchase yarn from upstream spinning firms and send their fabric to
downstream dyeing and processing firms. As shown in the bottom panel of Figure 1, the 17 firms
involved had an average BVR management score of 2.60, very similar to the rest of Indian
manufacturing. Hence, our particular sample of 17 Indian firms also appears broadly similar in
terms of management practices to manufacturing firms in developing countries.
II.B. The selection of firms for the field experiment
The sample firms were randomly chosen from the population of all publicly and privately owned
textile firms in Maharashtra, based on lists provided by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.6 We
restricted attention to firms with between 100 to 1000 employees to focus on larger firms but
avoided multinationals. Geographically we focused on firms in the towns of Tarapur and
Umbergaon (the largest two textile towns in the area) since this reduced the travel time for the
consultants. This yielded a sample of 66 potential subject firms.
All of these 66 firms were then contacted by telephone by our partnering international
consulting firm. They offered free consulting, funded by Stanford University and the World
Bank, as part of a management research project. We paid for the consulting services to ensure
that we controlled the intervention and could provide a homogeneous management treatment to
all firms. We were concerned that if the firms made any co-payments they might have tried to
direct the consulting, for example asking for help on marketing or finance.
Of this group of firms, 34 expressed an interest in the project and were given a follow-up
visit and sent a personally signed letter from Stanford. Of the 34 firms, 17 agreed to commit

6

The MCA list comes from the Registrar of Business, with whom all public and private firms are legally required to
register annually. Of course many firms do not register in India, but this is generally a problem with smaller firms,
not with 100+ employee manufacturing firms which are too large and permanent to avoid Government notice.

5

senior management time to the consulting program.7 We compared these program firms with the
49 non-program firms and found no significant differences in observables.8
The experimental firms have typically been in operation for 20 years and all are familyowned. They all produce fabric for the domestic market, and some also export. Table 1 reports
some summary statistics for the textile manufacturing parts of these firms (many of the firms
have other businesses in textile processing, retail and real estate). On average these firms had
about 270 employees, current assets of $13 million and sales of $7.5m a year. Compared to US
manufacturing firms these firms would be in the top 2% by employment and the top 5% by
sales,9 and compared to India manufacturing in the top 1% by both employment and sales (Hsieh
and Klenow, 2010). Hence, these are large manufacturing firms.10
These firms are complex organizations, with a median of 2 plants per firm (plus a head
office in Mumbai) and 4 reporting levels from the shop-floor to the managing director. In all the
firms, the managing director is the largest shareholder, and all directors are family members. One
firm is publicly quoted on the Mumbai Stock Exchange, although more than 50% of the equity is
held by the managing director and his father.
In Exhibits (1) to (7) in the Appendix we include a set of photographs of the plants. These
are included to provide some background information to readers on their size, production process
and initial state of management. Each plant site involves several multi-story buildings (Exhibit
1). The plants operate a continuous production process that runs constantly (Exhibit 2). The
factories’ floors were rather disorganized (Exhibits 3 and 4), and their yarn and spare-parts
inventory stores lacked any formalized storage systems (Exhibits 5 and 6).

III. THE MANAGEMENT INTERVENTION
III.A. Why use management consulting as an intervention
The field experiment aimed to improve management practices in the treatment plants. To achieve
this we hired a management consultancy firm to work with the plants as the easiest way to
7

The main reasons we were given for refusing free consulting were that the firms did not believe they needed
management assistance or that it required too much time from their senior management (1 day a week). But it is also
possible these firms were suspicious of the offer, given many firms in India have tax and regulatory irregularities.
8
For example, the program firms had slightly less assets ($12.8m) compared to the non-program firms ($13.9m), but
this difference was not statistically significant (p-value 0.841). We also compared the groups on management
practices using the BVR scores, and found they were almost identical (difference of 0.031, p-value 0.859).
9
Dunn & Bradstreet (August 2009) lists 778,000 manufacturing firms in the US with only 17,300 of these (2.2%)
with 270 or more employees and only 28,900 (3.7%) with $7.5m or more sales.
10
Note that most international agencies define large firms as those with more than 250+ employees.

6

rapidly change plant-level management. We selected the consulting firm using an open tender.
The winner was a large international management consultancy which is headquartered in the
U.S. but has about 40,000 employees in India. The full-time team of (up to) 6 consultants
working on the project at any time all came from their Mumbai office. These consultants were
educated at leading Indian business and engineering schools, and most of them had prior
experience working with US and European multinationals.
Selecting a high profile international consulting firm substantially increased the cost of
the project.11 However, it meant that our experimental firms were more prepared to trust the
consultants, which was important for getting a representative sample group. It also offered the
largest potential to improve the management practices of the firms in our study.
The project ran from August 2008 until August 2010, and the total cost was US$1.3
million, approximately $75,000 per treatment plant and $20,000 per control plant. Note this is
very different from what the firms themselves would pay for this consulting, which would be
probably about $250,000. The reason for our much cheaper costs per plant is that, because it was
a research project, the consultancy charged us pro-bono rates (50% of commercial rates),
provided free partner time and enjoyed economies of scale working across multiple plants.
While the intervention offered high-quality management consulting, the purpose of our
study was to use the improvements in management generated by this intervention to understand
if (and how) modern management practices affect firm performance. Like many recent
development field experiments, this intervention was provided as a mechanism of convenience –
to change management practices – and not to evaluate the management consultants themselves.
III.B. The management consulting intervention
The intervention aimed to introduce a set of standard management practices. Based on their prior
industry experience, the consultants identified 38 key practices on which to focus. These
practices encompass a range of basic manufacturing principles that are standard in almost all US,
European and Japanese firms, and can be grouped into five areas:
 Factory Operations: Regular maintenance of machines and recording the reasons for
breakdowns to learn from failures. Keeping the factory floor tidy to reduce accidents and ease
the movement of materials.
11

At the bottom of the consulting quality distribution in India consultants are cheaper, but their quality is poor. At
the top end, rates are similar to those in the US because international consulting companies target multinationals and
employ consultants that are often US or European educated and have access to international labor markets.

7

 Quality control: Recording quality defects by type, analyzing these records daily, and
formalizing procedures to address defects to prevent them recurring.
 Inventory: Recording yarn stocks on a daily basis, with optimal inventory levels defined and
stock monitored against these. Yarn sorted, labeled and stored in the warehouse by type and
color, and this information logged onto a computer.
 Human-resource management: Performance-based incentive system for workers and
managers. Job descriptions defined for all workers and managers.
 Sales and order management: Tracking production on an order-wise basis to prioritize
customer orders by delivery deadline. Using design-wise efficiency analysis so pricing can be
based on design (rather than average) production costs.
These 38 management practices (listed in Appendix Table A1) form a set of precisely defined
binary indicators that we can use to measure changes in management practices as a result of the
consulting intervention.12 We recorded these indicators on an on-going basis throughout the
study. A general pattern at baseline was that plants recorded a variety of information (often in
paper sheets), but had no systems in place to monitor these records or use them in decisions.
Thus, while 93 percent of the treatment plants recorded quality defects before the intervention,
only 29 percent monitored them on a daily basis or by the particular sort of defect, and none of
them had any standardized analysis and action plan based on this defect data.
The consulting treatment had three stages. The first stage, called the diagnostic phase,
took one month and was given to all treatment and control plants. It involved evaluating the
current management practices of each plant and constructing a performance database.
Construction of this database involved setting up processes for measuring a range of plant-level
metrics – such as output, efficiency, quality, inventory and energy use – on an ongoing basis,
plus extracting historical data from existing records. For example, to facilitate quality monitoring
on a daily basis, a single metric, termed the Quality Defects Index (QDI), was constructed as a
severity-weighted average of the major types of defects. At the end of the diagnostic phase the
consulting firm provided each plant with a detailed analysis of its current management practices
and performance. This phase involved about 15 days of consulting time per plant.
12

We prefer these indicators to the BVR management score for our work here, since they are all binary indicators of
specific practices, which are directly linked to the intervention. In contrast, the BVR indicator measures practices at
a more general level on a 5-point ordinal scale. Nonetheless, the sum of our 38 pre-intervention management
practice scores is correlated with the BVR score at 0.404 (p-value of 0.077) across the 17 firms.

8

The second step was a four month implementation phase given only to the treatment
plants. In this phase, the consulting firm followed up on the diagnostic report to help introduce as
many of the 38 key management practices as the firms could be persuaded to adopt. The
consultant assigned to each plant worked with the plant management to put the procedures into
place, fine-tune them, and stabilize them so that they could readily be carried out by employees.
For example, one of the practices was daily meetings for management to review production and
quality data. The consultant attended these meetings for the first few weeks to help the managers
run them, provided feedback on how to run future meetings, and adjusted their design. This
phase also involved about 15 days a month of consulting time per plant.
The third phase was a measurement phase which lasted until August 2010. This phase
involved only three consultants (and a part-time manager) who collected performance and
management data from all treatment and control plants. In return for the firms’ continuing to
provide this data, the consultants provided some light consulting advice to both the treatment and
control plants. This phase involved about 1.5 days a month of consulting time per plant.
So, in summary, the control plants were provided with the diagnostic phase and then the
measurement phase (totaling 225 consultant hours on average), while the treatment plants were
provided with the diagnostic, implementation and then measurement phases (totaling 733
consultant hours on average).
III.C. The experimental design
We wanted to work with large firms because their complexity means management practices are
likely to be important. However, providing consulting to large firms is expensive, which
necessitated a number of trade-offs detailed below.
Cross-sectional sample size: We worked with 17 firms. We considered hiring cheaper
local consultants and providing more limited consulting to a sample of several hundred plants in
more locations. But two factors pushed against this. First, many large firms in India are reluctant
to let outsiders into their plants because of their lack of compliance with tax, labor and safety
regulations. To minimize selection bias we offered a high quality intensive consulting
intervention that firms would value enough to take the risk of allowing outsiders into their plants.
This helped maximize initial take-up (26% as noted in section II.B) and retention (100%, as no
firms dropped out). Second, the consensus from discussions with Indian business people was that
achieving a measurable impact in large firms would require an extended engagement with high-

9

quality consultants. Obviously the trade-off was that this led to a small cross-sectional sample
size. We discuss the estimation issues this generates in section III.D below.
Treatment and control plants: The 17 firms in our sample had 28 plants. Due to
manpower constraints we could collect detailed performance data from only 20 plants, so we
designated 20 plants as “experimental” plants and randomly picked 6 control plants and 14
treatment plants. As Table 1 shows, the treatment and control firms were not statistically
different across any of the characteristics we could observe.13 The remaining 8 plants were then
the “non-experimental plants”: 3 in control firms and 5 in treatment firms. These nonexperimental plants did not themselves receive consulting services, but data on their
management practices and organizational and IT outcomes were collected in bi-monthly visits.
Timing: The consulting intervention was executed in three waves because of the capacity
constraint of the six-person consulting team. The first wave started in September 2008 with 4
treatment plants. In April 2009 a second wave of 10 treatment plants was initiated, and in July
2009 the diagnostic phase for the 6 control plants was carried out. Firm records usually allowed
us to collect data going back to a common starting point of April 2008.
We started with a small first wave because we expected the intervention process to get
easier over time due to accumulated experience. The second wave included all the remaining
treatment firms because: (i) the consulting interventions take time to affect performance and we
wanted the longest time-window to observe the treatment firms; and (ii) we could not mix the
treatment and control firms across implementation waves.14 The third wave contained the control
firms. We picked more treatment than control plants because the staggered initiation of the
interventions meant the different treatment groups provided some cross identification for each
other, and because we believed the treatment plants would be more useful for understanding why
firms had not adopted management practices before.
III.D. Small sample size
The focus on large firms meant we had to work with a small sample of firms. This raises three
broad issues. A first potential concern is whether the sample size is too small to identify
13

Treatment and control plants were never in the same firms. The 6 control plants were randomly selected first, and
then the 14 treatment firms randomly selected from the remaining 11 firms which did not have a control plant.
14
Each wave had a one-day kick-off meeting involving presentations from senior partners from the consulting firm.
This helped impress the firms with the expertise of the consulting firm and highlighted the potential for performance
improvements. Since this meeting involved a project outline, and we did not tell firms about the existence of
treatment and control groups, we could not mix the groups in the meetings.

10

significant impacts. A second is what type of statistical inference is appropriate given the sample
size. Third, the sample may be too small to be representative of large firms in developing
countries. We discuss each concern in turn and the steps we took to address them.
Significance of results: Even though we have only 20 experimental plants across 17
firms, we obtain statistically significant results. There are five reasons for this. First, these are
large plants with about 80 looms and about 130 employees each, so that idiosyncratic shocks –
like machine breakdowns or worker illness – tend to average out. Second, the data were collected
directly from the machine logs, so have very little (if any) measurement error. Third, the firms
are homogenous in terms of size, product, region and technology, so that time dummies control
for most external shocks. Fourth, we collected weekly data, which provides high-frequency
observations over the course of the treatment and the use of these repeated measures can
dramatically reduce the sample size needed to detect a given treatment effect (McKenzie,
2010b). Finally, the intervention was intensive, leading to large treatment effects – for example,
the point estimate for the reduction in quality defects was over 50%.
Statistical inference: A second concern is over using statistical tests which rely on
asymptotic arguments in the N dimension to justify the normal approximation. We use three
alternatives to address this concern. First, we use firm-clustered bootstrap standard errors
(Cameron et al, 2008). Second, we implement permutation procedures (for both the Intent to
Treat (ITT) and Instrumental Variables estimators) that have exact finite sample size and so do
not rely upon asymptotic approximations. Third, we exploit our large T sample to implement
procedures that rely upon asymptotic approximations along the time dimension (with a fixed N).
Permutation Tests: Permutation tests use the fact that order statistics are sufficient and
complete statistics to derive critical values for test procedures. We first implement this for the
null hypothesis of no treatment effect against the two sided alternative for the ITT parameter.
This calculates the ITT coefficient for every possible combination of 11 treatment firms out of
our 17 total firms (we run this at the firm level to allow for firm-level correlations in errors).
Once this is calculated for the 12,376 possible treatment assignments (17 choose 11), the 2.5%
and 97.5% confidence intervals are calculated as the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the treatment
impact. A treatment effect outside these bounds can be said to be significant at the 5% level.
Permutation tests for the IV estimator are more complex, involving implementing a procedure
based on Greevy et al. (2004) and Andrews and Marmer (2008) (see Appendix B).

11

T-asymptotic clustered standard errors: An alternative approach is to use asymptotic
estimators that exploit the large time dimension for each firm. To do this we use the recent
results by Ibramigov and Mueller (2009) to implement a t-statistic based estimator that is robust
to substantial heterogeneity across firms as well as to considerable autocorrelation across
observations within a firm. This approach requires estimating the parameter of interest separately
for each treatment firm and then treating the resultant set of 11 estimates as a draw from a t
distribution with 10 degrees of freedom (see Appendix B). Such a procedure is valid in the sense
of having correct size (for fixed N) so long as the time dimension is large enough that the
estimate for each firm can be treated as a draw from a normal distribution. In our application we
have on average over 100 observations for each firm, so this requirement is likely to be met.
Representativeness of the sample: A third concern with our small sample is how
representative it is of large firms in developing countries. In part this concern represents a
general issue for field experiments, which are often run on individuals, villages or firms in
particular regions or industries. In our situation we focus on one region and one industry, albeit
India’s commercial hub (Mumbai) and its largest industry (textiles). Comparing our sample to
the population of large (100 to 5000 employee) firms in India, both overall and in textiles,
suggests that our small sample is at least broadly representative in terms of management
practices (see Figure 1). In section V.D we also report results on a plant-by-plant basis to further
demonstrate the results are not driven by any particular plant outlier. While we have a small
sample, the results are relatively stable across the individual sample plants.
III.E. The potential conflict of interest in having the consulting firm measuring performance
A final design challenge was the potential for a conflict of interest in having our consulting firm
measuring the performance of the experimental firms. To address this about every other month
one of the research team visited the firms in India, meeting with the firms’ directors and
presenting in detail the quality, inventory and output data the consultants had sent us. This was
not only a useful way to initiate discussions on the impact of the experiment, but also important
for confirming the data we were receiving reflected reality. Moreover, when visiting the factories
we could visually confirm whether the interventions had led to the reorganization of the factory
floor, reduced inventory and improved quality control.

12

IV. THE IMPACT ON MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
In Figure 2 we plot the average management practice adoption of the 38 practices for the 14
treatment plants, the 6 control plants, and the 8 non-experimental plants. This data is shown at 2
month intervals before and after the diagnostic phase. Data from the diagnostic phase onwards
was compiled from direct observation at the factory. Data from before the diagnostic phase was
collected from detailed interviews of the plant management team based on any changes to
management practices during the prior year. Figure 2 shows five key results:
First, all plants started off with low baseline adoption rates of the set of 38 management
practices.15 Among the 28 individual plants the initial adoption rates varied from a low of 7.9%
to a high of 55.3%, so that even the best managed plant in the group had just over half of the key
textile-manufacturing practices in place. This is consistent with the results on poor general
management practices in Indian firms shown in Figure 1. For example, many of the plants did
not have any formalized system for recording or improving production quality, which meant that
the same quality defect could arise repeatedly. Most of the plants also had not organized their
yarn inventories, so that yarn stores were mixed by color and type, without labeling or
computerized entry. The production floor was often blocked by waste, tools and machinery,
impeding the flow of workers and materials around the factory.
Second, the intervention did succeed in changing management practices. The treatment
plants increased their use of the 38 practices over the period by 37.8 percentage points on
average (an increase from 25.6% to 63.4%).
Third, the treatment plants’ adoption of management practices occurred gradually. In
large part this reflects the time taken for the consulting firm to gain the confidence of the firms’
directors. Initially many directors were skeptical about the suggested management changes, and
they often started by piloting the easiest changes around quality and inventory in one part of the
factory. Once these started to generate improvements, these changes were rolled out and the
firms then began introducing the more complex improvements around operations and HR.
Fourth, the control plants, which were given only the 1 month diagnostic, increased their
adoption of these management practices, but by only 12% on average. This is substantially less
than the increase in adoption in the treatment firms, indicating that the four months of the
15

The pre-treatment difference between the treatment, control and other plant groups is not statistically significant,
with a p-value on the difference of 0.248 (see Table A1).

13

implementation phase were important in changing management practices. The control firms
typically did not adopt the more complex practices like daily quality meetings, formalizing the
yarn monitoring process or defining roles and responsibilities.
Fifth, the non-experimental plants in the treatment firms also saw a substantial increase in
the adoption of management practices. In these 5 plants the adoption rates increased by 17.5%.
This increase occurred because the owners of the treatment firms copied the new practices from
their experimental plants over to their other plants.

V. THE IMPACT OF MANAGEMENT ON PERFORMANCE
Previous work has shown a strong correlation between management practices and firm
performance in the cross-section, with a few papers (e.g. Ichniowski et al. 1998) also showing
this in the panel.16 Our unique panel data on management practices and plant level performance,
coupled with the experiment, enables us to examine the extent to which these relations are
causal. We begin with a panel fixed-effects specification:
OUTCOMEi,t = αi + βt + θMANAGEMENTi,t+νi,t

(2)

where OUTCOME will be one of the key performance metrics of quality, inventory and output.
The concern is that management practices are not exogenous to the outcomes that are being
assessed, even in changes. For example, a firm may start monitoring quality only when it starts
to experience a larger than usual number of defects, which would bias the fixed-effect estimate
towards finding a negative effect of better management on quality. Or firms may start monitoring
product quality as part of a major upgrade of workers and equipment, in which case we would
misattribute quality improvements from better capital and labor to better management.
To overcome this endogeneity problem, we instrument the management practice score
with log(1+weeks since the implementation phase began)17. We use this logarithmic form
because of the concave adoption path of management practices shown in Figure 2, with the
results robust to alternative functional form specifications such as linear or quadratic. The
exclusion restriction is that the intervention affected the outcome of interest only through its
impact on management practices, and not through any other channel. A justification for this
assumption is that the consulting firm focused entirely on the 38 management practices in their
16

Note that most papers using repeated surveys have found no significant panel linkage between management
practices and performance (Cappelli and Neumark (2001) and Black and Lynch (2004)).
17
Note that this is defined as zero for control plants and for treatment plants pre-implementation.

14

recommendations to firms, and firms did not buy new equipment or hire new labor as a result of
the intervention during the period of our study. The IV estimator will then allow us to answer the
headline question of this paper – does management matter?
If the impact of management practices on plant-level outcomes is the same for all plants,
then IV will consistently estimate the marginal effect of improvements in management practices,
telling us how much management matters for the average plant participating in the study.
However, if the effects of better management are heterogeneous, then the IV estimator will
consistently estimate a local average treatment effect (LATE). The LATE will then give the
average treatment effect for plants which do change their management practices when offered
free consulting. If plants which stand to gain more from improving management are the ones
who change their management practices most as a result of the consulting, then the LATE will
exceed the average marginal return to management. It will understate the average return to better
management if instead the plants that change management only when free consulting is provided
are those with the least to gain.
There was heterogeneity in the extent to which treatment plants changed their practices,
with the before-after change in the management practice score ranging from 26.3 to 60
percentage points. The feedback from the consulting firm was that to some extent it was firms
with the most unengaged, uncooperative managers who changed practices least, suggesting that
the LATE may underestimate the average impact of better management if these firms have the
largest potential gains from better management. Nonetheless, we believe the LATE to be a
parameter of policy interest, since if governments are to employ policies to try to improve
management, information on the returns to better management from those who actually change
management practices when help is offered is informative.
We can also directly estimate the impact of the consulting services which improved
management practices via the following equation:
OUTCOMEi,t = ai + bt + cTREATi,t + ei,t

(3)

where TREATi,t is a 1/0 variable for whether plants have started the implementation phase or
not. The parameter c then gives the ITT, which is the average impact of the intervention in the
treated plants compared to the control plants.

15

V.A Quality
Our measure of quality is the Quality Defects Index (QDI), a weighted average score of quality
defects, which is available for all but one of the plants. Higher scores imply more defects. Figure
3 provides a plot of the QDI score for the treatment and control plants relative to the start of the
treatment period. This is September 2008 for Wave 1 treatment, April 2009 for Wave 2 treatment
and control plants.18 This is normalized to 100 for both groups of plants using pre-treatment data.
To generate point-wise confidence intervals we block bootstrapped over firms.
It is clear the treatment plants started to reduce their QDI scores (i.e. improve quality)
significantly and rapidly from about week 5 onwards, which was the beginning of the
implementation phase following the initial 1 month diagnostic phase. The control firms also
showed a mild downward trend in their QDI scores from about week 30 onwards, consistent with
their slower take-up of these practices in the absence of a formal implementation phase.
Table 2 in columns (1) to (4) examines whether management practices improve quality
using regression analysis. In column (1) we present the fixed-effects OLS results which regresses
the weekly log(QDI) score on plant level management practices, plant fixed effects, and a set of
weekly time dummies. The standard errors are bootstrap clustered at the firm level to allow for
any correlation across different experimental plants within the same firm. The -0.561 coefficient
implies that increasing the adoption of management practices by 1 percentage point would be
associated with about a 0.6% reduction in defects, although this is not statistically significant.
In Table 2 column (2) we report the first stage from using the experimental intervention
to identify the causal impact of better management on quality. The coefficient on log cumulative
treatment is extremely significant, reflecting the fact that the intervention substantially increased
the adoption of management practices. In column (3) we report the second stage, finding a
significant point estimate of -2.028, suggesting that increasing the practice adoption rate by 1
percentage point would lead to a reduction in quality defects of about 2%. The large rise in the
point estimate from the OLS to the IV estimator suggests firms may be endogenously adopting
better management practices when their quality starts to deteriorate. There was anecdotal
evidence for the latter, in that the consulting firm reported plants with worsening quality were
often the most keen to implement the new management practices because of their concern over

18

Since the control plants have no treatment period we set their timing to zero to coincide with the 10 Wave 2
treatment plants. This maximizes the overlap of the data.

16

quality problems. This has some conceptual similarities with the broader empirical literature
showing that tough times – measured by higher competition – raises productivity (e.g. Syverson
2004a), presumably in part because firms respond by improving management.
The reason for this large effect is that measuring defects allows firms to address quality
problems rapidly. For example, a faulty loom that creates weaving errors would be picked up in
the daily QDI score and dealt with in the next day’s quality meeting. Without this, the problem
would often persist for several weeks, since the checking and mending team had no mechanism
(or incentive) for resolving defects. In the longer term the QDI also allows managers to identify
the largest sources of quality defects by type, design, yarn, loom and weaver, and start to address
these systematically. For example, designs with complex stitching that generate large numbers of
quality defects can be dropped from the sales catalogue. This ability to improve quality
dramatically through systematic data collection and evaluation is a key element of the successful
lean manufacturing system of production (see, for example, Womack, Jones and Roos, 1992).
Finally, in column (4) we look at the ITT, which is the average reduction in the defects
index after the intervention in the treatment plants versus the control plants. We see a 32% (=
exp(-.386)-1) fall in the QDI index, meaning the intervention cut quality defects by about a third.
At the foot of table 2 we also present our Ibramigov-Mueller (IM) and permutation
significance tests. First, looking at the IM tests that exploit asymptotics in T rather than N, we
find that the IV and ITT results are both significant at the 5% level (zero is outside the 95%
confidence intervals). For the standard permutation tests the ITT is again significant at the 5%
level (the p-value is 0.0168), as are the IV-permutation tests.
V.B Inventory
Figure 4 shows the plot of inventory levels over time for the treatment and control groups. It is
clear that after the intervention the inventory levels in the treatment group fall relative to the
control group, with this being point-wise significant by about 30 weeks after the intervention.
The reason for this effect is that these firms were carrying about 4 months of inventory on
average before the intervention, including a large amount of dead stock. Often, because of poor
records and storage practices, firms did not even know they had these stocks. By cataloguing the
yarn and sending the shade-cards to the design team to include in new products,19 selling dead

19

Shade cards comprise a few inches of sample yarn, plus information on its color, thickness and material. These are
sent to the design teams in Mumbai who use these to design new products using the surplus yarn.

17

yarn stock, introducing restocking norms for future purchases, and monitoring inventory on a
daily basis, the firms reduced their inventories. But this took time as the reduction in inventories
primarily arose from lowering stocking norms and using old yarn for new products.
Table 2 columns (5) to (7) shows the regression results for log of raw material (yarn)
inventory. The results are presented for the 18 plants for which we have yarn inventory data (two
plants do not maintain yarn stocks on site). In column (5) we present the fixed-effects result
which regresses the weekly yarn on the plant level management practices, plant fixed-effects,
and a set of weekly time dummies. The coefficient of -0.639 says that increasing management
practices adoption rates by 1 percentage point would be associated with a yarn inventory
reduction of about 0.6%. In Table 2, column (6), we see the impact of management instrumented
with the intervention displays a point estimate of -0.929, somewhat higher than the FE estimates
in column (1).20 Again, the IV estimator is higher than the OLS estimator, suggesting that the
adoption of better management practices may be endogenous (or at least downward biased by
measurement error). In column (7) we see the intervention causes an average reduction in yarn
inventory of (exp(-.179)-1=) 16.4%.
These numbers are substantial but not unprecedented. Japanese automotive firms
achieved much greater reductions in inventory levels (as well as quality improvements) from the
adoption of lean manufacturing technology. Many firms reduced inventory levels from several
months to a few hours by moving to just-in-time production (Womack, Jones and Roos, 1991).
Finally, as with the quality defects estimates, the IM confidence interval for the IV
estimator finds the coefficient significant at the 5% level. However, the IV permutation tests
cannot exclude zero. Looking at the ITT coefficient, we see that under IM the results are
significant at the 10% level, although again not significant using the standard permutation tests.
V.C Output
In Figure 5 we plot output over time for the treatment and control plants. Output is measured in
physical terms, as production picks21. The results here are less striking, although output of the
treatment plants has clearly risen on average relative to the control firms, and this difference is
point-wise statistically significant in some weeks towards the end of the period.

20
21

We do not report the IV first-stage as this is very similar to the first stage for quality shown in column (2).
A production pick is a single crossing of the shuttle, representing the weaving of one thread of weft yarn.

18

In columns (8) to (10) in table 2 we look at this in a regression setting with plant and time
dummies. In column (8) the OLS coefficient of 0.127 implies increasing the adoption of
management practices by 1 percentage point would be associated with about a 0.1% increase in
output. In column (9), we see the impact of management instrumented with the intervention
displays a higher significant point estimate of 0.346. As with quality and inventory the IV
estimator is again notably higher than the OLS estimator, again indicating an endogenous
adoption of better management when output falls. Finally, in column (10) we look at the ITT and
see a point estimate of 0.056, implying a 5.4% increase in output (exp(0.056)-1), although this
only significant at the 11% level.22 Looking at the small-sample standard errors we find the IM
and permutation tests are all significant at the 5% or 10% level.
There are several reasons for these increases in output. Undertaking routine maintenance
of the looms reduces breakdowns. Collecting and monitoring the breakdown data also helps
highlight looms, shifts, designs and yarn-types that are associated with more breakdowns. Visual
displays around the factory floor together with the incentive schemes motivate workers to
improve operating efficiency. Finally, keeping the factory floor clean and tidy reduces the
number of untoward incidents like tools falling into machines or factory fires. Again the
experience from lean manufacturing is that the collective impact of these procedures can lead to
extremely large improvements in operating efficiency, raising output levels.
V.D Results by plant
We can also examine the difference in quality, inventory and output after treatment on a plant by
plant basis. Figure 6 plots the histograms of the before-after changes in our performance
measures for the treatment and control plants. No outliers are driving these differences, with all
treatment plants improving their quality (top-left plot), nine of the treatment plants improving
their inventory (top-right plot) and all treatment plants improving their output (bottom left plot).
In comparison the control plants appear to be fairly randomly distributed around the zero impact
point. We can also test the statistical difference of these changes between the two groups, and

22

The IV is significant (and not the ITT) because the first stage of the IV uses log(cumulative treatment) rather than
the binary 1/0 treatment variable, with the former more correlated with the gradual improvement in performance.
Running the reduced-form for log(output) returns a coefficient (s.e.) of 0.028 (0.009) on log(cumulative treatment).

19

find the p-value on the difference in differences is 0.035 for quality, is 0.096 for inventory and
0.010 for output.23
V.E Are the improvements in performance due to Hawthorne effects?
Hawthorne effects are named after a series experiments carried out at the Hawthorne Works in
the 1920s and 1930s. The results apparently showed that just running experiments and collecting
data can improve performance, raising concerns that our results could be spurious.
However, we think this is unlikely, for a series of reasons. First, our control plants also had
the consultants on site over a similar period of time as the treatment firms. Both sets of plants got
the initial diagnostic period and the follow-up measurement period, with the only difference
being the treatment plants also got an intensive consulting during the intermediate 4 month
implementation stage while the control plants had briefer, but frequent, visits from the
consultants collecting data. The control plants were not told they were in the control group.
Hence, it cannot be simply the presence of the consultants or the measurement of performance
that generated the improvement in performance. Second, the improvements in performance took
time to arise and they arose in quality, inventory and efficiency, where the majority of the
management changes took place. Third, these improvements persisted for many months after the
implementation period, so are not some temporary phenomena due to increased attention.
Finally, the firms themselves also believed these improvements arose from better management
practices, which was the motivation for them extensively copying these practices out to their
other non-experimental plants (see Figure 2).

VI. THE IMPACT OF MANAGEMENT PRACTICES ON
ORGANIZATION AND COMPUTERIZATION
VI.A The impact of management practices on firm organization
Although our interventions were never intended to directly change the treatment firms’
organizational design, theory gave us some reason to believe that organizational changes might
follow as a result of better management practices due to changes in the information available to
decision makers. In recent years a large theoretical literature on the economics of organization
has developed dealing with the locus of decision-making within firms. However, this literature
23

Formally, we test this by regressing the 20 plant level differences on a 1/0 dummy variable for being a treatment
firm, and report the p-value on that dummy, clustering at the parent firm level.

20

does not lead to clear-cut predictions about the effects of increased availability of information to
managers. On the one hand, models of hierarchy as specialization in knowledge acquisition (like
Garicano, 2000) suggest that more decisions ought to be taken at lower levels if the amount of
information available to all levels is increased. Similarly, a standard agency perspective might
also suggest that more decisions would be delegated if new or more accurate performance
measures become available, especially if (as in our sample) the directors are under significant
time constraints. However, to the extent that the plant managers were initially better informed
than their bosses by virtue of being closer to the operations, the availability of the better
measures might have reduced their information advantage, favoring the directors’ making more
decisions. But while the theoretical literature is large, the empirical literature is very limited.
To measure decentralization we collected data on eight variables: the locus of decisionmaking for weaver hiring, manager hiring, spares purchases, maintenance planning, weaver
bonuses, investment, and departmental co-ordination, and the number of days per week the
owner spent at the factory. Because firms’ organizational designs change slowly over time, we
collected this data at lower frequencies – pre-intervention, in March 2010 and in August 2010.
For every decision except investment and days at the factory we scored decentralization on a 1 to
5 scale, where 1 was defined as no authority of the plant manager over the decision and 5 as full
authority (see Appendix Table A2 for the survey and Table A4 for descriptive statistics). These
questions and scoring were based on the survey methodology in Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen
(2009b), which measured decentralization across countries and found developing countries like
India, China and Brazil typically have very centralized decision-making within firms. The
measure of the decentralization for investment was in terms of “The largest expenditure (in
rupees) a plant manager (or other managers) could typically make without a Director’s
signature”, which had an average of 12,608 rupees (about $250). Finally, the number of days the
owners spend each week at the factory is a revealed preference measure of decentralization. The
owners are usually located either at their head-offices in Mumbai (which they prefer as it
dramatically reduces their commute) or at the factory (if it needs direct management from them).
To combine all eight decentralization measures into one index we took the first principal
component, which we called the decentralization index. We found changes in this index were
strongly and significantly correlated with changes in management across firms, as better
management led to more decentralization. Table 3 looks at this in a regression format:

21

DECENTRALIZATIONi,t = ai + bt +cMANAGEMENTi,t + ei,t

(3)

where DECENTRALIZATION is our index of plant decentralization, and ai and bt are plant
fixed effects and time dummies. In column (1) we run the OLS estimation and find a significant
and positive coefficient, indicating that firms which improved their management practices during
the experiment have also delegated more decisions to their plant managers. Given that the
decentralization index has a standard deviation of 1 the magnitude of this coefficient is large –
increasing the adoption of management practices by 37.8% (the mean change for the treatment
group) is associated with a 0.55 standard-deviation change increase in decentralization. So
typically this would mean the owner reduces his factory visits from daily to three times a week,
while also letting the plant manager make hiring decisions for weavers, award small weaver
bonuses, and plan the weekly maintenance schedule. In column (2) we run the IV estimation,
using the log(1+weeks since the implementation phase began) as the instrument, and again find a
positive and significant impact. Finally, in column (3) we report a positive ITT.
The consultants provided no advice on delegation and decentralization. It occurred in
large part because the better monitoring of the factory operations allowed owners to delegate
more decisions without fear of being exploited (the monitoring channel in the principal-agent
group of organizational theories). For example, with daily inventory, quality and output data it is
harder for the factory manager to steal inventory or output without detection by the owner.
VI.B The impact of management practices on computerization
A major topic over the last decade has been the relationship between IT and productivity. A
growing literature finds that the productivity impact of IT is substantially larger than its cost
share (e.g. Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2002). The literature argues this is because IT is
complementary with modern management and organizational practices, so that as firms invest in
IT they also improve their management practices. This leads to a positive bias on IT in
productivity estimates because management and organizational practices are typically an
unmeasured residual.24 But none of this literature has any experimental evidence.
So to investigate the potential complementarity between IT and management practices we
collected computerization data on nine aspects of the plants, covering the use of Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) systems, the number of computers, the age of the computers, the
number of computer users, the total hours of computer use, the connection of the plant to the
24

See, for example, Bartel, Ichniowski and Shaw (2007) and Bloom, Sadun and van Reenen (2009a).

22

internet, the use of e-mail by the plant manager and the director, the existence of a firm website
and the depth of computerization of production decisions (see Appendix Tables A3 for the
survey and Table A4 for descriptive statistics). As with the organizational changes we collected
this data once from before the intervention, in March 2010 and in August 2010. Even in table A4
it is readily apparent that as firms adopted more modern management practices they significantly
increased the computerization of their operations. Table 3 looks at this in a regression format:
COMPUTERIZATIONi,t = ai + bt +cMANAGEMENTi,t + ei,t

(4)

where COMPUTERIZATION is measured in terms of the number of computer users (in columns
(4) to (6)) or in terms of the overall computerization index (in columns (7) to (9)). In column (4)
we see that the full adoption of all management practices is associated with an increase of 16.76
hours of computer use a week, a rise of over 100% given the pre-sample mean was 13.66 hours
per week. In columns (5) and (6) we report the IV and ITT estimates, which show a similar
result. The exclusion restriction here is that the consulting intervention did not directly change
computerization, apart from its effect through the management practices. The consultants were
not told to discuss computerization apart from its use in implementing the management practices,
and in our own discussions with the owners we did not come across cases where they mentioned
the consultants discussing computerization for other reasons. In columns (7) to (9) we report
similar OLS, IV and ITT results for the computerization index, which is a broader measure of
computer use, and again see highly significant increases from the management intervention.
These finding also relate to another major IT literature that has argued that skill biased
technical change (SBTC) has been the major factor driving the increase in income inequality
observed in the US and most other countries since the 1970s (see for example Autor, Katz and
Kearney 2008). But SBTC is usually inferred as the residual in inequality regressions, with rather
limited direct evidence on specific skill-biased technologies. Our experimental changes in
management practices are skilled-biased, in that computer users in India are relatively skilled due
to the need for literacy and numeracy. As a result modern management practices are a skillbiased technology, driving both the use of computers and the demand for skilled workers.

VII. WHY DO BADLY MANAGED FIRMS EXIST?
Given the evidence in section (IV) the obvious question is whether these management changes
also increased profitability and productivity, and, if so, why they were not introduced before.

23

VII.A. The estimated impact of management practices on profits and productivity
Profits: Overall we estimate a total increase in profits of around $228,000, with our
calculations outlined in Table A5. We could not obtain accounting data on these firms’ profits
and losses. Public accounts data are available only with a lag of 2-3 years at the firm level (rather
than plant, which is what we would want), and in our interviews with firm owners they told us
they under-report profits to avoid tax and also move profits to years when they want a loan (to
have proof of income). When asked for their internal accounts the firms were evasive and would
not provide them, beyond occasional comments that profits were in the range of $0.5m to $1m
per year.25 So we estimated the changes from the quality, inventory and efficiency
improvements. Our methodology is simple: for example, if an improvement in practices is
estimated to reduce inventory stock by X tons of yarn, we map this into profits using
conservative estimates of the cost of carrying X tons of yarn. Or if it reduces the numbers of
hours required to mend defects we estimated this reduction in hours on the firm’s total wage bill.
These estimates are medium-run because, for example, it takes a few months for the firms to
reduce their mending manpower.
These estimates for increases in profits are potentially biased. There is a downward bias
because we take firms’ initial capital, labor and product range as given. But in the long run the
firms can re-optimize, for example, with more machines per weaver if quality improves (as
dealing with breakdowns is time consuming). Furthermore, many of the management practices
are complementary, so they are much more effective when introduced jointly (e.g. Milgrom and
Roberts, 1990). However, the intervention time-horizon was too short to change many of the
complementary human-resource practices. The estimates are upward biased if the firms backslide
on the management changes once the consultants leave.
To estimate the net increase in profit for these improvements in management practices we
also need to calculate the costs of implementing these changes (ignoring for now any costs of
consulting). These costs were small, averaging less than $3000 per firm.26 So given the $250,000
this consulting would have cost these firms, this implies about a 90% one-year rate of return.

25

It is not even clear if firms actually keep correct records of their profits given the risk these could find their way to
the tax authorities. For example, any employee that discovered these could use these to blackmail the firm.
26
About $35 of extra labor to help organize the stock rooms and factory floor, $200 on plastic display boards, $200
for extra yarn racking, $1000 on rewards, and $1000 for extra computer equipment (this is bought second hand).

24

Productivity: We estimate a total increase in productivity of 11.1%, detailed in Table A5.
Our methodology is again very simple, assuming a constant-returns-to-scale Cobb-Douglas
production function Y=ALαK1-α where Y is value-added (output − materials and energy costs), L
is hours of work and K is the net capital stock. Using this we can back out changes in
productivity after estimating changes in output and inputs. So, for example, reducing the yarn
inventory by 16.4% lowers capital by 1.3% (yarn is 8% of the capital stock), increasing
productivity by 0.6% (capital has a factor share of 0.42). Our estimated productivity impact will
also be subject to a number of the biases discussed above for profitability.
VII.B. Why are firms badly managed?
Given the evidence in section (VII.A) on the large increase in profitability from the introduction
of these modern management practices, the obvious question is: Why had firms not already
adopted them? To investigate this we asked our consultants to document every other month the
reason for the non-adoption of any of the 38 practices in each plant. To do this consistently we
developed a flow-chart (Appendix Exhibit 7) which runs through a series of questions to
understand the root cause for the non-adoption of each practice. The consultants collected this
data from discussions with owners, managers, and workers, plus their own observations.
As an example of how this flow chart works, imagine a plant that does not record quality
defects. The consultant would first ask if there was some external constraint, like labor
regulations, preventing this, which we found never to be the case.27 They would then ask if the
plant was aware of this practice, which in the example of recording quality typically was the
case. The consultants would then check if the plant could adopt the practice with the current staff
and equipment, which again for quality recording systems was always true. Then they would ask
if the owner believed it would be profitable to record quality defects, which was often the
constraint on adopting this practice. The owner frequently argued that quality was so good they
did not need to record quality defects. This view was mistaken, however, because, while these
plants’ quality might have been good compared to other low-quality Indian textile plants, it was
very poor by international standards. So, as shown in Figure 3, when they did adopt basic quality
control practices they substantially improved their production quality. So, in this case the reason

27

This does not mean labor regulations do not matter for some practices – for example firing underperforming
employees – but they did not directly impinge adopt the immediate adoption of the 38 practices.

25

for non-adoption would be “incorrect information” as the owner appeared to have incorrect
information on the cost-benefit calculation.
The overall results for non-adoption of management practices are tabulated in Table 4,
for the treatment plants, control plants and the non-experimental plants. This is tabulated at twomonth intervals starting the month before the intervention. The rows report the different reasons
for non-adoption as a percentage of all practices. From the table several results are apparent.
First, a major initial barrier to the adoption of these practices was a lack of information about
their existence. About 15% of practices were not adopted because the firms were simply not
aware of them. These practices tended to be the more advanced practices of regular quality,
efficiency and inventory review meetings, posting standard-operating procedures and visual aids
around the factory. Many of these are derived from the Japanese-inspired lean manufacturing
revolution and are now standard across Europe, Japan and the US.28
Second, another major initial barrier was incorrect information, in that firms had heard of
the practices but thought they did not apply profitably to them. For example, many of the firms
were aware of preventive maintenance but few of them thought it was worth doing. They
preferred to keep their machines in operation until they broke down, and then repair them. This
accounted for slightly over 45% of the initial non-adoption of practices.
Third, as the intervention progressed the lack of information constraint was rapidly
overcome. However, the incorrect information constraints were harder to address. This was
because the owners had prior beliefs about the efficacy of a practice and it took time to change
these. This was often done using pilot changes on a few machines in the plant or with evidence
from other plants in the experiment. For example, the consultants typically started by persuading
the managers to undertake preventive maintenance on a set of trial machines, and once it was
proven successful it was rolled out to the rest of the factory. And as the consultants demonstrated
the positive impact of these initial practice changes, the owners increasingly trusted them and
would adopt more of the recommendations, like performance incentives for managers.29
Fourth, once the informational constraints were addressed, other constraints arose. For
example, even if the owners became convinced of the need to adopt a practice, they would often
28

This ignorance of best practices seems to be common in many developing contexts, for example in pineapple
farming in Ghana (Conley and Udry, 2010).
29
These sticky priors highlight one reason why management practices appear to change slowly. The anecdotal
evidence from private equity and consulting is that firms typically need between 18 months to 3 years to execute a
turn around.

26

take several months to adopt it. A major reason is that the owners were severely time
constrained, working an average of 68 hours per week already. There was also evidence of
procrastination in that some owners would defer on taking quick decisions. This matches up with
the evidence on procrastination in other contexts, for example African farmers investing in
fertilizer (Duflo, Kremer and Robinson, 2009).
Finally, somewhat surprisingly, we did not find evidence for the direct impact of capital
constraints, which are a significant obstacle to the expansion of micro-enterprises (e.g. De Mel et
al., 2008). Our evidence suggested that these large firms were not cash-constrained, at least for
tangible investments. We collected data on all the investments for our 17 firms over the period
August 2008 until August 2010 and found the firms invested a mean (median) of $880,000
($140,000). For example, several of the firms were adding machines or opening new factories,
apparently often financed by bank loans. Certainly, this scale of investment suggests that
investment on the scale of $2000 (the first-year costs of these management changes, ignoring the
consultants’ fees) is unlikely to be directly impeded by financial constraints.
Of course financial constraints could impede hiring international consultants. The market
cost of our free consulting would be at least $250,000, and as an intangible investment it would
be difficult to collateralize. Hence, while financial constraints do not appear to directly block the
implantation of better management practices, they may hinder firms’ ability to improve their
management using external consultants. On the other hand, our estimates of the return on hiring
consultants to improve management practices suggest profitability in just over one year.
VII.C. How do badly managed firms survive?
We have shown that management matters, with improvements in management practices
improving plant-level outcomes. One response from economists might then be to argue that poor
management can at most be a short-run problem, since in the long run better managed firms
should take over the market. Yet many of our firms have been in business for 20 years and more.
One reason why better run firms do not dominate the market is constraints on growth
derived from limited managerial span of control. In every firm in our sample only members of
the owning family have positions with major decision-making power over finance, purchasing,
operations or employment. Non-family members are given only lower-level managerial positions
with authority only over basic day-to-day activities. The principal reason is that family members

27

do not trust non-family members. For example, they are concerned if they let their plant
managers procure yarn they may do so at inflated rates from friends and receive kick-backs.
A key reason for this inability to decentralize is the poor rule of law in India. Even if
directors found managers stealing, their ability to successfully prosecute them and recover the
assets is minimal because of the inefficiency of Indian civil courts. A compounding reason for
the inability to decentralize in Indian firms is bad management practices, as this means the
owners cannot keep good track of materials and finance, so may not even able to identify
mismanagement or theft within their firms.30
As a result of this inability to delegate, firms can expand beyond the size that can be
managed by a single director only if other family members are available to share directorial
duties. Thus, an important predictor of firm size was the number of male family members of the
owners. In particular, the number of brothers and sons of the leading director has a correlation of
0.689 with the total employment of the firm, compared to a correlation between employment and
the average management score of 0.223. In fact the best managed firm in our sample had only
one (large) production plant, in large part because the owner had no brothers or sons to help run
a larger organization. This matches the ideas of the Lucas (1978) span of control model, that
there are diminishing returns to how much additional productivity better management technology
can generate from a single manager. In the Lucas model, the limits to firm growth restrict the
ability of highly productive firms to drive lower productivity ones from the market. In our Indian
firms, this span of control restriction is definitely binding, so unproductive firms are able to
survive because more productive firms cannot expand.
Entry of new firms into the industry also appears limited by the difficulty of separating
ownership from control. The supply of new firms is constrained by the number of families with
finance and male family members available to build and run textile plants. Since other industries
in India – like software, construction and real estate – are growing rapidly the attractiveness of
new investment in textile manufacturing is relatively limited (even our firms were often taking
cash from their textile businesses to invest in other businesses).
30

Another compounding factor is none of these firms had a formalized development or training plan for their
managers, and managers could not be promoted because only family members could become directors. As a result
managers lacked career motivation within the firm and were often poorly equipped to take on extra responsibilities.
In contrast, Indian software and finance firms that have grown management beyond the founding families place a
huge emphasis on development and training. (see also Banerjee and Duflo (2000)).

28

Finally, a 50% tariff on fabric imports insulates Indian textile firms against Chinese
competition. Hence, the equilibrium appears to be that, with Indian wage rates being extremely
low, firms can survive with poor management practices. Because spans of control are
constrained, productive firms are limited from expanding, and so do not drive out badly run
firms. And because entry is limited new firms do not enter rapidly. The situation approximates a
Melitz (2003) style model where firms have very high decreasing returns to scale, entry rates are
low, and initial productivity draws are low (because good management practices are not
widespread). The resultant equilibrium has a low average level of productivity, a low wage level,
a low average firm-size, and a large dispersion of firm-level productivities.
VII.D. Why do firms not use more management consulting?
Finally, why do these firms not hire consultants themselves, given the large gains from better
management? A primary reason is that these firms are not aware they are badly managed, as
illustrated in Table 4. Of course consulting firms could still approach firms for business, pointing
out that their practices were bad and offering to fix them. But Indian firms, much like US firms,
are bombarded with solicitations from businesses offering to save them money on everything
from telephone bills to raw materials, and so are unlikely to be receptive. Of course consulting
firms could go further and offer to provide free advice in return for an ex post profit-sharing deal.
But monitoring this would be extremely hard, given the firms’ desire to conceal profits from the
tax authorities. Moreover, the client firm in such an arrangement might worry that the consultant
would twist its efforts to increase short-term profits at the expense of long-term profits.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS
Management does matter. We implemented a randomized experiment that provided managerial
consulting services to textile plants in India. This experiment led to improvements in basic
management practices, with plants adopting lean manufacturing techniques that have been
standard for decades in the developed world. These improvements in management practices led
to improvements in product quality, reductions in inventory and increased efficiency, raising
profitability and productivity. Firms also delegated more decisions because the improved
informational flow from adopting modern management practices enabled the owners to reduce
their oversight of plant operations. At the same time computer use increased, driven by the need
to collect, process and disseminate data as required by modern management practices.

29

What are the implications of this for public policy? Certainly we do not want to advocate
free consulting, given its extremely high cost. But our results do suggest that, first, knowledge
transference from multinationals would be very helpful. Indeed, many of the consultants working
for the international consulting firm hired by our project had worked for multinationals in India,
learning from their manufacturing management processes. Yet a variety of legal, institutional,
and infrastructure barriers have limited multinational expansion within India. Abolishing tariffs
could also help, as Indian firms would be driven to improve management practices to survive
against lower cost imports from countries like China. Second, our results also suggest that a
weak legal environment has limited the scope for well-managed firms to grow. Improving the
legal environment should encourage productivity-enhancing reallocation, helping to drive out
badly managed firms. Finally, our results suggest that firms were not implementing best
practices on their own because of lack of information and knowledge. This suggests that training
programs for basic operations management, like inventory and quality control, could be helpful.

30

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Andrews, Donald W.K and Vadim Marmer,(2008) “Exactly Distribution-free Inference in Instrumental
Variables Regression with Possibly Weak Instruments,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(1), 183-200
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Mellissa Kearney (2008), “Trends in US wage Inequality: Revising the
Revisionists,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (2), 300-323.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo (2000) “Reputation Effects and the Limits of Contracting: a Study of
the Indian Software Industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3), 989-1017.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo (2005) “Growth Through the Lens of Development Economics”, in
Philippe Aghion and Stephen Durlauf (eds), Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 1, Amsterdam.
Bartel, Ann, Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn Shaw, 2007. ”How Does Information Technology Really
Affect Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement and
Worker Skills,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1721-1758.
Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar (2003) “Managing with Style: The Effects of Managers on
Corporate Policy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1169-1208.
Black, Sandra and Lisa Lynch. 2004. ‘What's Driving the New Economy? The Benefits of Workplace
Innovation,” Economic Journal, 114(493), 97-116.
Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2009a) “Americans do IT Better: American
Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle,” forthcoming American Economic Review.
Bloom, Nicholas, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen (2009b) “The organization of firms across
countries,” NBER Working Paper No. 15129.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen (2007) “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices across
Firms and Countries”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1341-1408.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen (2010) “Human Resource Management and Productivity,” draft
chapter for the, Handbook of Labor Economics.
Bresnahan, Timothy, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin Hitt (2002) “Information Technology, Workplace
Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-level Evidence,” QJE, 117(1), 339-376.
Bruhn, Miriam, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar (2010), “The impact of offering consulting services
to small and medium enterprises: evidence from a randomized trial in Mexico,” mimeo.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach and Douglas Miller (2008) “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
Inference with Clustered Errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3), 414-27.
Cappelli, P and D. Neumark (2001), “Do ‘High Performance” Work Practices Improve EstablishmentLevel Outcomes?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54(4), 737-775.
Clark, Greg (1987), “Why isn’t the Whole World Developed?” Journal of Economic History, 141-173.
Conley, Tim and Christopher Udry, (2010), “Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in Ghana,”
American Economic Review, 100(1), 35-69.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2008), “Returns to Capital in
Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” QJE, 113(4), 1329-1372.
Delery, John and Harold Doty (1996), “Modes of Theorizing in Strategic Human Resource Management:
Test of Universalistic, Contingency and Configurational Performance Predictions”, Academy of
Management Review, 39(4), 802-835.
Drexler, Alejandro, Greg Fischer and Antoinette Schoar (2010), “Financial literacy training and rule of
thumbs: evidence from a field experiment,” mimeo.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer and Jonathan Robinson (2009), “Nudging farmers to use fertilizer: theory
and experimental evidence from Kenya,” Harvard mimeo.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and Chad Syverson (2008) “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review, 98(1), 394-425
Garicano, Luis (2000) “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production”, Journal of
Political Economy, 108(5), 874-904.
Garicano, Luis and Van Zandt, Timothy (2010), “Hierarchy,” in Robert Gibbons and John Roberts,
editors, Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton University Press.

31

Gibbons, Robert and John Roberts (2010), The Handbook of the Organizational Economics, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Greevy, Robert, Jeffrey H. Silber, Avital Cnaan and Paul R. Rosenbaum (2004), “Randomization
Inference with Imperfect Compliance in the ACE-inhibitor,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association. 99(465), 7-15.
Hsieh, Chiang-Tai and Pete Klenow (2009), “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403-1448.
Hsieh, Chiang-Tai and Pete Klenow (2010), “Development accounting,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 2(1), 207-223.
Huselid, Mark and Brian Becker (1996), ”Methodological Issues in Cross-sectional and Panel Estimates
of the Human Resource-firm Performance link,” Industrial Relations, 35(3), 400-422.
Ibragimov, R. and U.K. Muller (2009), “t-statistic Based Correlation and Heterogeneity Robust
Inference,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics.
Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw and Giovanna Prenushi. (1997), “The Effects of Human Resource
Management: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines”, American Economic Review, 87(3), 291-313.
Karlan, Dean and Martin Valdivia (2010) “Teaching Entrepreneurship: Impact of Business Training On
Microfinance Clients and Institutions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Lazear, Edward, and Paul Oyer (2009), “Personnel Economics,” in Robert Gibbons and John Roberts,
eds. Handbook of Organizational Economics.
Lucas, Robert (1978), “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics, 508-23.
MacDuffie, John Paul (1995), “Human Resource Bundles and Management Performance: Organizational
Logic and Flexible Production Systems,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 48(2), 197-221.
McKenzie, David (2010a), “Impact Assessments in Finance and Private Sector Development: What have
we learned and what should we learn?” World Bank Research Observer, 25(2), 209-33.
McKenzie, David (2010b) “Beyond Baseline and Follow-up: The Case for More T in Experiments,”
Mimeo, World Bank.
McKinsey Global Institute (2001), India: The Growth Imperative.
Melitz, Marc (2003), “The impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Intra-industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.
Milgrom, Paul and JohnRoberts (1990), “The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology,
Strategy and Organization,” American Economic Review, 80 (3), 511-528.
Mookherjee, Dilip (2010), ”Incentives and Hierarchy,” in Robert Gibbons and John Roberts, editors,
Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton University Press, forthcoming.

Mundlak, Yair (1961), ”Empirical Production Function Free of Management Bias,” Journal of
Farm Economics, 43(1), 44–56.
Osterman, Paul (1994), ”How Common Is Workplace Transformation and Who Adopts It?” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 47(2), 173-188.
Pack, Howard (1987), Productivity, Technology, and Industrial Development: A Case Study in Textiles,
World Bank Publications.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Julie Wulf (2006) “The Flattening Firm: Evidence from Panel Data on the
Changing Nature of Corporate Hierarchies,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4), 759-773.
Syverson, Chad (2004), “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example”, Journal of Political
Economy, 112(6), 1181-1222.
Syverson, Chad (2010), ‘’What determines productivity at the micro level?”, draft manuscript for the
Journal of Economic Literature.
Taylor, F. (1911), Principles of Scientific Management, Harper and Brothers, New York and London.
Walker, Francis (1887), “The source of business profits”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1(3), 265-288.
Womack, James, Daniel Jones and Daniel Roos (1991), The Machine that Changed the World, Harper
Collins: New York.
Woodward J. (1958), Management and Technology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

32

Table 1: The field experiment sample
Sample sizes:
Number of plants
Number of experimental plants
Number of firms
Plants per firm
Firm/plant sizes:
Employees per firm
Employees, experimental plants
Hierarchical levels
Annual sales $m per firm
Current assets $m per firm
Daily mtrs, experimental plants
Management and plant ages:
BVR Management score
Management adoption rates
Age, experimental plant (years)
Performance measures
Operating efficiency (%)
Raw materials inventory (kg)
Quality (% A-grade fabric)

Mean

All
Median Min

Max

Treatment Control Diff
Mean
Mean
p-value

28
20
17
1.65

n/a
n/a
n/a
2

n/a
n/a
n/a
1

n/a
n/a
n/a
4

19
14
11
1.73

9
6
6
1.5

n/a
n/a
n/a
0.393

273
134
4.4
7.45
12.8
5560

250
132
4
6
7.9
5130

70
60
3
1.4
2.85
2260

500
250
7
15.6
44.2
13000

291
144
4.4
7.06
13.3
5,757

236
114
4.4
8.37
12.0
5,091

0.454
0.161
0.935
0.598
0.837
0.602

2.60
0.262
19.4

2.61
0.257
16.5

1.89 3.28
0.079 0.553
2
46

2.50
0.255
20.5

2.75
0.288
16.8

0.203
0.575
0.662

71.99
60,002
41.76

0.758
0.957
0.629

70.77 72.8
59,497 61,198
40.12 34.03

26.2 90.4
70.2
6,721 149,513 59,222
9.88 87.11
39.04

Notes: Data provided at the plant and/or firm level depending on availability. Number of plants is the total
number of textile plants per firm including the non-experimental plants. Number of experimental plants is the
total number of treatment and control plants. Number of firms is the number of treatment and control firms.
Plants per firm reports the total number of other textiles plants per firm. Several of these firms have other
businesses – for example retail units and real-estate arms – which are not included in any of the figures here.
Employees per firm reports the number of employees across all the textile production plants, the corporate
headquarters and sales office. Employees per experiment plant reports the number of employees in the
experiment plants. Hierarchical levels displays the number of reporting levels in the experimental plants – for
example a firm with workers reporting to foreman, foreman to operations manager, operations manager to the
general manager and general manager to the managing director would have 4 hierarchical levels. BVR
Management score is the Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) management score for the experiment plants.
Management adoption rates are the adoption rates of the management practices listed in Table A1 in the
experimental plants. Annual sales ($m) and Current assets ($m) are both in 2009 US $million values,
exchanged at 50 rupees = 1 US Dollar. Daily mtrs, experimental plants reports the daily meters of fabric
woven in the experiment plants. Note that about 3.5 meters is required for a full suit with jacket and trousers, so
the mean plant produces enough for about 1600 suits daily. Age of experimental plant (years) reports the age
of the plant for the experimental plants. Raw materials inventory is the stock of yarn per intervention.
Operating efficiency is the percentage of the time the machines are producing fabric. Quality (% A-grade
fabric) is the percentage of fabric each plant defines as A-grade, which is the top quality grade.

33

Table 2: The impact of modern management practices on plant performance
Dependent Variable
Specification

Managementi,t

Adoption of management practices

Quality
defects
OLS
(1)
-0.561
(0.440)

Cumulative treatmenti,t

Management
IV
1st stage
(2)

Quality
defects
IV
2nd stage

Quality
defects
ITT

Inventory

Inventory

Inventory

Output

Output

Output

OLS

IV
2nd stage

ITT

OLS

IV
2nd stage

ITT

(3)
-2.028**
(1.013)

(4)

(5)
-0.639***
(0.242)

(6)
-0.929**
(0.386)

(7)

(8)
0.127
(0.099)

(9)
0.346**
(0.147)

(10)

0.088***
(0.018)

Week since start of intervention

-0.386**
(0.162)

Interventioni,t

Intervention stage initiated

Instrument

-0.179**
(0.089)

Cumulative
treatment

0.056
(0.034)

Cumulative
treatment

Cumulative
treatment

Small sample robustness
Ibragimov-Mueller (95% CI)
(90%CI)
Permutation Test I (p-value)
IV Permutation Tests (95% CI)
(90% CI)

(-4.46,-0.53)
(-4.09,-0.90)

(-5.03,-0.98)
(-4.65,-1.36)
(-6.05,-.06)
(-6.00,-0.23)

(-0.69,-0.38)
(-0.66,-0.41)
0.02

(-0.81,-0.09)
(-0.75,-0.16)

(-0.84,-0.02)
(-0.77,-0.10)
(-2.64,0.66)
(-2.04,0.52)

(-0.17,0.02)
(-0.15,0.00)
0.14

(0.22,0.86)
(0.28,0.80)

(-.08,2.25)
(0.13,2.03)

(0.05,0.26)
(0.07,0.24)
0.10

(0.07,0.62)
(0.12,0.54)

Time FEs
113
113
113
113
113
113
113
114
114
114
Plant FEs
20
20
20
20
18
18
18
20
20
20
Observations
1732
1732
1732
1732
1977
1977
1977
2312
2312
2312
Notes: All regressions use a full set of plant and calendar week dummies. Standard errors bootstrap clustered at the firm level. Quality defects is a log of the
quality defects index (QDI), which is a weighted average score of quality defects, so higher numbers imply worse quality products (more quality defects).
Inventory is the log of the tons of yarn inventory in the plant. Output is the log of the weaving production picks. Management is the adoption share of the 38
management practices listed in table A1. Intervention is a plant level indicator taking a value of 1 after the implementation phase has started at a treatment plant
and zero otherwise. Cumulative treatment is the log of one plus the cumulative count of the weeks of since beginning the implementation phase in each plant,
and zero otherwise. OLS reports results with plant estimations. IV reports the results where the management variable has been instrumented with log(1+ weeks
since start of implementation phase). First stage results are only shown for quality as the first stage results for inventory and output are very similar. ITT reports
the intention to treat results from regressing the dependent variable directly on the 1/0 intervention indicator. Time FEs report the number of calendar week time
fixed effects. Plant FEs reports the number of plant-level fixed effects. Two plants do not have any inventory on site, so no inventory data is available. Small
sample robustness implements three different procedures (described in greater detail in Appendix B) to address issues of plant heterogeneity, within plant (and
firm) correlation, and small sample concerns, where 95% CI and 90% CI report 95% and 90% confidence intervals. Ibragimov-Mueller estimates parameters
firm-by-firm and then treats the estimates as a draw from independent (but not identically distributed) normal distributions. Permutation Test I reports the pvalues for testing the null hypothesis that the treatment has no effect for the ITT parameter by constructing a permutation distribution of the ITT estimate using
1000 possible permutations (out of 12376) of treatment assignment. IV-Permutation tests implements a permutation test for the IV parameter using 1000
possible permutations (out of 12376) of treatment assignment. These tests have exact finite sample size.

34

Table 3: The impact of modern management practices on organization and computerization
Dep. variable:
Specification
Managementi,t

Adoption of management practices

OLS
(1)
1.695***
(0.420)

Decentralization Index
IV
ITT
(2)
(7)
1.837***
(0.535)

Interventioni,t

0.360**
(0.164)

Intervention stage initiated

Instrument

Hours of computer use
OLS
IV
ITT
(4)
(5)
(6)
16.761***
23.272**
(3.457)
(6.708)

Cumulative
treatment

Computerization index
OLS
IV
ITT
(7)
(8)
(9)
1.154***
1.497**
(0.338)
(0.555)

6.168**
(2.163)
Cumulative
treatment

0.403**
(0.148)
Cumulative
treatment

Small sample robustness
0.06
0.02
0.08
(-0.74,2.37)
(-18.99,62.89)
(-1.19,3.89)
(-.34,2.16)
(-9.88,45.07)
(-0.48,2.98)
Time Fes
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Plant Fes
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
28
Observations
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
84
Notes: All regressions use three observations per firm (pre intervention, March 2010 and August 2010), and a full set of plant dummies and time dummies.
Standard errors bootstrap clustered at the firm level. Management is the adoption of the 38 management practices listed in table A1. Decentralization index is
the principal component factor of 7 measures of decentralization around weaver hiring, manager hiring, spares purchases, maintenance planning, weaver
bonuses, investment, and departmental co-ordination. This has a standard deviation of 1 and a mean of 0. Hours of computer use is the hours of computer use.
This has a (pre-intervention) mean and standard deviation of 13.66 and 12.20. Computerization index is the principal component factor of 10 measures around
computerization, which are the use of an ERP system, the number of computers in the plant, the number of computers less than 2 years old, the number of
employees using computers for at least 10 minutes per day, and the cumulative number of hours of computer use per week, an internet connection at the plant, if
the plant-manager uses e-mail, if the directors use of e-mail, and the intensity of computerization in production. The other computerization columns show the
results for the individual components of this index that changed over time (the omitted components did not change). This has a standard deviation of 1 and a
mean of 0. Cumulative treatment is the log of one plus the cumulative count of the weeks since the start of the implementation phase in each plant (treatment
plants only), and value zero before. OLS reports results with plant estimations. IV reports the results where the management variable has been instrumented with
log(1+ cumulative intervention weeks). ITT reports the intention to treat results from regressing the dependent variable directly on the 1/0 intervention indicator.
Time FEs reports the number of time fixed effects. Plant FEs reports the number of plant-level fixed effects. SD of dep. var. reports the standard deviation of
the dependent variable. The Small sample robustness implements three different procedures (described in greater detail in Appendix B) to address issues of
plant heterogeneity, within plant (and firm) correlation, and small sample concerns.
Permutation Test I (p-value)
IV Permutation Tests (95% CI)
(90% CI)

35

Table 4: Reasons for bad management, as a percentage (%) of all practices, before and after treatment
Non-adoption reason
Firm group
1
1
3
5
7
9
month month months months months months
before
after
after
after
after
after
Treatment
18.5
13.5
2.0
0.6
0
0
Lack of information
Control
12.9
9.6
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.0
(plants not aware of the practice)
Non-experimental
9.3
6.8
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.8
Treatment
44.4
36.6
33.6
31.3
31.1
30.2
Incorrect information
Control
46.7
45.3
44.2
43.1
42.2
42.2
(plants incorrect on cost-benefit calculation)
Non-experimental
41.2
42.0
38.6
35.6
34.6
33.6
Treatment
10.3
7.5
7.2
7.5
7.7
6.8
Owner lack of time, low ability or procrastination
Control
11.6
10.2
9.3
9.8
8.4
8.4
(the owner is the reason for non-adoption)
Non-experimental
23.5
22.0
27.0
31.5
26.3
26.6
Treatment
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Not profitable
Control
0
0
0
0
0
0
(the consultants agree non-adoption is correct)
Non-experimental
0
0
0
0
0
0
Treatment
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Other
Control
0
0
0
0
0.9
0.9
(variety of other reasons for non-adoption)
Non-experimental
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Total
(sum of all individual reasons)

Treatment
Control
Non-experimental

74.4
71.2
73.4

58.2
65.1
71.0

45.5
61.6
70.7

40.1
60.9
69.8

39.9
60.6
65.4

38.1
60.6
64.7

Notes: Show the percentages (%) of practices not adopted by reason for non-adoption, in the treatment plants, control plants and non-experimental plants.
Timing is relative to the start of the treatment phase (the end of the diagnostic phase for the control group and the start of the treatment phase for the other plant
in their firm for the non-experimental plants). Covers 532 practices in treatment plants (38 practices in 14 plants), 228 practices in the control plants (38 practices
in 6 plants) and 304 practices in the non-experimental plants (38 practices in 8 plants). Non adoption was monitored every other month using the tool shown in
Exhibit 7, based on discussions with the firms’ directors, managers, workers, plus regular consulting work in the factories.

36

.
6

.
8

Figure 1: Management practice scores across countries

1
1

2

3
3

4

5
5

Indian Manufacturing, mean=2.69

0
0

.
2

.
4

D
e
n
s
i
t
y

.
6

0
.
8 0

.
2

.
4

US Manufacturing, mean=3.33

2

3
3

5
5

4
t

.
6
.
4

Brazil and China Manufacturing, mean=2.67

1
1

2

3
3

5
5

4

.
6
.
4

Indian Textiles, mean=2.60

0

.
2

D
e
n
s
i
t
y

.
8

1

0
0

.
2

D
e
n
s
i
t
y

.
8

Density of Firms

1 1

1

2

3

4

5

1

Experimental Firms, mean=2.60

0
0

.
5

D
e
n
s
i
t
y

1
.
5

t

1
1

3

5
5

t

Management score
Notes: Management practice histograms using Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) methodology. Double-blind surveys used to
evaluate firms’ monitoring, targets and operations. Scores from 1 (worst practice) to 5 (best practice). Samples are 695 US firms,
620 Indian firms, 1083 Brazilian and Chinese firms, 232 Indian textile firms and 17 experimental firms.

.6
.5

Treatment plants (♦)

.4

Control plants (+)

.3

Non-experimental plants
in treatment firms (●)

Non-experimental plants
in control firms (■)

.2

Share of key textile management practices adopted

Figure 2: The adoption of key textile management practices over time

-10

-8

-6

-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Months after the diagnostic phase

8

10

12

Notes: Average adoption rates of the 38 key textile manufacturing management practices listed in Table 2. Shown separately for
the 14 treatment plants (diamond symbol), 6 control plants (plus symbol), the 5 non-experimental plants in the treatment firms
which the consultants did not provide any direct consulting assistance to (round symbol) and the 3 non-experimental plants in the
control firms (square symbol). Scores range from 0 (if none of the group of plants have adopted any of the 38 management
practices) to 1 (if all of the group of plants have adopted all of the 38 management practices). Initial differences across all the
groups are not statistically significant.

Figure 3: Quality defects index for the treatment and control plants
End of
Implementation

120

140

Start of
Implementation

100

97.5th percentile

Average (♦ symbol)

80

Control plants

60

2.5th percentile
97.5th percentile

40

Average (+ symbol)
Treatment plants
2.5th percentile

0

20

Quality defects index (higher score=lower quality)

Start of
Diagnostic

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

Weeks after the start of the diagnostic
Notes: Displays the average weekly quality defects index, which is a weighted index of quality defects, so a higher score means
lower quality. This is plotted for the 14 treatment plants (+ symbols) and the 6 control plants (♦ symbols). Values normalized so
both series have an average of 100 prior to the start of the intervention. To obtain confidence intervals we bootstrapped the firms
with replacement 250 times.

Figure 4: Yarn inventory for the treatment and control plants
Start of
Implementation

End of
Implementation

120

97.5th percentile

Average (♦ symbol)

100

Control plants
97.5th percentile
2.5th percentile
Average (+ symbol)

80

Treatment plants

2.5th percentile

60

Yarn inventory (normalized to 100 prior to diagnostic)

Start of
Diagnostic

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

Weeks after the start of the intervention
Notes: Displays the weekly average yarn inventory plotted for 12 treatment plants (+ symbols) and the 6 control plants (♦
symbols). Values normalized so both series have an average of 100 prior to the start of the intervention. To obtain confidence
intervals we bootstrapped the firms with replacement 250 times. 2 treatment plants maintain no on-site yarn inventory.

Figure 5: Output for the treatment and control plants
End of
Implementation

Start of
Implementation

130

Start of
Diagnostic

Output (normalized to 100 prior to diagnostic)

120

97.5th percentile
Treatment plants

110

Average (+ symbol)

100

2.5th percentile
97.5th percentile

90

Average (♦ symbol)

80

Control plants

70

2.5th percentile

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

Weeks after the start of the intervention
Notes: Displays the weekly average output for the 14 treatment plants (+ symbols) and the 6 control plants (♦ symbols). Values
normalized so both series have an average of 100 prior to the start of the intervention. To obtain confidence intervals we
bootstrapped the firms with replacement 250 times.

Figure 6: Plant level changes in performance
Treatment

Control

Density

5

10

15

8
6
4
0

0

2

Density

Treatment

20

Control

-1

-.5

0

.5

1

-1

-.5

0

.5

1

10

Density
5
0

0

.2

.4

.6

0

.2

Before/after difference in log (Output)

.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

Notes: Displays the histogram of plant by plant changes
in log (Quality Defects Index), log (Inventory) and log
(Output) between the post and pre treatment periods.

Treatment

15

Control

-.4

Before/after difference in log (Inventory)

Before/after difference in log (Quality Defects Index)

.6

APPENDIX A: DATA
Our estimates for profits and productivity impacts are laid out in Table A5, with the methodology
outlined below. We calculate the numbers for the median firm.
A. Estimations of profitability and productivity impacts.
We first generate the estimated impacts on quality, inventory and efficiency. To do this we take the
Intention to Treat (ITT) numbers from Table 2, which shows a reduction of quality defects of 32%
(exp(-0.386)-1), a reduction in inventory of 16.4% (exp(-0.179)-1) and an increase in output of 5.4%
(exp(0.056)-1).
Mending wage bill:
Estimated by recording the total mending hours, which is 71,700 per year on average, times the
mending wage bill which is 36 rupees (about $0.72) per hour. Since mending is undertaken on a piecewise basis – so defects are repaired individually – a reduction in the severity weighted defects should
lead to a proportionate reduction in required mending hours.
Fabric revenue loss from non grade-A fabric:
Waste fabric estimated at 5% in the baseline, arising from cutting out defect areas and destroying
and/or selling at a discount fabric with unfixable defects. Assume an increase in quality leads to a
proportionate reduction in waste fabric, and calculate for the median firm with sales of $6m per year.
Inventory carrying costs:
Total carrying costs of 22% calculated as interest charges of 15% (average prime lending rate of 12%
over 2008-2010 plus 3% as firm-size lending premium – see for example
http://www.sme.icicibank.com/Business_WCF.aspx?pid), 3% storage costs (rent, electricity,
manpower and insurance) and 4% costs for physical depreciation and obsolescence (yarn rots over
time and fashions change).
Increased profits from higher output
Increasing output is assumed to lead to an equi-proportionate increase in sales because these firms are
small in their output markets, but would also increase variable costs of energy and raw-materials since
the machines would be running. The average ratio of (energy + raw materials costs)/sales is 63%, so
the profit margin on increased efficiency is 37%.
Labor and capital factor shares:
Labor factor share of 0.58 calculated as total labor costs over total value added using the “wearing
apparel” industry in the most recent (2004-05) year of the Indian Annual Survey of industry. Capital
factor share defined as 1-labor factor share, based on an assumed constant returns to scale production
function and perfectly competitive output markets.

37

APPENDIX B: ECONOMETRICS
We briefly outline in this section the various econometric procedures we implemented to verify the
robustness of our results. We first outline the Ibragimov-Mueller procedure and then briefly discuss
the two permutation tests and refer the reader to the original papers for a more detailed discussion.
The proposed procedure by Ibragimov-Mueller (2009) (IM) is useful for our case where the number of
entities (firms) is small but the number of observations per entity is large. Their approach can be
summarized as follows: Implement the estimation method (OLS, IV, ITT) on each treatment firm
separately and obtain 11 firm-specific estimates. Note that we cannot do this for the control firms
since there is no within-firm variation for the right hand side for the control firms. Therefore the
results from this procedure are essentially based on before-after comparisons for the treatment firms,
after using the control firms to remove time period effects.
The procedure requires that the coefficient estimates from each entity are asymptotically independent
and Gaussian (but can have different variances). In our case this would be justified by an asymptotics
in T argument (recall we have about 110 observations per plant). In particular, we can be agnostic
about the exact structure of correlations between observations within a firm as long as the parameter
estimators satisfy a central limit theorem. Subject to this requirement, the extent of correlation across
observations within an entity is unrestricted. In addition, different correlation structures across firms
are permissible since the procedure allows for different variances for each firm level parameter. This
“asymptotic heterogeneity” considerably relaxes the usual assumptions made in standard panel data
contexts (such as those underlying the cluster covariance matrices in our main tables). Finally, IM
show that the limiting standard Gaussian distribution assumption (for each firm) can be relaxed to
accommodate heterogeneous scale mixtures of standard normal distributions as well.
We next summarize the ideas underlying the permutation based tests. We first describe the
permutation test for the ITT parameter. We base the test on the Wei-Lachin statistic as described in
Greevy et al (2004). The reason for using this statistic is that the permutation test for the IV parameter
is a generalization of this procedure and so it is natural to consider this procedure in the first step.
Consider the vector of outcomes
for plant i (we examine each outcome separately). Define
the binary random assignment variable for firm i. Define the random variable

This variable takes on the values 0, 1 and -1. It is equal to zero if plant is a control or plant is a
treatment plant and any of the outcome variables for either plant is missing. It is equal to +1 if plant i
is a treatment plant, plant j is a control and the outcome for i is larger than the outcome for j. It is
equal to -1 if plant i is a treatment plant, plant j is a control and the outcome for i is smaller than the
outcome for j. The Wei-Lachin statistic can be written as

Under the null hypothesis of no treatment effect, the treatment outcomes should not be systematically
larger than the control outcomes. Specifically, under the null hypothesis and conditional upon the
order statistics, each possible candidate value of T has an equal probability of occurring. We use this
insight to construct a critical value for the test. Consider one of the
combinations of the firm
treatment assignment variable Z. For each such permutation, compute T. Form the empirical
distribution of T by considering all possible permutations and record the appropriate quantile for the
distribution of T thus generated (in the one-sided alternative case this would be the 1 quantile).
Finally, reject the null hypothesis of no treatment effect if the original statistic T exceeds this quantile.

38

Greevy et al (2004), show that this test has exact size  for any sample size n. Therefore, the
conclusions of this test do not rely upon any asymptotic theory. Instead, the results lean heavily on the
idea of exchangeability – the property that changing the ordering of a sequence of random variables
does not affect their joint distribution. For our application, this notion seems reasonable. Note that
exchangeability is weaker than the i.i.d. assumption so for instance outcomes across firms can even be
correlated (as long as they are equi-correlated).
Consider next the randomization inference based test for the IV case. We first consider the crosssection. Define the counterfactual model for outcomes
and let
denote potential
treatment status when treatment assignment is .
Define observed treatment status as
. In our case, the treatment status is the fraction of the 38 practices that the
firm has implemented. The maintained assumption is that the potential outcomes are independent of
the instrument Z or equivalently
is independent of Z and the error term has mean 0. We
observe a random sample on
and wish to test the null hypothesis
against the
two-sided alternative. Note that under the null hypothesis,
is independent of
Z and we use this fact to construct a test along the lines of the previous test. Consider the analogue of
the first equation

Where we have replaced the response
by the response subtracted by
. Note that
is
consistently estimable under the null, so without loss of generality we can treat it as known. For our
data, we modify this approach to allow for a panel and covariates (time and plant dummies). This
parallels the proposal in Andrews and Marmer (2008) and we can define
and we form the statistic as

Where

For each candidate value of , we form
and carry out the permutation test (as described in the
ITT case above and noting that we do not use pre-treatment outcomes). We collect the set of values for
which we could not reject the null hypothesis (against the two-sided alternative at =.05) to construct
an exact confidence set for . Although the confidence set constructed in this manner need not be a
single interval, in all our estimations, the confidence sets were single intervals.

39

Table A1: The textile management practices adoption rates
Area

Specific practice

Pre-intervention level
Post-intervention change
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Preventive maintenance is carried out for the machines
0.429
0.667
0.286
0
Preventive maintenance is carried out per manufacturer's recommendations
0.071
0
0.071
0.167
The shop floor is marked clearly for where each machine should be
0.071
0.333
0.214
0.167
The shop floor is clear of waste and obstacles
0
0.167
0.214
0.167
Machine downtime is recorded
0.571
0.667
0.357
0
Machine downtime reasons are monitored daily
0.429
0.167
0.5
0.5
Factory
Machine downtime analyzed at least fortnightly & action plans implemented to try to reduce this
0
0.167
0.714
0
Operations Daily meetings take place that discuss efficiency with the production team
0
0.167
0.786
0.5
Written procedures for warping, drawing, weaving & beam gaiting are displayed
0.071
0.167
0.5
0
Visual aids display daily efficiency loomwise and weaverwise
0.214
0.167
0.643
0.167
These visual aids are updated on a daily basis
0.143
0
0.643
0.167
Spares stored in a systematic basis (labeling and demarked locations)
0.143
0
0.143
0.167
Spares purchases and consumption are recorded and monitored
0.571
0667
0.071
0.167
Scientific methods are used to define inventory norms for spares
0
0
0.071
0
Quality defects are recorded
0.929
1
0.071
0
Quality defects are recorded defect wise
0.286
0.167
0.643
0.833
Quality defects are monitored on a daily basis
0.286
0.167
0.714
0.333
Quality
There is an analysis and action plan based on defects data
0
0
0.714
0.167
Control
There is a fabric gradation system
0.571
0.667
0.357
0
The gradation system is well defined
0.500
0.5
0.429
0
Daily meetings take place that discuss defects and gradation
0.071
0.167
0.786
0.167
Standard operating procedures are displayed for quality supervisors & checkers
0
0
0.714
0
Yarn transactions (receipt, issues, returns) are recorded daily
0.929
1
0.071
0
The closing stock is monitored at least weekly
0.214
0.167
0.571
0.5
Scientific methods are used to define inventory norms for yarn
0
0
0.083
0
Inventory
There is a process for monitoring the aging of yarn stock
0.231
0
0.538
0
Control
There is a system for using and disposing of old stock
0
0
0.615
0.6
There is location wise entry maintained for yarn storage
0.357
0
0.357
0
Loom
Advance loom planning is undertaken
0.429
0.833
0.214
0
There is a regular meeting between sales and operational management
0.429
0.500
0.143
0
Planning
There is a reward system for non-managerial staff based on performance
0.571
0.667
0.071
0
There is a reward system for managerial staff based on performance
0.214
0.167
0.286
0
Human
There is a reward system for non-managerial staff based on attendance
0.214
0.333
0.357
0
Resources
Top performers among factory staff are publicly identified each month
0.071
0
0.357
0
Roles & responsibilities are displayed for managers and supervisors
0
0
0.643
0
Customers are segmented for order prioritization
0
0
0
0.167
Sales and
Orderwise production planning is undertaken
0.692
1
0.231
0
Orders
Historical efficiency data is analyzed for business decisions regarding designs
0
0
0.071
0
All
Average of all practices
0.256
0.288
0.378
0.120
p-value for the difference between the average of all practices
0.510
0.000
Notes: Reports the 38 individual management practices measured before, during and after the management intervention. The columns Pre Intervention level of Adoption report the preintervention share of plants adopting this practice for the 14 treatment and 6 control plants. The columns Post Intervention increase in Adoption report the changes in adoption rates
between the pre-intervention period and 4 months after the end of the diagnostic phase (so right after the end of the implementation phase for the treatment plants) for the treatment and
control plants. The p-value for the difference between the average of all practices reports the significance of the difference in the average level of adoption and the increase in adoption
between the treatment and control groups.

40

Table A2: The decentralization survey:
For all questions except D7 any score can be given, but the scoring guide is only provided for scores of 1, 3 and 5.
Question D1: “What authority does the plant manager(or other managers) have to hire a WEAVER (e.g. a worker supplied by a contractor)?”
Score 1
Score 3
Score 5
Scoring grid:
No authority – even for replacement hires
Requires sign-off from the Director based on the business case.
Complete authority – it is my decision
Typically agreed (i.e. about 80% or 90% of the time).
entirely
Question D2: “What authority does the plant manager(or other managers) have to hire a junior Manager (e.g. somebody hired by the firm)?”
Score 1
Score 3
Score 5
Scoring grid:
No authority – even for replacement hires
Requires sign-off from the Director based on the business case.
Complete authority – it is my decision
Typically agreed (i.e. about 80% or 90% of the time).
entirely
Question D3: “What authority does the plant manager (or other managers) have to purchase spare parts?”?
Probe until you can accurately score the question. Also take an average score for sales and marketing if they are taken at different levels.
Score 1
Score 3
Scoring grid:
No authority
Requires sign-off from the Director based on the business case.
Typically agreed (i.e. about 80% or 90% of the time).

Score 5
Complete authority – it is my decision
entirely

Question D4: “What authority does the plant manager (or other managers) have to plan maintenance schedules?”
Score 1
Score 3
Scoring grid:
No authority
Requires sign-off from the Director based on the business case.
Typically agreed (i.e. about 80% or 90% of the time).

Score 5
Complete authority – it is my decision
entirely

Question D5: “What authority does the plant manager (or other managers) have to award small (<10% of salary) bonuses to workers?”
Score 1
Score 3
Scoring grid:
No authority
Requires sign-off from the Director based on the business case.
Typically agreed (i.e. about 80% or 90% of the time).

Score 5
Complete authority – it is my decision
entirely

Question D6: “What is the largest expenditure (in rupees) a plant manager (or other managers) could typically make without your signature?”
Question D7: “What is the extent of follow-up required to be done by the directors?”
Score 1
Score 3
Scoring grid:
Directors are the primary point of contact for
Frequent follow ups on about half of the decisions made by
information exchange between managers
managers

Score 5
Minimal follow-ups on decisions taken
between managers. Only dispute
resolution.

Question D8: “How many days a week did the director spend away from the factory last month?”

41

Table A3: The computerization survey:
Question C1: “Does the plant have an Electronic resource planning system?”
Question C2: “How many computers does the plant have?”
Question C3: “How many of these computers are less than 2 years old”
Question C4: “How many people in the factory typically use computers for at least 10 minutes day?”
Question C5: “How many cumulative hours per week are computers used in the plant”?
Question C6: “Does the plant have an internet connection”
Question C7: “Does the plant manager use e-mail (for work purposes)?”
Question C8: “Does the plant manager use e-mail (for work purposes)?”
Question C9: “What is the extent of computer use in operational performance management?” (and score from 1 to 5 is possible, but scores given for 1,3, and 5)
Score 1
Score 3
Score 5
Scoring grid:
Computers not used in
Around 50% of operational performance metrics
All main operational performance metrics (efficiency,
operational performance
(efficiency, inventory, quality and output) are tracked
inventory, quality and output) are tracked & analyzed
management
& analyzed through computer/ERP generated reports.
through computer/ERP generated reports.

Table A4: Descriptive statistics for the Decentralization and Computerization survey
Decentralization questions
D1 (weaver hiring)
D2 (manager hiring)
D3 (spares purchases)
D4 (maintenance planning)
D5 (worker bonus pay)
D6 (investment limit, rupees)
D7 (director coordination)
D8 (days director not at the factory per week)
Decentralization index
Computerization questions
C1 (ERP)
C2 (number computers)
C3 (number new computers)
C4 (computer users)
C5 (computer hours)
C6 (internet connection)
C7 (plant manager e-mail)
C8 (directors e-mail)
C9 (production computerization)
Computerization index

Mean
pre-level

Min prelevel

Max
pre-level

SD
pre-level

Mean
change

Correlation of change
with treatment status

4.68
1.93
2.61
4.50
2.25
10357
2.78
2.69
0

3
1
1
1
1
1000
2
0
-1.33

5
4
4
5
4
35000
4
4.75
1.52

0.72
1.05
0.79
1
1.14
10434
0.69
1.30
1

0
0.36
0.18
0.04
0.29
714
0.36
0.39
0.44

n/a
0.198
0.121
0.133
0.375
0.169
0.358
0.282
0.355

0.74
2.68
0.43
3
10
0.64
0.29
0.82
2.71
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
-1.58

1
8
8
10
48
1
1
1
5
3.15

0.44
1.98
1.55
2.21
12.20
0.49
0.46
0.39
0.98
1

0
0.36
0.29
0.11
5.34
0.036
0.04
0
0.89
0.458

n/a
0.377
0.189
0.308
0.439
0.133
-0.280
n/a
0.367
0.440

Notes: There are about 50 rupees to the dollar. The mean change measures the different between pre the experiment and August 2010. The decentralization index and the
computerization index are normalized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of unity on the pre-experiment sample.

42

Table A5: Estimated median impact of improved quality, inventory and efficiency
Change
Impact
Estimation approach
Estimated
impact
Profits (annual in $)
Improvement in
Reduction in
Reduction in defects (32%) times median $13,000
quality
repair
mending manpower wage bill ($41,000).
manpower

Reduction in
inventory

Reduction in
waste fabric

Reduction in defects (32%) times the
average yearly waste fabric (5%) times
median average sales ($6m).

$96,000

Reduction in
inventory
carrying costs

Reduction in inventory (16.4%) times
carrying cost of inventory (22%) times
median inventory ($230,000)

$8,000

Increased sales
Increased
efficiency
Total
Productivity (%)
Improvement in
Reduction in
quality
repair
manpower

Increase in output (5.4%) times margin
$121,000
on sales (37% ) times median sales ($6m)
$238,000
Reduction in defects (32%) times share
of repair manpower in total manpower
(18.7%) times labor share (0.58) in
output in textiles (from the 2003-04
Indian Annual Survey of Industries.)

3.5%

Reduction in
waste fabric

Reduction in defects (31.9%) times the
average yearly waste fabric (5%)

1.6%

Reduction in
inventory

Reduction in
capital stock

Reduction in inventory (16.4%) times
inventory share in capital (8%) times
capital factor share in output in textiles
(0.42)

0.6%

Increased
efficiency
Total

Increased
output

Increase in output (5.4%) without any
change in labor or capital

5.4%
11.1%

Notes: Estimated impact of the improvements in the management intervention on firms’ profitability and
productivity through quality, inventory and efficiency using the estimates in Table 2. Figure calculated for the
median firm. See Appendix A for details of calculations for inventory carrying costs, fabric waste, repair
manpower and factor shares.

43

Exhibit 1: Plants are large compounds, often containing several buildings.

Plant entrance with gates and a guard post

Plant surrounded by grounds

Front entrance to the main building

Plant buildings with gates and guard post

Exhibit 2: These factories operate 24 hours a day for 7 days a week
producing fabric from yarn, with 4 main stages of production

(1) Winding the yarn thread onto the warp beam

(2) Drawing the warp beam ready for weaving

(3) Weaving the fabric on the weaving loom

(4) Quality checking and repair

Exhibit 3: Many parts of these factories were dirty and unsafe

Garbage outside the factory

Garbage inside a factory

Flammable garbage in a factory

Chemicals without any covering

Exhibit 4: The factory floors were frequently disorganized
Instrument
not
removed
after use,
blocking
hallway.

Dirty and
poorly
maintained
machines

Old warp
beam, chairs
and a desk
obstructing the
factory floor

Tools left on
the floor
after use

Exhibit 5: Most plants had months of excess yarn, usually spread across
multiple locations, often without any rigorous storage system

Yarn without
labeling, order or
damp protection

Different types
and colors of
yarn lying mixed

Yarn piled up so high and
deep that access to back
sacks is almost impossible

Crushed yarn cones (which
need to be rewound on a
new cone) from poor storage

Exhibit 6: The parts stores were often disorganized and dirty

Spares without any labeling or
order

No protection to prevent damage and rust

Spares without any labeling or order

Shelves overfilled and disorganized

Exhibit 7: Non adoption flow chart used by consultants to collect data
Legend

Is the reason for the non adoption
of the practice internal to the firm?

No

External factors (legal, climate etc)

Hypothesis
Yes
Conclusion
Was the firm previously aware
that the practice existed?

Yes

Lack of information

No

Owner lack of time, low
ability or procrastination

Can the firm adopt the practice with
existing staff & equipment?

Could the firm hire new
employees or consultants
to adopt the practice?

Lack of local skills

Did the owner believe introducing
the practice would be profitable?

Would this adoption be
profitable

Not profit maximizing

Could the CEO get his employees to
introduce the practice?

Do you think the CEO was correct
about the cost‐benefit tradeoff?

Does the firm have enough internal
financing or access to credit?

Did the firm
realize this
would be
profitable?

Other reasons

Credit constraints

Incorrect information

Notes: The consultants used the flow chart to evaluate why each particular practice from the list of 38 in Table 2 had not been
adopted in each firm, on a bi-monthly basis. Non adoption was monitored every other month based on discussions
13with the firms’
directors, managers, workers, plus regular consulting work in the factories.

