NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VENTURE CAPITAL AND OTHER PRIVATE EQUITY:
A SURVEY
Andrew Metrick
Ayako Yasuda
Working Paper 16652
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16652

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Andrew Metrick and Ayako Yasuda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Venture Capital and Other Private Equity: A Survey
Andrew Metrick and Ayako Yasuda
NBER Working Paper No. 16652
December 2010
JEL No. G24
ABSTRACT
We review the theory and evidence on venture capital (VC) and other private equity: why professional
private equity exists, what private equity managers do with their portfolio companies, what returns
they earn, who earns more and why, what determines the design of contracts signed between (i) private
equity managers and their portfolio companies and (ii) private equity managers and their investors
(limited partners), and how/whether these contractual designs affect outcomes. Findings highlight
the importance of private ownership, and information asymmetry and illiquidity associated with it,
as a key explanatory factor of what makes private equity different from other asset classes.

Andrew Metrick
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
metrick@yale.edu
Ayako Yasuda
Graduate School of Management
UC Davis
3206 Gallagher Hall
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616-8609
asyasuda@ucdavis.edu

1

Introduction
Worldwide, private equity funds manage about $2.5 trillion [(TheCityUK 2010), p.2].

While buyouts (BO) generally account for one half to two thirds of private equity investments by
value, venture capital (VC) accounts for the majority of investments by number of deals. The
industry underwent an extraordinary growth in the last 15 years, increasing from $100 billion in
1994 [(Fenn and Liang 1998), p.2]. A main driver of this change was institutional investors’
portfolio allocation to private equity, which increased from 3% (2%) on average in 1997 to 12%
(6%) in 2007 for large foundations (endowments).1 Private equity funds’ roles in the economy
and their managerial compensation drew scrutiny among policymakers in the aftermath of the
2007-8 financial crisis, and there is an ongoing debate about increasing taxation on private equity
managers’ profit participation (= “carried interest”), and on the industry’s impact on innovation,
competition, and employment. The industry has rapidly globalized in recent years, with China
receiving the third highest investment after U.S. and U.K. in 2008-2009, followed by France and
India.2 Reflecting their increasingly important roles as financial intermediaries and as activist
investors, the literature studying venture capital and other private equity (e.g., buyouts) funds has
grown significantly in the last decade.
In this paper we review the literature on the following topics: why professional private
equity exists; what private equity managers do with their portfolio companies; what returns they
earn, who earns more and why; what determines the design of contracts signed between (i) them
and portfolio companies and (ii) them and their investors (limited partners); and how/whether
these contractual designs affect outcomes.
To the best of our knowledge this is the only survey paper that treats both the venture
capital (VC) and the buyout (BO) segments as subsets of a broader, private equity industry. By
doing so, we highlight similarities among them – what makes them both “private equity” – in

1
2

Cambridge Associates estimates.
(TheCityUK 2010), p.1, Table 1.

2

contrast to the public equity markets. Key defining characteristic is the illiquidity of the capital
and the information asymmetry between insiders and outsiders of the firms. Often times, the
focus in the literature is on “leveraged” in the “leveraged buyouts” – even though an LBO is just
one of many deal structures that private equity investors employ to deploy their fund capital. We
instead focus on what distinguishes both the venture capital and buyout funds from other
investment management vehicles, such as hedge funds and mutual funds, and discuss the theory
and evidence on this “private equity” industry both as financial intermediaries and as an asset
class.3
The paper proceeds as follows. We begin in Section 2 by defining private equity and then
discussing theories that motivate the existence and economic rationale for venture capital and
buyout specialists, respectively. Both VCs and BO investors are financial intermediaries that
raise funds from institutional investors and invest in private, illiquid companies. They are both
activist investors that exercise significant control rights over their portfolio companies, and aim to
maximize financial returns on behalf of their investors. Theories explaining the rationale for VC
emphasize the information asymmetry between entrepreneurs and investors and contrast VCs’
superior information production ability vis-à-vis banks. Theories explaining the rationale for BO
instead assume that BO targets are public firms and either highlight the improved managerial
incentives of LBO firms (as compared with those given to public company CEOs) or are
concerned more broadly with the question of why firms go private. Neither strand of theories
explains why private firms become targets of BO funds.
Section 3 reviews the broad literature that documents the economic (value-added)
activities of VC and BO investors. The literature identifies three groups of economic activities

3

For survey papers focusing on venture capital, see, for example, (Fenn and Liang 1998), (Gompers and Lerner 2001),
and (Denis 2004), and more recently, (Kaplan and Lerner 2010) and (Krishnan and Masulis forthcoming); for survey
papers focusing on buyouts, see, among others, (Cumming et al. 2007) and (Kaplan and Stromberg 2009). For a
broader survey on financial intermediation that includes private equity, see (Chemmanur forthcoming). Also see
(Lerner forthcoming).

3

for both VC and BO, namely: (1) pre-investment screening activities; (2) monitoring / governance
activities during the holding period; and (3) influencing and orchestrating exiting activities.
In Section 4 we focus on the performance of the private equity funds. We begin by
discussing the levels of risk-adjusted returns. We then review the evidence on performance
persistence, and various sources of both the level of excess performance and its persistence. The
extant evidence on excess performance (and its persistence) in private equity is mixed; we
provide several reasons as to why this is and suggest futures areas for research.
In Section 5, we discuss the strand of literature that examines features of contracts signed
between private equity fund managers and their investors, as well as contracts signed between
private equity fund managers and their portfolio companies. Both VC and BO funds are
organized as closed-end, finite-life limited partnerships, with fund managers serving as general
partners (GPs) and investors as limited partners (LPs). Partnership agreements set management
fees, carried interest, and (in case of BO funds) terms of transaction fees and monitoring fees. The
agreements also restrict activities of the fund managers through various covenants. The literature
on VC contracts has focused on the use of convertible securities, staged financing, syndication,
voting rights, and board rights. In contrast to the extensive literature on the VC contracts, the
theoretical literature on the BO contracts is almost nonexistent. Evidence from existing empirical
analyses suggest that agency problems between GPs and LPs of BO funds may be exacerbated
when cheap debt is available and allows GPs to collect large fees from portfolio companies
upfront in the form of transaction fees.
Finally, in Section 6 we conclude with a summary of what we know and what still needs to
be learned.

2
2.1

Why Do Venture Capital and Private Equity Markets Exist?
What is Private Equity?

We provide a definition of private equity funds by listing the following main characteristics:

4

1. A PE fund is a financial intermediary, meaning that it takes the investors’ capital and invests
it directly in portfolio companies.
2. A PE fund invests only in private companies. This means that once the investments are made,
the companies cannot be immediately traded on a public exchange.
3. A PE fund takes an active role in monitoring and helping the companies in its portfolio.
4. A PE fund’s primary goal is to maximize its financial return by exiting investments through a
sale or an initial public offering (IPO).
Characteristic (1) defines PE funds as financial intermediaries and differentiates it from angel
investors and private investment companies that use their own capital. Typically these funds are
organized as limited partnerships, with the venture capitalists or the buyout firm partners acting
as the general partners (GPs) of the fund and the investors — often pension funds, endowments
and other institutional investors — acting as the limited partners (LPs). Potential agency conflicts
between GPs and LPs are addressed by contractual provisions in the limited partnership
agreements, and have been examined in the literature, as discussed below.
Characteristic (2) is the most obvious defining feature of private equity and distinguishes
it from both the traditional investment assets of stocks and bonds as well as the other alternative
asset of hedge funds. Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between various asset classes within
private equity and also between private equity and other asset classes. Within private equity,
there are four main subclasses, of which VC and BO are the largest and most important two.
Overlapping circles in Figure 1 indicates where the scopes of neighboring groups overlap: for
example, the mezzanine category comprises both growth equity (that overlaps with later-stage
venture capital) and the subordinate debt layer of buyout transactions (which is often attached to
some equity ownership) and thus overlaps with both venture capital and buyouts. Distressed
investing, on the other hand, can be thought of as a specialized segment of buyouts that target
mature and distressed companies.

5

In all four cases, portfolio companies of private equity funds are private companies for
which little public information exists. Thus, information asymmetry is thought to be far greater
in private equity compared with investments in public companies that must file regular reports
with the SEC and also are often covered by Wall Street analysts. As a result, portfolio values of
private equity funds are not marked to market and fund returns are not finalized until the end of
the funds’ lifetime. In contrast, while some hedge funds participate in private equity transactions
(especially larger companies that buyouts and distressed investors invest in), they are primarily
investors in publicly traded assets such as stocks and bonds and their portfolios are marked to
market.
Characteristic (3) is central to the raison d’être of private equity — and potentially a key
determinant of a given PE fund’s performance. While all “active” investment fund managers —
mutual funds, hedge funds, and private equity funds — select their stocks and are evaluated on
their ability to pick winners, not all of them actively influence actions of the management of the
companies they invest in. Except for large blockholders who gain seats on the boards of public
companies, public company investors’ ability to influence the management is severely limited. In
contrast, private equity investors often condition their investments on contractual provisions, such
as board seats, veto rights, and various contingent control rights, that enable them to influence the
actions of the management while they hold their investments. In Section 3, we provide an
extensive review of the literature’s findings on these monitoring / value-adding activities
performed by PE fund managers.
Finally, since PE funds are financial intermediaries, they need some mechanism to give
money back to their investors, which gives rise to Characteristic (4). Exits can occur through an
IPO, with a subsequent sale of the PE stake in the open market, through a sale of the company to
another investor (especially to another BO fund), or through the sale of the company to a larger
company. The requirement to exit and the focus on financial return differentiates PE from

6

strategic investments done by large corporations. While corporations are active both in VC and
BO markets, their investment criteria are different from professional PE because of the lack of
need for exits and greater emphasis on synergy with their existing operations.
To summarize, PE funds differ from both mutual funds and hedge funds in that they
invest in illiquid, private companies, and differ from corporations in that they are required to
return money to investors within a finite investment horizon and thus need to focus on targets
with a clear path to exits. These functional differences are reflected in the ways PE funds are
organized, in contrast to hedge funds and mutual funds, and as described in Table 1. PE funds
have a finite life — typically 10 years — and a fixed fund size that is determined at the time of
the fund inception. Both hedge funds and mutual funds are open-ended and do not have a finite
fund lifetime. Within the fund lifetime, investors in PE funds must commit to illiquidity of up to
10 years, unlike hedge funds and mutual funds, both of which allow redemptions on demand,
subject to some waiting period.
Because of the illiquidity and the long-term nature of PE investments, reinvestments are
not permitted or restricted to a modest fraction of the fund size; in contrast, hedge fund and
mutual fund investors are offered options to automatically reinvest any dividends and
distributions from funds on an on-going basis. PE fees are often highest first and decline in later
years, because successful managers are expected to raise follow-on funds with new fee streams;
hedge fund and mutual fund fees are flat percentages of assets under management, so that total
fees would rise over time as assets grow. And finally, despite the common perception, hedge
fund and PE fund carried interest are earned quite differently. In hedge funds, carry is a fixed
percentage (usually 20%) of the market value of the portfolio in excess of cost basis, and can be
earned each year as long as the former exceeds the latter, subject to high watermarks. In contrast,
carried interest in PE is earned only on realized basis — i.e., only if investments are exited and
cumulative exit values exceed the contractually specified threshold amount. Since exits typically

7

are concentrated in the latter half of the funds’ life, PE managers often wait for many years before
they earn any carry from their funds.
2.2

The Economic Rationale for Professional Venture Capitalists

Several theoretical papers offer economic rationale for existence of VC funds as defined above.
(Chan 1983) shows that, in a market setting with imperfect information and positive search costs,
uninformed investors and informed entrepreneurs in equilibrium are unable to overcome the
lemons problem and investors earn lower returns by investing in alternative projects. Venture
capitalists as financial intermediaries may evolve as informed screening agents that improve the
allocation of resources and welfare of the investors. (Campello and Da Matta 2010) provide an
equilibrium analysis of prospective LPs’ demand for GPs’ service, quality of GPs’ screening
activities, and payoffs GPs derive from running VC funds.
Venture capital funds are not the only financial intermediaries that bridge between
investors and small businesses; banks also provide the intermediary function for small businesses.
(Ueda 2004) offers an explanation for why VCs and banks coexist in an economy. The key tradeoff between the two choices is that while VCs’ evaluations of the project quality are more
accurate, they also use the threat of expropriation to extract rent from the entrepreneurs. The
model explains why projects financed by VCs have less collateral, high growth, high risk, and
high profitability, and why VC markets are more active in markets where intellectual property is
better protected.
(Winton and Yerramilli 2008) is another paper that compares venture capital financing
with bank financing. While (Ueda 2004) focuses on the ex ante screening ability differential
between VCs and banks, (Winton and Yerramilli 2008) model follow-on financing decisions, thus
incorporating ex post (costly) monitoring into their analysis. In addition to the standard continueor-liquidate decision, the model allows for an aggressive or a conservative continuation choice,
which makes continuation strategy risky in the sense of cash flow volatility between the two

8

choices. VCs have better ability to monitor, but demand higher returns because they impose
illiquidity on their investors; in contrast, banks are less skilled at monitoring, but demand lower
returns from entrepreneurs because they themselves face lower funding cost by exposing
themselves to liquidity shocks. VCs are optimal only if firms face highly risky and positively
skewed project cash flows, with low probability of success, low liquidation value, and high
returns if successful, and if they face highly volatile cash flows across two continuation strategies.
2.3

The Economic Rationale for Professional Buyout Investor

The extant literature that relates to the economic rationale for existence of buyout investors has
focused exclusively on public-to-private transactions, where formerly publicly traded companies
are taken over by buyout investors and delisted. In one strand, the agency conflicts between
shareholders and the management of public firms are emphasized, with leveraged buyouts
proposed as solutions. In another strand of this literature, information and liquidity are
emphasized as main factors governing the firm’s decision to go private.
2.3.1

Jensen’s Theory of Leveraged Buyouts as Governance Mechanism

In a series of articles [e.g., (Jensen and Meckling 1976), (Jensen 1986), (Jensen 1989), (Jensen
2007)], Jensen and his co-authors advance a hypothesis that free cash flows in public firms
present serious agency problems and that LBOs mitigate these conflicts between managers and
shareholders. Private benefits of control (and higher compensation associated with larger firm
size) induce public firm mangers to engage in empire building and misuse free cash flows, both at
the expense of shareholders. Jensen argues that debt reduces agency costs of free cash flows and
disciplines the managers, and that the growth in popularity of LBOs during the 1980’s was partly
due to this control function of debt. Moreover, larger managerial ownership and the monitoring
and controlling functions of BO investors, combined with the discipline of debt, lead to better-run
firms and improved operational performance.

9

Studying a sample of 263 going private transactions between 1980 and 1987, (Lehn and
Poulsen 1989) find empirical evidence in support of Jensen’s free cash flow hypothesis:
undistributed cash flows are significantly related to a firm’s decision to go private, and premiums
paid to stockholders are significantly related to undistributed cash flows.4
2.3.2

Information and Liquidity as Critical Determinants of Public Status

(Mehran and Peristiani 2010) empirically examine a sample of companies that went private
between 1990 and 2007 and argue that a primary reason behind the decision to de-list was a
failure to attract financial visibility and investor interest. Firms with declining analyst coverage,
institutional ownership, and low stock turnover were more likely to go private and opted to do so
sooner. Similar results are reported by (Bharath and Dittmar 2010), who study a sample of goingprivate transactions from 1980 to 2004. Both studies compare determinants of going private for
those firms that were acquired by BO funds and those that were taken over by other investors
(e.g., management and other private companies), and find that they go private for similar reasons.
For example, non-LBO going-private transactions are more likely if the firms have less analyst
coverage and higher free cash flow, as are LBO transactions. Thus, the findings in these studies
explain why firms go private in general more than why firms specifically choose to go private
under the buyout fund ownership.5
2.3.3

Economic Rationale of Private-to-Private Buyouts

While the largest buyout investments are often public-to-private deals (with high leverage) and
they tend to receive heightened attention from media due to their size and high profile, the vast
majority of buyout targets are private firms and these transactions often employ little to moderate
leverage. For example, (Stromberg 2007) reports that, of 21,397 buyout transactions between

4

Also see (Kaplan 1991), (Cotter and Peck 2001), (Denis 1992), (Lehn et al. 1990), (Hite and Vetsuypens 1989),
(Denis 1994), (Gupta and Rosenthal 1991), and (Muscarella and Vetsuypens 1990).
5
But also see (DeAngelo et al. 1984), (Slovin et al. 1991), which examine management buyouts from the 1980’s and
find that targets who receive bids with an outside buyout investor experience significantly higher returns than those
without. Also see (Masulis and Thomas 2009).

10

1970-2007, public-to-private transactions account only for 6.7% of all transactions and 28% of
firm values acquired. Thus, neither the high leverage nor the going private decision is a necessary
ingredient of a buyout investment. To the best of our knowledge, little prior theoretical work
exists that systematically analyzes the economic roles played by private-to-private buyout
investors or buyouts where high leverage is not a key ingredient. Indeed, in a recent empirical
study of private-to-private buyout transactions, (Chung 2009) argues that agency costs of free
cash flows is unlikely to explain the buyouts of privately held targets, as ownership is already
concentrated in these firms prior to buyouts. Moreover, these firms grow substantially after
buyouts. These empirical findings by Stromberg, Chung and others suggest that more research is
needed to understand the economic rationale of non-public-to-private buyout transactions.

3

What do Venture Capitalists and Buyout Investors do?

As discussed in the previous section, private equity investors are activist, hands-on investors
whose goal is to maximize financial returns on behalf of their limited partners. The literature
focuses on three main groups of activities: (i) pre-investment screening activities; (ii) monitoring
and governance activities during the holding period; and (iii) exiting activities. Both VC- and
BO-backing are associated with improved governance practice at the investee firms including
more independent and hands-on boards and higher earnings quality.
3.1

Economic Activities of Venture Capitalists

VC (and BO) firms serve as general partners of the fund they run. Since these funds have a finite
lifetime, typically 10-years long, firms raise new funds every 3-5 years and at a given point in
time mature firms are managing two or more consecutive funds. Funds that are 5 years or
younger take up more of general partners’ time and efforts, as such funds are in their “investment
periods” — periods during which the GPs of the fund search and screen hundreds of prospective
startups before committing capital to a select portfolio of 15-25 companies. Funds that are older
than 5 years are in the growth and harvesting stage — a period during which the GPs’ main work

11

is to monitor and provide follow-on funds as necessary and conditional on achieving milestones,
assist the portfolio companies in value-adding activities, and finally help prepare the companies
for exit events, either via IPOs or acquisitions.

For a number of companies that are not

sufficiently successful to warrant profitable exits, this is also a period in which VCs get involved
in restructuring or shutting down the operations.
(Gorman and Sahlman 1989) report 49 responses to a questionnaire mailed (this is preemail era!) to 100 venture capitalists in 1984. They provide the first evidence on how VCs
actually spend their days. For example, VCs (who responded) spend about half their time
monitoring nine portfolio investments; of these, five are companies on whose boards they sit. As
board members, a VC typically devotes 80 hours of on-site time and 30 hours of phone time per
year in direct contact with each company. Fundraising, strategic analysis, and management
recruitment are the most commonly mentioned activities that they perform. The number of
companies VCs monitor seems to have changed little since 1984: (Metrick and Yasuda 2010a)
report that, for a sample of funds raised between 1993-2006, a mean (median) VC fund invests in
24 (20) companies and has 5 (4) partners, suggesting that a partner at a typical VC firm running
two funds on average would monitor close to 10 firms at a given point in time.6
How do VCs screen startups before committing capital, and what kind of companies do
they tend to fund? (Kaplan et al. 2009) examine 50 VC-backed companies that eventually went
public, and find that business lines remain stable from early business plan to IPO, while
management is frequently replaced. Therefore, the results suggest that the business (idea) rather
than the management team should be the key screening criteria for investments in startups. The
evidence of frequent management turnover is in line with (Hellmann 1998), which explains that

6

For example, a hypothetical XZY Venture Partners with 4 partners may have their first fund, XYZ I, that is 7 years
old and has 20 portfolio companies, and another fund XYZ II that is 4 years and nearly fully funded, with another 20
companies. (20+20)/4 = 10.

12

in equilibrium founders voluntarily relinquish control of the firm so that VCs are incented to
search for a superior management team without fear of holdup.7
In an empirical study of a large, comprehensive small business dataset, (Puri and Zarutskie
2010) find that VC-backed companies tend to be younger, faster-growing, and larger compared to
non-VC-backed companies. Thus, scalability is an important criterion that VCs use to screen
prospective investments’ market potential, while profitability is not. The tendency for faster
growth of VC-backed firms may also contribute to the higher CEO turnover rate: rare are
individuals who have the talent and skill sets of founder-CEOs of startups as well as those of
professional managers running multi-billion dollar companies.
Do VCs fund high-growth companies, or do companies funded by VCs grow fast?
According to (Inderst and Mueller 2009), the answer seems to be a little bit of both. The paper
shows that, in a competitive product market, new ventures financed by VCs (active investors)
may prey on rivals by “strategically overinvesting” early on, and dominate their industry peers in
the long run. The value of VCs is greater in highly competitive industries as well as in industries
with network effects and economies of scope, as is typical for many “new economy” industries.8
Collectively, these papers support the view that a VC business model works the best in newly
emerging markets that can support fast growth and large scale, and VCs strategically focus their
efforts and attain skills that enable them to identify strong business ideas in such markets and
push them to achieve high growth in a relatively short period time for attractive financial returns.
Once VCs find and fund their portfolio companies, how do they monitor / influence them,
who receive more monitoring and why, and is monitoring valuable to the companies? VC
investments are often staged, and by structuring investments to be dispensed over many
incremental rounds, each conditional on some measure of performance, rather than an upfront

7

(Hellman and Puri 2002), (Baker and Gompers 2003), and (Hochberg 2003) find that replacement of founder-CEOs is
more likely and/or occurs faster at VC-backed companies compared with non-VC-backed firms.
8
In line with this view of VCs’ comparative advantage, (Hellmann and Puri 2000) find that first-mover firms are more
likely to obtain venture capital than follower (imitator) firms.

13

payment for the whole project, VCs exercise their rights to monitor, evaluate the interim
performance and (and if found unpromising) abandon the project mid-course. Consistent with the
monitoring role of staged financing, (Gompers 1995) analyzes a sample of 794 VC-backed
companies’ investment history and finds that firms with higher levels of agency costs (measured
by, e.g., the ratio of intangible to total assets, the market-to-book ratio, and R&D intensity) are
monitored more frequently, i.e., durations between their investment rounds are more frequent.
Venture capitalists appear to influence the way in which their portfolio companies are run,
staffed, and funded. Using a dataset on Silicon Valley start-ups, (Hellmann and Puri 2002) find
that VC-backed companies are more professionalized, as measured by human resource policies,
adoption of stock option plans, and hiring of a marketing VP. Using a sample of European VC
deals, (Bottazzi et al. 2008) find that venture capitalists with more prior business experience are
more hands-on investors, helping with recruiting and fundraising for and interacting more
frequently with their portfolio companies.9 Both (Baker and Gompers 2003) and (Hochberg 2003)
find that VC backing is associated with more independent boards. (Lerner 1995) reports that
board representations increase around CEO turnover and is higher the more distant the companies
and VCs are from each other. (Cornelli et al. 2010), using East European VC investment data,
document disciplinary roles (manager evaluation and firing) played by VC-backed company
boards. Moreover, (Hochberg 2003) also finds that VC-backed IPO firms exhibit lower earnings
management than non-VC-backed counterparts.10
Several studies document the economic roles of VCs in innovation. (Kortum and Lerner
2000), for example, find that increases in VC funding in an industry is associated with
significantly higher patenting rates, while controlling for the effect of unobservable arrivals of
technological opportunities that affect both VC activities and patenting by using instruments.
Patents filed by VC-backed companies are more valuable (cited and litigated more frequently)

9

The activities documented in these more recent papers echo those from (Sahlman 1990).
See similar evidence for BO-backed companies in (Katz 2009).

10

14

than those filed by non-VC-backed companies. (Hellmann and Puri 2000) find that VC backing is
associated with a significant reduction in the time to bring a product to market and that this is
especially true for firms with first-mover positions in the markets. Finally, (Tian and Wang
2010) find evidence that firms backed by VCs with higher tolerance for failure (measured by the
VCs’ willingness to keep funding a startup conditional on not meeting milestones) stay
innovative long after VCs exit as investors.11 Overall, the evidence is strong that VCs pour funds
into innovator firms (who present the greatest “homerun” opportunities) and push for their
dominance as first movers in new markets [but see (Caselli et al. 2009) for a contrary European
evidence].12
Some studies focus on VCs’ roles as managers of a portfolio of firms that may collaborate
as well as compete with each other. (Lindsey 2008) provides evidence that strategic alliances are
more frequent among companies sharing a common venture capitalist, and that the effect is
concentrated in alliances in which contracting problems are more pronounced [also see (Gompers
and Xuan 2009)]. (Inderst et al. 2007) argue that, by staging funding and rationing a fixed amount
of capital (bound by the size of committed capital) among a portfolio of companies in later stage
financing, VCs not only improve their bargaining power but also enhance entrepreneurs’
incentives to outperform their peer portfolio companies.
Given these highly specialized, hands-on activities that VCs perform, it is not surprising
that the most common backgrounds VC partners have are some combination of technology /
science and business. According to (Wieland 2009), among the 125 partners from 15 VC firms,
60 percent of them hold a degree in science or engineering; particularly common is a bachelor’s
degree in engineering, which 44 percent of VCs hold. The most common postgraduate degrees
held by VCs are MBA degrees — held by 62 percent of them. 78 percent of them have worked in
11

In a related paper, (Gompers et al. 2005) find that public companies that were once VC-backed firms themselves
spawn VC-backed entreprensuers at a significantly higher rate than others.
12
Using a sample of 37 Italian VC-backed IPO firms and matched pairs of 37 non-VC-backed IPO firms, (Caselli et al.
2009) find that VCs choose more innovative firms at the time of backing, but post-transactions VC-backed firms do not
pursue more innovative business plans.

15

the IT or health care sector, 37 percent have worked as entrepreneurs in startups, and 38 percent
as line manager at a listed firm.13
There is some empirical evidence that capital markets perceive VC monitoring (as proxied
by VC reputation) to enhance firm values. For example, examining a sample of VC-backed IPO
firms between 1978 and 1987, (Barry et al. 1990) find that firms backed by high reputation VCs
(as measured by, e.g., VC age and the number of past IPOs) experience lower underpricing for
their IPOs. (Krishnan et al. forthcoming) find that more reputable VCs stay involved longer after
IPOs and contribute to better long-run performance of the firms.
Finally, VCs seem to influence timing of exit events in some cases.14 (Masulis and Nahata
forthcoming) provide evidence that VCs face pressure to have liquidity events towards the end of
their funds’ life; thus, M&A announcements of firms backed by VC funds near the end of fund
life are associated with significantly higher acquirer returns, suggesting these are fire sales. (Puri
and Zarutskie 2010) also document time-varying survival rates of VC-backed companies: they are
higher relative to non-VC-backed firms in the first four years after receiving funding, but
conditional on surviving past this point, are lower in the subsequent periods.
3.2

Economic Activities of Buyout Investors

In one of the early papers examining the first wave of buyouts in the 1980’s, (Kaplan 1991)
document status changes of LBO target firms over time and find that LBOs are neither short-lived
nor permanent: Median target firms spend about 7 years remaining private. (Stromberg 2007),
(Guo et al. forthcoming), and (Lopez de Silanes et al. 2010), using data sets that involve more
recent BO transactions, report median holding periods of 9, 4, and 4 years, respectively.
What types of firms are likely to become buyout targets? (Opler and Titman 1993) find
that, consistent with free-cash-flow theory, LBO target firms have both low Tobin’s q and high

13

Similar findings are reported by (Zarutskie 2010) for first-time VC partners. Also see (Gompers et al. 2009).
Also see (Bayar and Chemmanur forthcoming) for a theoretical analysis of IPO vs. acquisition exit decisions by
entrepreneurs and VCs.
14

16

cash flows relative to non-target firms, and are more diversified. Firms with large expected costs
of financial distress (measured as those with high R&D expenditures) are less likely to do
LBOs.15
With respect to post-investment monitoring activities of buyout investors, (Cotter and
Peck 2001) find that buyout specialists use more long-term debt and are more active monitors of
firms and their monitoring roles substitute for tighter debt terms in motivating managers to run
their firms efficiently. In a case study, (Baker and Wruck 1989) examine the LBO of O.M. Scott
& Sons and document that the adoption of a strong incentive compensation plan, a reorganization
and decentralization of decision making, and the relationships between managers, PE sponsors,
and the board of directors were as important as the disciplining power of heavy debt load and
management equity ownership in improving performance of the firm.16
More recently, (Kaplan et al. forthcoming) examine the relationship between CEO
characteristics and subsequent performance of BO portfolio companies and find that resoluteness
and execution skills, but not communication and interpersonal skills, translate to good
performance. (Acharya et al. 2009) study a hand-collected sample of boards of U.K., BO-backed
companies and find that they play a markedly active role “leading” the company strategy and
operations whereas boards of non-BO backed, plc companies play a more remote, supervisory
and monitoring role. (Cornelli and Karakas 2008) study UK firms that went through public-toprivate transactions and find (1) significant reduction in board size, (2) replacement of outside
directors with BO firm employees, (3) greater BO firm presence at boards of companies requiring
more time and efforts (e.g., firms that experience CEO change at the time of transactions), and
overall high turnover both of directors and CEOs during investment periods.17 Focusing on a

15

Also see (Lehn and Poulsen 1989), (Lehn et al. 1990), and (DeAngelo and DeAngelo 1987).
Also see (Denis 1994) for an in-depth case study comparison of an LBO vs. a leveraged recapitalization.
17
Consistent with a tighter leash with which BO-backed company executives are managed, (Edgerton 2010) finds that
LBO target firms significantly reduce the size of their corporate jet fleets compared with those of comparable public
firms. (Brown et al. 2009) find that LBO target firms bargain harder with suppliers post transactions. The effect is
absent in cases of leverage recapitalizations; thus, it is the change in organizational form rather than leverage that lead
to price concessions from suppliers.
16

17

sample of public-debt issuing private firms that later have IPOs, (Katz 2009) finds that BObacked firms have higher earnings quality than those that do not have BO-sponsorship, engage
less in earnings management, and report more conservatively both before and after the IPO.
These findings are consistent with tighter monitoring and reputational considerations exhibited by
BO investors.
One particularly controversial issue is how buyout investors affect employment,
productivity, and investment activities at the portfolio companies.18 (Davis et al. 2008) find that
U.S. Buyout target firms reduce more pre-existing jobs relative to controls both before and after
the transactions, but create more jobs at new establishments they open after transactions. Higher
old-job destructions of buyout target firms are driven by service sector firms rather than
manufacturing firms. (Harris et al. 2005) find that U.K. buyout target plants are less productive
pre-transaction and experience a substantial increase in productivity after a buyout, due to
reduction in labor intensity of production via outsourcing of intermediate goods and materials.
(Bernstein et al. 2010) analyze the impact of buyouts on industry performance across nations
(U.S., U.K., and continental Europe) and find that high BO activity is associated with faster
growth in productivity and employment. (Lerner et al. forthcoming) find that LBOs do not
decrease patenting activity of target firms, patents applied for by target firms are more cited, and
are more concentrated in the most important and prominent areas of companies’ innovative
portfolios. Overall, evidence suggests that buyout target firms become strategically more focused,
which lead to existing job loss where inefficiency existed, and at the same time result in focused
expansions and job creations in areas of their core strengths.

4

Performance: Risk-adjusted Returns, Persistence, and Sources of Performance

Both VC and BO funds make illiquid investments in private companies and fund returns are
reported either as IRRs or value multiples, not time-weighted returns. At the deal level,

18

Also see (Lichtenberg and Siegel 1990) and (Long and Ravenscraft 1993) for earlier evidence.

18

investment return realizations are low frequency events, and may not be observed for deals that
stagnate and are never cashed out. These features of PE investments make it challenging to
analyze their performance using standard risk-adjustment methods.
VC and BO asset classes also share similarities in the reported findings about their
performances. While neither asset class appears to significantly outperform public benchmarks
after risk adjustments, there seems to be some performance persistence among firms. These
findings contrast sharply with findings in the mutual fund literature. The persistence is stronger in
VC than in BO, and some explanations have been offered for the difference.
4.1

Evidence on Returns

Data on investment performance of VC and BO investments can be gathered either at the
portfolio company level, or at the fund level. While the fund-level data have the advantage of
being net of fund fees and carry, aggregation at the fund level also implies loss of information
about the timing of individual investments and exits. Loss of information is particularly
problematic for cases of investment write-offs, as researchers do not observe when the funds and
their investors incur actual losses. In contrast, deal-level data allow researchers to more explicitly
control for selection bias arising from lack of observations for final outcomes of unsuccessful
investments. However, the deal-level data may suffer from incompleteness, as documented by
(Kaplan et al. 2002) and (Maats et al. 2010). Furthermore, studies using deal-level data are often
restricted (due to data limitations) to firms that underwent IPOs and/or (in case of buyouts) firms
that were publicly traded prior to transactions, which are a small and select subset of all PE target
firms. The best studies in this area have either made use of a novel dataset, developed a model
that helps overcome the data problem, or both.
We first review the papers studying cash flows data in and out of VC and BO funds, and
then review the evidence based on company-level data. Finally, we review evidence based on VC
and BO index returns, which have been developed based on both fund-level and deal-level data.

19

4.1.1

Fund-level performance

Cash flow data for fund partnerships are typically reported quarterly, and funds aggregate and net
out any opposing cash flows that occur during a given measurement period. For example, a fund
that receives a quarterly management fees of $5M and a capital call of $10M, and books an exit
distribution to LP of $40M will have a net cash outflow of -$25M to the investors that period, and
conversely the investors (limited partners) experience a net cash inflow of +$25M.19 Since this
observed net cash flow is already net of fees and carry, fund-level performance measures
represent net returns.
Researchers face two primary challenges when using fund-level cash flows data to assess
risk and returns in private equity. First, this type of data is confidential and is not easily accessible
for research use. Recently, a small number of researchers have overcome this obstacle and gained
access to data, either from a single large investor or from vendors such as Venture Economics or
Preqin. Second, because investments are illiquid and individual project returns are not fully
realized until after the end of the fund life, usually ten years, it is not easy to measure risk
(“beta”) at the fund level, using standard time-series correlations with the market and other factor
returns. Existing studies’ approach to address this data limitation varies, though all employ some
version of market-return adjustment with an effective assumption of beta = 1.20
Existing studies offer somewhat mixed conclusions about the fund-level performance of
private equity relative to public equity markets. Using a large fund-level cash flow dataset of
private equity funds provided by Venture Economics, (Kaplan and Schoar 2005) find that net-offee returns of private equity funds (both venture capital and buyout) approximately equal the S&P
500, in the sense that discounting fund inflows and outflows using the same-period S&P 500
returns and dividing the sum of discounted present values of outflows by the sum of discounted

19

In this example, there may or may not be a carry payment to the fund manager (general partners); but this amount (if
any) is already netted out of the total exit distributions and is reflected in the exit distribution to LPs.
20
Beta estimates obtained using deal-level data or index returns (reported in Sections 4.1.2 and 4.1.4) suggest that this
assumption is too low for VC, whereas it may be reasonable for BO.

20

present values of inflows yields a ratio of approximately one (“public market equivalent”, or
PME). The inference is made by focusing on 746 funds which are mostly funds started before
1995 (and thus are fully liquidated).
In contrast, (Ljungqvist and Richardson 2003) find that the average net-of-fee IRR of
their sample funds is 19.8 percent, 5.7 percent higher than the IRR of a simulated investment in
the S&P 500 index under an identical time schedule of cash outflows (14.1 percent). They assign
industry-adjusted risk measures to individual portfolio companies and find that the excess
performance results are robust to this further refinement on risk-adjustments.21 Ljungqvist and
Richardson obtain data from a single large investor (LP); thus their sample is somewhat smaller
— the core sample is 73 funds raised between 1981 and 1993 — and skews toward large, buyout
funds and away from venture capital funds.

Their sample also outperforms the Venture

Economics population of funds in eight out of eleven vintage years. Thus their results may be
more representative of buyout fund performance than venture capital fund performance.
(Jones and Rhodes-Kropf 2003) differ from other studies reviewed here in that they use
GP estimates of value changes rather than realized returns to estimate quarterly private equity
returns. Using the Venture Economics data, they find the beta of 1.80 and the annualized alpha of
4.68% for VC funds, and the beta of 0.66 and the alpha of 0.72% per annum for BO funds.
(Phalippou and Gottschalg 2009) start with a dataset similar to that used by Kaplan and
Schoar, but make several adjustments to the measurement of the PME22 and conclude that the
performance reported by previous research is overstated. They argue, in particular, that (i) the
funds included in Venture Economics perform better than those funds excluded from Venture
Economics but whose deal-based performance is available from VentureXpert, a database of
21

The refinement implicitly assumes that BO portfolio companies have similar leverage to their industry peers, which
have levered equity beta of around 1. On the one hand, to the extent that BO portfolio companies are more highly
levered, this may account for some of the reported excess performance here. (Axelson et al. 2010) show that LBO
firms’ leverage levels are not explained well by those of their public-market industry peers. On the other hand, BO beta
estimates using index returns and reported in Section 4.1.4 are about 1. Also see (Kaplan and Stein 1990).
22
Phalippou and Gottshalg (2009) use the term Profitability Index (PI) to refer to this measure; however, because
Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003) use the term PI to refer to a slightly different performance measure, for consistency
we refer to it as PME, as defined in Kaplan and Schoar (2005).

21

portfolio company-level investments; (ii) Net-Asset-Value of unrealized investments tend to be
inflated and should be written-off when calculating fund distributions in the last period of the
fund’s life; and (iii) it is more conservative to use present values of fund inflows as weights rather
than the size of committed capital, because poorly-performing funds tend to invest faster, and
thus have larger present values of cost basis (inflows) than better-performing funds, which tend to
invest more slowly, do. After implementing these three adjustments, they show that the PME of
their broadened sample is reduced from 1.01 to 0.88.
Finally, (Driessen et al. 2009) develop and apply a GMM-style methodology to a fundlevel cash flows dataset consisting of 958 mature private equity funds.

Their estimation

methodology is based on a moment condition that equates the expected discounted value of the
cost basis of an investment in a portfolio company to the expected discounted value of the exit
value of the investment; in implementation, because the deal-level cash flow data is not available,
the method is applied to the fund-level cash flows data. Driessen et al. find a market beta of 3.21
and significant underperformance for VC funds, and a low beta (0.33) and mixed evidence on
performance for BO funds. While the VC result is similar in magnitude to (Korteweg and
Sorensen forthcoming), the BO result is at odds with studies using index returns (reported in
Section 4.1.4).

4.1.2

Deal-level performance: Venture Capital
(Brav and Gompers 1997) compare the long-run performance of VC-backed IPOs and

nonventure-backed IPOs completed between 1972-1992 and find that VC-backed IPOs generally
perform better than nonventure-backed IPOs. They identify the smallest nonventure-backed IPOs
as the main drivers of long-run underperformance of IPO firms — these firms significantly
underperform benchmarks and in the Fama-French 3-factor model. In contrast, VC-backed IPOs
do not underperform.

22

Two papers develop econometric methods that measure risk and return of VC investments
at the deal level while correcting for sample selection.23 (Cochrane 2005) measures the mean,
standard deviation, alpha, and beta of VC investments, using a maximum likelihood estimate that
corrects for selection bias. The selection-corrected mean arithmetic return is 59%, with the mean
arithmetic alpha of 32%. Volatility is 89%. While high, these figures are generally comparable to
those of the smallest NASDAQ stocks in the estimation period.

(Korteweg and Sorensen

forthcoming) develop a model that corrects for the higher frequency of observations for better
performing investments and obtain beta estimates of VC investments in the range of two to three,
much higher than previously reported in the literature. Similarly, VC betas close to two are
obtained when regressing VC index returns on contemporaneous and lagged market returns and
summing over the coefficients, as discussed in Section 4.1.4.
4.1.3

Deal-level performance: Buyouts
(Andrade and Kaplan 1998) find that buyout transactions in the 1980’s created value

despite high leverage and subsequent financial distress [also see (Kaplan 1989a) and (Kaplan
1989b)]. (Guo et al. forthcoming), in a study examining buyout transactions completed between
1990-2006, find that they earned high financial returns on average and had operating performance
comparable to or slightly succeeding benchmark firms.

Tax benefits of leverage, multiple

expansion (market timing), and operating gains equally contributed to the results.
(Holthausen and Larcker 1996), in an early study of the first wave of buyouts focused on
reversed LBOs, find that these firms’ operating performance is significantly better than their
industry peers for the first four years after the IPO events, while there is no evidence of abnormal
common stock performance. They, however, also document some evidence of a decline in
performance over time. Similar improvements in operating performance are also reported in
(Muscarella and Vetsuypens 1990). Echoing these earlier findings, (Cao and Lerner 2009)

23

Also see (Gompers and Lerner 1997).

23

examine post-IPO long-run performance of reversed LBOs completed between 1981 and 2003
and find that they perform as well as or better than other IPOs and the stock market as a whole.
Like Holthausen and Lacker, they also find that performance deteriorates over time.
(Kracaw and Zenner 1996) study the announcement effects of buyouts on the stock prices
of targets and lending banks and find positive wealth effects for lending banks and targets.
Interestingly, they find negative wealth effects on the stock prices of targets of leveraged
recapitalizations.24 (DeAngelo et al. 1984) also find that public shareholders gain about 22% in
public-to-private buyouts.
(Lopez de Silanes et al. 2010) study a large sample of buyout transactions and their deallevel returns. They find that 10% of deals result in bankruptcy while 25% of them have an IRR
over 50%. They also find a negative relationship between deal-level returns (IRRs) and the size of
the funds investing in them: the median IRR of investments held by the top decile BO firms is
16% while investments held by the bottom decile firms have a 36% median IRR. The authors
argue that diseconomies of scale are significant in the BO industry. (Groh and Gottschalg 2009),
using a data set of 133 US buyouts, construct a mimicking levered public equity portfolio for
each deal (using deal-specific debt-to-equity ratios) and show that many such mimicking
portfolios default during the holding period. Their results highlight the difficulty of proper
benchmarking for BO returns.
4.1.4

Asset-class-level returns

Several vendors have developed VC and BO indices by aggregating either fund-level or deallevel data.25 This enables researchers to estimate risk-adjusted performance of VC or BO as an
asset class using standard factor models. However, returns thus constructed still suffer from a
stale price problem: company valuations are updated infrequently and only when companies

24

In contrast, (Gupta and Rosenthal 1991) study leverage recaps and find positive abnormal returns to shareholders.
Cambridge Associates publishes CA VC and PE index that are based on fund cash flow data. Dow Jones publishes
DowJones Index of Venture Capital (formerly Sand Hill Index) that is based on deal-level data.
25

24

either receive new rounds of financing (in cases of VC) or have exits. Not addressing stale price
issues leads to underestimated beta and over-estimated alpha. (Woodward 2009), (Metrick and
Yasuda 2010b), and (Barber and Yasuda 2010) address this problem by including lagged values
of factor returns in the regressions and sum over the estimated coefficients across lags. 26
Consistent with stale prices, lagged factor returns (especially market returns) are often significant
explanatory variables. Market betas estimated this way are approximately 1 for BO and 2 for VC,
and alphas are not significantly different from zero for either asset class.
4.1.5

Summary

The evidence on whether VC and BO funds achieve excess performance is mixed. This is due to
several reasons. First, many of the studies that employ fund-level cash flow data make an
effective assumption that market beta for the asset class is 1, which may or may not be
appropriate. Studies using deal-level data or index returns and explicitly estimating market beta
while correcting for other data issues (e.g., sample selection, stale prices) tend to obtain beta
estimates closer to 2 for VC, and around 1for BO; more data and more studies with innovative
methodology can further improve the precision of these estimates. Second, some studies use selfreported portfolio values as updated by GPs to gauge performance, which may be subject to stale
price problems. When these self-reported values are marked to market, as done in (Gompers and
Lerner 1997), it has a large positive effect on risk measures such as beta. Similarly, when lagged
market returns are included, estimated betas are far larger than when they are not included. Third,
in case of BO, it is difficult to adjust for the leverage risk that may vary from deal to deal and
from fund to fund. Even if the average BO beta exposure is close to 1, it may not be uniform
across funds, and cross-sectional performance variation may or may not be coming from
differences in the levels of systematic risk (via leverage or otherwise) taken by individual funds.
These and other known data issues (such as stale prices, illiquidity premium, selection bias, and

26

(Asness et al. 2001).

25

missing data on defunct dates) likely account for the mixed results thus far in the literature.
Solving methodological challenges and/or overcoming data limitations, and reconciling existing
findings towards a more unified understanding of private equity performance is an important
remaining research agenda in this strand of the literature.
4.2

Performance Persistence and Sources of Performance
One distinguishing feature of private equity as an asset class is the evidence on

performance persistence not only at the GP level but also at the LP and the entrepreneur level (in
case of VC). (Kaplan and Schoar 2005) document that GPs whose funds outperform the industry
in one fund are likely to outperform the industry in the next and vice versa. The persistence is
found not only between two consecutive funds but also between the current fund and the second
previous fund. Persistence is found in both VC and BO, but is stronger in VC. (Metrick and
Yasuda 2010a) provide an explanation and supporting empirical evidence as to why persistence is
weaker in BO: when BO fund managers gain experience, they increase the size of their funds
much faster than VC fund managers do, thereby increasing the per-partner capital under
management. In line with this explanation, (Marquez et al. 2010) argue that PE fund managers
(and VC fund managers more than BO fund managers) with positive alpha allow their superior
performance to persist because there is assortative matching between funds and portfolio
companies along this dimension. Because PE fund managers are incented to signal positive alpha
to potential investees in order to be matched with the best firms, they are willing to not fully
capture the surplus from their alphas by either increasing the fund size or their fees. (Hochberg et
al. 2010b), on the other hand, argue that persistence results from the hold-up power of incumbent
fund investors (limited partners).
In a different vein, (Lerner et al. 2007) examine the returns that institutional investors
realize from private equity and find that endowments (and to a lesser degree public pensions)
outperform other types of investors by a large margin. Part of the outperformance appears to be

26

due to their better ability to select superior funds. Finally, (Gompers et al. 2010) study serial
entrepreneurs and find that entrepreneurs who were successful in prior ventures are much more
likely to succeed than others [also see (Gompers et al. 2009)]. One interpretation is that others
perceive them to have skill and are more willing to commit resources. Thus, success begets
success and strengthens performance persistence.
These results are markedly different from those in other asset classes such as mutual
funds, and are thus striking. How the persistence result found at the GP level and at the LP level
relates to one another is another interesting open question. At the first glance, it appears that highperforming PE (and especially VC) firms are matched with sophisticated investors (endowments
and public pension funds). However, (Phalippou 2010) argues that the performance persistence of
VC funds as reported in (Kaplan and Schoar 2005) is mainly driven by unsophisticated investors;
VC funds that are expected to be backed by skilled investors do not exhibit performance
persistence and a significant flow-performance relationship. This finding is at odds with the
simple matching story. Richer evidence that sheds more light on the persistence phenomenon is
warranted.
Below, we review the extant literature that examines both sources of performance and
possible explanations for performance persistence for VC and BO. We first review the studies
that focus on VC and then on BO.
Studies on the determinants of VC performance fall into two broad categories: those that
examine how VC-company matching at times of investment leads to differentials in performance,
and those that examine how VC’s post-investment activities (including exit decisions) are related
to investment performance.
Several studies document that established VCs exercise pricing power, which offers an
explanation for the performance persistence phenomenon and seems particularly valuable in hot
markets. Using a unique hand-collected sample of first-round recipient companies that received
offers from multiple VCs, (Hsu 2004) finds that high-reputation VCs’ offers are three times more

27

likely to be accepted, and moreover that they acquire startup equity at a 10-14% discount.
Reputation is measured as the number of past deals made in the startup’s industrial segment. The
finding suggests that start-ups perceive affiliation with high-reputation VCs to have positive
effects on their firms’ performance, and are willing to share the rent with such VCs. The effect
itself can be either certification, value-added, or both.
(Gompers and Lerner 2000) find that competition for a limited number of attractive
investments leads to a positive relationship between capital inflows and valuations of new
investments.27 While they find that changes in valuations are not related to the ultimate success of
the firms, (Kaplan and Schoar 2005) find that market entry (the number of new funds entering the
market, and thus similar to capital inflows) and fund performance are countercyclical [see also
similar results in the context of European VC and BO investments in (Diller and Kaserer 2009)].
To the extent that higher valuations affect the division of exit values in entrepreneurs’ favor, but
not the exit values, the two findings are reconcilable. Significantly, Kaplan and Schoar also find
that the performance of funds raised by high-reputation VC firms (firms with more previous
funds) is less sensitive to market entry. Combined, findings of these three studies suggest that
reputable VCs avoid the negative effects of capital inflows on performance by successfully
insisting on favorable investment terms even in hot markets. Consistent with this interpretation,
(Gompers et al. 2008) find that VC firms with the most industry experience increase their
investments the most when public market signals become more favorable. Their investments are
more responsive than firms with less industry experience, and the increased investment rate does
not adversely affect subsequent success rates.
How do reputable VC firms sustain their pricing advantage? Several studies argue that
the network among VCs who engage in repeated transactions with each other through deal
syndication serves as a source of performance as well as barriers to entry. (Hochberg et al. 2007)
find that funds run by better-networked VC firms perform significantly better (measured as better
27

Also see (Gompers 1994) and (Gompers and Lerner 1998b) for analysis of determinants of capital flows.

28

successful exit rates). While a better network status can either be a source of better screening or
conversely a result of better value-adding skills, (Hochberg et al. 2010a) further argue that VCs
use networks as barriers to entry, and benefit by getting low prices for deals. (Hochberg et al.
2010a) also find that more densely networked markets experience less entry, and document
strategic behavior by both entrants (who try to enter by syndicating with incumbents) and
incumbents (who freeze out other incumbents that facilitate entry by newcomers).
While a number of studies document how VCs’ monitoring activities affect VC-backed
firms’ operational characteristics (e.g., board composition, earnings quality, and personnel
policy), as discussed in Section 3, few studies actually document a relationship between VCs’
post-investment activities and investment performance.28 One exception is (Bottazzi et al. 2008)
which, using a sample of European VC deals, find that companies that receive funding from more
activist VCs are more successful. In another study, (Lindsey 2008) documents facilitation of
strategic alliances among portfolio companies as a new value-added role of venture capitalists,
and finds these alliances improve the probability of exit for VC-backed firms.
Besides monitoring and other interim activities, post-investment VC activities also
include executing exits and distributing exit proceeds back to investors, and the literature offers
some evidence of market-timing skill as a source of performance for VCs. Using a sample of
VC-backed biotech firms between 1978 and 1992, (Lerner 1994b) finds that companies go public
when equity valuations are high, and that seasoned venture capitalists (a common measure of VC
reputation in the literature) are particularly good at taking companies near market peaks. VC
returns on investments are realized (and used to calculate fund returns and carry) not when the
firms go public, but when the VCs decide to distribute the now-public stocks to their investors.29
Thus, VCs’ abilities to time the public stock market could contribute to their fund returns.
28

One perennial problem is the difficulty of separating out the effects of sorting from the effects of value-added
activities. See the discussion of (Sorensen 2007) below.
29
Although it is also possible for the VCs to sell the fund’s stock holdings in the open market and distribute the cash
proceeds to investors, it is more common practice for them to make in-kind distributions in cases of IPO exits. One
reason is that as insiders of the firms, VCs’ sales of stocks are more restricted than sales by limited partners. Another is
that some limited partners may prefer to receive in-kind distributions, thereby controlling the timing of liquidations.

29

(Gompers and Lerner 1998a) examine a sample of in-kind distributions by VCs to their limited
partners and find evidence that VCs use inside information to time stock distributions after
substantial price run-ups.
While a positive relationship between VC reputation measures and investment
performance is extensively documented, this could be due to either reputable VCs matching with
higher ex-ante quality firms (because of better screening ability, better proprietary deal flow,
better network, or all of the above), or reputable VCs possessing better monitoring skills.
Disentangling the two effects is an important yet challenging research goal. A standard
econometric approach with instruments that affects VC reputation measure (e.g., experience) but
does not affect investment outcome is difficult to find in the VC setting. For example, geographybased instruments are valid in other contexts, but in VC investments, proximity affects
effectiveness of monitoring and value-added activities, and thus cannot be excluded from the
second-stage equation.30 Prior to this realization, several papers made valiant but incomplete
efforts to solve these problems. (Sorensen 2007) explicitly tackles this problem by using the
identifying assumption that VCs and firms’ participation in a particular market, where the market
is defined by a region-year pair, is exogenous and is independent of error terms in the model.
Then, presence of other agents affects investment decisions and leads investors with differing
experiences (reputation) to invest in companies with similar unobserved quality for exogenous
reasons. Sorensen finds that the companies funded by more experienced VCs are more likely to
go public (a success measure), and that sorting is almost twice as important as value-added in
explaining the difference in IPO rates.
Finally, (Nahata 2008) proposes a new measure of VC reputation and shows it predicts
performances of portfolio companies better than alternative measures. His proposed measure is
IPO capitalization share and is based on cumulative market capitalization of IPOs backed by the
VC. Nahata argues that this measure captures both VC screening and monitoring expertise.
30

See (Chen et al. 2010) for geography of venture capital.

30

Existing studies examining determinants of BO performance have tended to focus on two
factors: whether BO reputation (or stronger relationships with banks) has positive effects on the
fund performance via better debt pricing, and whether competition (or lack thereof) among
bidders at the time of investments drives up (down) purchase prices.
Using a sample of 180 public-to-private LBOs, (Demiroglu and James 2010) find that
reputable BO firms are better at market timing in credit markets (increasing deal activities more
when credit spreads are low and lending standards are lax), and that they get better loan terms
(lower spreads, longer maturities, higher portions of institutional loans). Though buyouts
sponsored by reputable BO firms are more levered, the valuations they pay are not higher. While
Demiroglu and James do not provide a direct evidence on fund performance, the findings suggest
that reputable BO firms’ better pricing power vis-à-vis lenders is a source of performance
persistence in buyouts. Their findings on market timing and pricing power echo parallel findings
on VC in (Hsu 2004) and (Gompers et al. 2008).31 (Ivashina and Kovner 2010) document that BO
firms with stronger bank relationships obtain better spreads and covenant terms. The results in
Demiroglu and James and Ivashina and Kovner appear to be related, as there is likely to be a
positive correlation between BO reputation and the strength of their relationships with lenders.
(Kaplan and Stein 1993) examine pricing and financial structure of large MBOs in the
1980’s and find that over time the deals were struck with higher ratios of prices to cash flows,
employing higher ratios of debt obligations to cash flows and more junk bonds as opposed to
private debt, and more upfront monetary rewards for management teams and dealmakers. Laterperiod buyouts were more likely to experience defaults and costly financial distress, and Kaplan
and Stein argue that overheating in the buyout market, driven by the demand for junk bonds, is
the most likely explanation.32

31

Note, however, that in case of VC the rent is extracted from entrepreneurs, whereas in case of BO the rent is
extracted from lenders.
32
Also see (Gompers 1998) for related evidence for VC in the late 1990’s.

31

Several recent studies examine determinants of the degree of competition among bidders
and their effects on buyout performance in more recent buyout booms. These studies tend to
focus on large, public-to-private transactions where it is common for the seller to receive multiple
offers and banks are hired to assist in the bidding process. In a theory paper, (Povel and Singh
2010) analyze a recent phenomenon called “stapled finance”, whereby a seller arranges a prepackaged loan commitment for whoever wins the bidding contest, and show that stapled finance
increases bidding competition and benefits the seller by increasing valuations, even though the
seller would need to compensate the arranging bank for offering the loan. The results suggest
that buyers of stapled finance transactions perform worse than non-stapled finance transactions,
ceteris paribus. Consistent with the theoretical prediction of Povel and Singh, (Boone and
Mulherin 2009) find that staple financing is associated with increased competition, i.e., a greater
number of firms making non-binding and binding private offers for the target firm.
Another aspect of the bidding process that received attention during the recent buyout
boom is the so-called club deals or consortiums where multiple BO funds join forces to purchase
a target firm as a consortium.33 The evidence is mixed on the competitive effect of club deals.
Examining a sample of U.S. public-to-private buyouts conducted by prominent BO firms,
(Officer et al. 2010) find that club deals are associated with lower premiums paid to target
shareholders compared to solo-sponsored deals, especially among deals before 2006 and in target
firms with low institutional ownership. Officer et al. argue that the most likely explanation is that
club deals dampen competition and facilitate collusion. In contrast, analyzing a sample of 870
takeovers of publicly traded targets, (Boone and Mulherin 2009) find that, while target abnormal
returns are somewhat lower in consortium deals in the short run, the results do not hold for longer
event windows. Boone and Mulherin also find that BO takeovers (both solo and consortium
deals) are generally associated with greater degrees of competition than other types of bidders.
33

Other papers that examine potential conflicts of interests at BO firms include (Acharya and Johnson forthcoming)
and (Fang et al. 2010). See (Gompers and Lerner 1999b), (Li and Masulis 2004), (Hamao et al. 2000), and (Hellmann
et al. 2008) for related evidence on combining VC with investment banking and commercial banking.

32

They thus reject the view that BO consortium deals facilitates collusion, which is at odds with
Officer et al.’s conclusion. (Marquez and Singh 2010) present a theoretical model that shows that
whether club deals hurt (via lower premiums paid) or benefit (via bundled value-adding expertise
of multiple PE firms) target shareholders depend on both the number of potential bidders and
bidding costs, thus suggesting that the extant empirical findings may be reconcilable.

5

Contracts
Contracts employed by VC and BO fund managers share many features. At the fund

level, limited partnership agreements signed between GPs and LPs are structured quite similarly.
Both VC and BO funds are closed-end, finite-life (typically 10 years) partnerships where GPs
earn management fees annually as a pre-determined percentage of base capital (e.g., committed
capital), and carried interest, which entitles GPs to (typically) 20% of the fund profit. Both types
of funds restrict GPs’ activities (e.g., investments outside of funds, investments across funds,
investment in asset classes other than private equity) through negative covenants.
At the deal level, VC contracts and BO contracts appear to be more distinct from each
other.

Specifically, while VC investments are minority stakes and typically made using

convertible securities, and financing is syndicated and staged over multiple rounds, BO
investments are one-time acquisitions of controlling stakes and are typically financed using equity
and debt. Note, however, the observation made by Sahlman (1990) that “[t]he debt used in LBOs
is similar in function to the staged-capital-commitment process used in venture-capital deals; in
neither is there much discretionary cash flow”. (p. 516) Thus, both types of deal structures are
aimed at disciplining the portfolio company management by taking away excess cash flows from
them. Both deal-level contracts also include features like board seats that facilitate monitoring
and advising roles played by GPs.

33

5.1

Contracts between Fund Managers and Investors

Compared to the extensive literature on the contracts between VCs and their portfolio companies,
the literature on the contracts between fund managers and their investors is relatively small. The
earlier studies tend to focus on VCs, while the more recent papers are more likely to contain
analyses of the buyout segment of the industry. (Sahlman 1990) was the first analysis of contracts
between VC fund managers (GPs) and investors (LPs) [also see (Gompers and Lerner 1996)].
Typical structures of limited partnerships are described, summary statistics of a sample of 76 VC
funds raised in 1986-87 are reported, and agency problems between GPs and LPs and contractual
provisions in fund partnership agreements as potential remedies are discussed.
As discussed in Section 3, funds have a finite lifetime and VC and BO firms raise new
funds every 3-5 years. Several papers examine the strategic choices made by GPs of new vs.
follow-on funds. (Gompers 1996) finds evidence that young VC firms take portfolio companies
public earlier than older VC firms in order to establish a reputation and successfully raise capital
for new funds. IPOs are timed to precede or coincide with raising money for follow-on funds.
Similarly, (Ljungqvist et al. 2007) find that younger funds invest in riskier buyouts in an effort to
establish a track record, whereas established funds act more strategically in response to market
conditions.
(Gompers and Lerner 1999a) find that the pay of new VC funds is less sensitive to
performance and varies less than that of older funds, which is consistent with a learning model
rather than a signaling model. (Chung et al. 2010) present a learning-based framework for
estimating total pay for performance, where pay for performance arises from both explicit pay
earned via carried interest in the current fund and implicit pay from expected future fundraising.
They find that implicit pay from future fundraising is stronger for BO funds (which are more
scalable than VC funds) and for younger funds (for which current performance is more
informative about ability). Focusing on the lemons problem that arises when existing LPs face
liquidity shocks and GPs need to raise funds from new investor, (Lerner and Schoar 2004) find

34

that fund managers impose more transfer restrictions when raising new funds and also funds
focused on industries with longer investment cycles.
(Axelson et al. 2009) analyze the optimal financing structure of buyout funds that
minimizes the agency conflicts between GPs and LPs and find that a mix of ex ante and ex post
financing achieves the second best. 34 While the closed-end fund structure with carry
compensation incents GPs to avoid overinvestment in good times, the deal-by-deal debt financing
prevents them from making bad deals in bad times (when credit market conditions tighten). The
model explains pro-cyclicality of investment volumes and counter-cyclicality of performance in
the buyout industry.
Using detailed records on 238 funds raised between 1993 and 2006, (Metrick and Yasuda
2010a) analyze and compare the features of venture capital and buyout fund contracts. The paper
builds a model of expected GP revenue as a function of their contracts with LPs, modeling carry
as an option-like position on the fund assets and incorporating as model parameters fees, carry,
transaction and monitoring fees (in case of buyouts), as well as leverage, portfolio concentration,
and investment risk. About two-thirds of expected revenue comes from fixed revenue
components and is not sensitive to performance. BO fund managers with prior experience
increase the size of their follow-on funds significantly faster than VC fund managers do, and as a
result BO fund managers’ per personnel revenue is higher than that of VC fund counterparts. The
results are consistent with greater scalability of BO business.
While the partnership agreements share a number of similarities between VCs and BOs,
including the fees and carry structures, there is one distinction between the two segments of
private equity: the buyout funds charge various fees, such as transaction fees and monitoring fees,
directly to portfolio companies, whereas VC funds do not. To the best of our knowledge no
theory paper has explicitly examined implications of this practice in an agency model setting.
(Metrick and Yasuda 2010a) conduct sensitivity analysis and show that, ceteris paribus, these fees
34

Also see (Campello and Da Matta 2010) for analysis of VC funds.

35

make total GP compensation less sensitive to performance and become disproportionately large
(relative to management fees and carry) when individual buyout transactions are financed with
high debt-to-equity ratio (because these fees are charged on enterprise values rather than on
equity values). In a paper surveying the literature findings on performance and fee structures,
(Phalippou 2009) argues that, among the various components of buyout fund managers’ fee
arrangements with investors, transaction and monitoring fees are especially opaque.
5.2

Contracts between Venture Capitalists and Portfolio Companies
There is an extensive literature, both theoretical and empirical, that examines the features

of contracts between venture capitalists and portfolio companies.35 In part, the greater interest in
VC-company contracts relative to those in BO-company contracts stems from the fact that the
relationships between VCs and entrepreneurs resemble the theoretically pristine (but hard to find
in practice) setup of principal-agent models that are used in much of the contract-theory literature
[(Kaplan and Stromberg 2001)]. Thus, the VC setup offers a rare natural laboratory to test the
implications of the theory of the firm without the usual confounding factors, e.g., the dispersed
stock ownership and short-term pressures associated with publicly traded firms. That said, we
note the dearth of papers on contracts used in buyout transactions and expect it to be a growth
area in the literature.
One of the most frequently analyzed features of the VC-company contracts is the use of
convertible securities that combines the features of equity and debt. A number of studies offer
(generally non-mutually exclusive) explanations for its prevalent use.36 (Berglof 1994) analyzes
the potential conflict of interests that arise from a future sale of the company to a third party. On
the one hand, an entrepreneur values private benefits of control that are increasing in the firm

35

For definitions and detailed explanations of features included in standard VC contracts, see, e.g., Sahlman (1990),
Metrick and Yasuda (2010b) (Chapters 8 and 9), as well as the model term sheet on NVCA’s website,
http://www.nvca.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=108&Itemid=136. For prevalence of various
contract features in real-world contracts, see, e.g., Sahlman (1990), Kaplan and Stromberg (2003, 2004), and Dow
Jones Venture Capital Deal Terms Report (6th Edition, 2009).
36
(Marx 1998), (Bergemann and Hege 1998),(Trester 1998), (Kirilenko 2001), and (Cornelli and Yosha 2003).

36

value and is afraid of a sale that compensates him insufficiently for their loss; on the other hand, a
VC is afraid of a premature, “cheap exit” that results in a poor return on her financial investment,
but would be enticing for the entrepreneur to accept. Since one conflict is more likely in good
states of the world and another in bad states of the world, convertible securities (either convertible
debt or convertible preferred stock) with contingent transfer of control to the vulnerable party
emerges as the optimal security that best protects the two initial contracting parties against
dilution and expropriation from the future buyer. The findings are consistent with the practice; in
the U.S., nearly all the VC investments are made with preferred stock, either with conversion
feature, or in combination with common stock, so that VCs receive the downside protection of
debt in poor states of the world, and the upside potential of equity in good states of the world.
In contrast to Berglof’s focus on the allocation of control rights, (Schmidt 2003) argues
that incentive properties of convertible securities — effort incentives for the entrepreneur and the
VC — are crucial in explaining why they are almost always used in VC transactions while very
rarely used by banks or other outside investors that finance small businesses. They show that
convertible security achieves the first best investment outcomes (relative to standard debt-equity
contracts) when the investor’s costly effort is important37 for the success of the startup; hence, it
is used in venture capital finance where extra-financial value of VC backing is important, but not
in bank financing where banks are passive investors.
(Hellmann 2006) argues that the key property of convertible preferred stock used in VC
transactions is that it (typically) requires forced conversion of preferred stock to common stock
upon IPO exits, but not upon exits by acquisitions. The most commonly used type of convertible
preferred stock is participating convertible preferred (PCP),38 which allows holders to “doubledip”, i.e., receive both the debt-like payoff (redemption value) and the equity-like payoff
(participation value) as long as the security remains unconverted.

37
38

In most VC contracts,

Also see (Casamatta 2003) and (Repullo and Suarez 2004).
See Metrick and Yasuda (2010b), Chapter 9, for different types of preferred stock used in VC transactions.

37

conversion of preferred stock to common is forced (“automatic conversion”) rather than voluntary
in cases of an exit via an IPO. Thus, PCP with automatic conversion upon IPOs effectively
allocates more cash flow rights to VCs in exits via acquisitions than in IPO exits. Hellmann
argues that this is optimal in a model with double moral hazard, where both the entrepreneur and
the VC provide value-adding effort. In a related paper, (Bengtsson 2009) finds that restrictive
covenants are more prevalent in contracts with debt-like payoffs (i.e., PCP) as compared to
simple convertible preferred that resembles equity more closely. (Cumming 2008) also shows that
stronger VC control rights are more likely to lead to exits by acquisitions rather than by write-offs
or IPOs.
Another feature of VC-company contracts that has drawn significant attention in the
literature is that a VC’s total investment in a company is often staged over time and follow-on
investments are either implicitly or explicitly conditional on reaching milestones.39 (Gompers
1995) argues that this contractual feature protects VCs against inefficient continuation of the
project by entrepreneurs and thus is most valuable when liquidation values are hurt the most from
inefficient continuation, and finds empirical evidence in support of this argument. Specifically,
Gompers analyzes a sample of 794 VC-backed companies’ investment history and finds that
more frequent financing rounds (shorter duration between rounds) are associated with high levels
of agency costs (measured by, e.g., the ratio of intangible to total assets, the market-to-book ratio,
and R&D intensity).
(Admati and Pfleiderer 1994) also analyze stage financing and show that a fixed-fraction
contract where the insider VC always receives a fixed fraction of the equity of the company in all
financing rounds induces the inside investor (the initial VC) to make optimal investment
decisions.40 In a related paper, (Fluck et al. 2004) argue that, without syndication, the holdup cost
exceeds the efficiency gain of staged financing. While staged financing reduces the agency cost

39
40

Also see (Neher 1999).
(Lerner 1994a) provides empirical evidence in support of this hypothesis.

38

of inefficient continuation of unpromising projects, it gives too much bargaining power to earlystage venture capitalists and leads to dilution of entrepreneurs’ stake ex post, unless staged
financing is combined with pre-agreed syndication of later-stage investments. The results
highlight the complementarity of staged financing and syndication, two somewhat distinct
features of VC investments.
In another study examining bargaining between VCs and entrepreneurs in staged
financing, (Inderst et al. 2007) argue that staged financing, combined with the closed-fund feature
of VC partnerships (whereby the fund size, or the “depth of the investor’s pocket”, is fixed) and
the fact that a fund finances a portfolio of projects, may lead not only to improved bargaining
power for the VC, but also to improved incentives for entrepreneurs. The results suggest that
staged financing and the fund structure where multiple portfolio companies compete for a fixed
amount of capital are complementary.
(Kaplan and Stromberg 2003) analyze actual VC contracts in light of contracting theory
and find that VC contracts allow separate allocations of cash flow rights, board rights, voting
rights, liquidation rights, and other control rights among stakeholders. (Kaplan and Stromberg
2004) relate expected post-investment actions by VCs to contracts and find that greater VC
control is associated with increased management intervention while greater VC equity incentives
are associated with increased value-added effort.
Other studies focus on less studied aspects of VC-company contracts. (Hellmann 1998)
studies why entrepreneurs give up control rights over to VC, exposing them to the risk of being
fired before their shares are fully vested. A key ingredient of the model is that entrepreneurs may
take non-contractible actions that increase their private benefits of control, while venture
capitalists may make non-contractible (and costly) efforts to search for a good management team.
Equilibrium conditions are derived where entrepreneurs voluntarily relinquish control and
knowing that venture capitalists are incented to search for a superior outside management team.

39

(Field and Hanka 2001) examine a sample of VC-company contracts with post IPO
lockup clauses, which prohibit insiders from selling their shares in the open market for a preset
period of time (e.g., 6 months) after the IPO date.

Expiration of lockups results in large

permanent increases in trading volumes and abnormal negative returns around the lockup
expiration date. (Broughman and Fried 2010) examine whether cash flow rights are renegotiated
between entrepreneurs and VCs by studying sales of Silicon Valley firms. Results suggest VCs
sometime concede cash-flow rights and allow common shareholders to receive payment before
VCs’ liquidation preferences are satisfied, especially when the firm’s choice of corporate law
gives shareholders more power to hold up the sale.
More recently, researchers have started to examine determinants of both time-series and
cross-country variation in contract terms. (Inderst and Muller 2004) build an equilibrium model
in which capital-market characteristics affect the relative supply and demand for VC capital,
which in turn affects bargaining between entrepreneurs and VCs, which in turn affects the
valuation and relative ownership shares of VCs and entrepreneurs. The model explains the
cyclicality of the VC industry and in particular the Internet boom and bust period in which
entrepreneurs enjoyed high valuations and retained large equity shares during the boom, whereas
venture capitalists obtained much larger ownership shares and demanded low valuations during
the bust.
Several papers empirically study the effects of legal regimes on VC contracts using
international data and offer somewhat mixed evidence.41 (Kaplan et al. 2007) examine features of
international VC contracts and find that legal regimes affect contractual features more when
investors are inexperienced, but that more experienced VCs implement U.S.-style contracts
regardless of legal regime. Use of U.S.-style contracts is associated with lower failure rates of VC
firms, even controlling for VC experience, suggesting efficiency of U.S. style contracts even in
non-U.S. markets. Similarly, (Bottazzi et al. 2009) find that the legal system in the target country
41

Also see (Black and Gilson 1998), (Allen and Song 2003), and (Cao et al. 2010).

40

does not explain contract provisions after controlling for VC home country effects. In contrast,
(Lerner and Schoar 2005) study international PE contracts (which include both VC and BO
investments) and find that, while convertible preferred stock with covenants are favored
contractual choices in high-enforcement and common law nations, majority equity ownership
combined with debt and board control are often used in low-enforcement and civil law nations.
They argue that the legal system constrains the ability of private parties to write contracts that are
complex or state contingent. Similarly, (Balcarcel et al. 2010) find that both capital flows and
investment patterns systematically vary with the rule of law variables of the target countries.
5.3

Contracts between Buyout Investors and Portfolio Companies

Researchers know relatively little about the contractual relationships between buyout investors
and portfolio companies, due in part to data limitations that appear to be even more severe for
buyouts than those for VC contracts. Here we review a small group of empirical papers that
provide evidence suggestive of potential agency conflicts between BO fund managers and
investors during hot markets.
In one of the earlier studies examining financial structure and pricing of public-to-private
buyout transactions in the 1980’s, (Kaplan and Stein 1993) find that, over time, as the junk bond
market took off and record amounts were issued, both the buyout investors and the management
teams took more money out of transactions up-front.
One distinct contractual difference between the BO and VC fund managers’
compensation is that BO fund managers routinely charge to their portfolio companies upfront
transaction fees at the time of the investment as well as on-going monitoring fees. These fees are
distinct from management fees that GPs charge to the investors of the funds, and may be shared
with investors and/or used to offset the management fees. Incentive effects of these portfolio
company fees are not well understood, though anecdotal evidence suggests that at the height of

41

the latest BO boom of 2003-2007, they comprised a very significant portion of the GPs’ total
revenues, especially at larger funds.
(Metrick and Yasuda 2010a) build a model that estimates expected present values of PE
manager fee revenues as functions of the fund fee structure, firm characteristics, and deal
structures (such as leverage and the portfolio company fee structure). While the expected values
of portfolio company fees (the sum of transaction fees and monitoring fees) are only a third of
expected carry when the leverage ratio is 1:1, they increase to nearly 90% of expected carry when
the leverage ratio is increased to 4:1.42 As these fees are less risky and less sensitive to
performance than carried interest, larger portfolio company fees associated with higher leverage
suggests that leverage might weaken monitoring incentives of BO fund managers to maximize
firm value and earn carry.
Using a sample of 1,157 buyout transactions from 1980 to 2008, (Axelson et al. 2010)
show that the economy-wide cost of borrowing rather than industry-specific characteristics is the
main driver of the buyout leverage [also see (Brinkhuis and De Maeseneire 2009) for similar
findings using a sample of European buyouts]. Credit market conditions also have a strong effect
on prices paid in buyouts, and moreover use of high leverage in transactions negatively affects
fund performance. Combined with the results of (Kaplan and Stein 1993) and (Metrick and
Yasuda 2010a), these findings suggest that agency problems between buyout fund mangers and
their investors may be exacerbated when cheap debt is available and allows fund managers to
pocket large fees upfront. Clearly more research is needed to understand contractual patterns in
BO transactions.

6

Conclusion

VC and BO funds are financial intermediaries that invest in private companies, take an active role
in monitoring and advising investee companies, exit investments through a sale or an IPO, and
42

Leverage directly impacts relative values of portfolio company fees, because these fees are paid as a percentage of
the total enterprise value of the firm, whereas BO funds invest only in the equity portions of the firm’s capital structure.

42

whose goal is to maximize present values of their current and future fund revenues (earned via
management fees and carried interest). VCs are specialists whose superior screening capability
for high-growth, risky start-up firms in high-tech sectors helps alleviate the underinvestment
problem that arises from the severe information asymmetry between informed entrepreneurs and
uninformed investors. In contrast, economic rationale for BO specialists, especially those that are
engaged primarily in private-to-private transactions and do not require high leverage, is not well
understood. More research is needed to improve our understanding of how generic BO funds
emerge in the economy. Both VC and BO-backing is associated with significant changes in the
ways the investee companies are operated, including more independent and hands-on boards,
higher earnings quality, and higher CEO turnover.
Evidence on existence of excess performance (and its persistence) in private equity is
mixed. This is due in part to significant data limitations and methodological challenges required
to overcome the data limitations. Naïve applications of standard approaches to asset pricing tend
to produce overestimates of alphas and underestimates of market beta. Valiant attempts have been
made to correct for various aspects of data problems, including stale prices, infrequency of return
realizations, sample selection, and missing observations, especially in the VC literature where
data availability is better and the literature dates back longer. In comparison, the literature on BO
performance is more nascent and the body of research working on this topic is expected to grow
significantly.
As VCs are thought to emerge as solutions to the underinvestment problem arising from
information asymmetry between entrepreneurs and uninformed investors, it is natural that
contracts used in VC transactions have features that address many potential agency problems. The
literature has analyzed, among other features, use of convertible securities, staged financing, and
syndication. The use of leverage as a disciplinary device to constrain the use of excess cash is
emphasized as the economic rationale of leveraged buyouts, but the economic purpose of nonleveraged buyout transactions is not well established:

the contract (and other economic)

43

mechanisms that address agency issues in these non-leveraged transactions remain an open
question. Finally, contracts between VC and BO fund managers (GPs) and their investors (LPs)
also address various agency issues. Since LPs do not monitor GPs on the day-to-day basis, their
contracts are designed to best align their interests, via use of profit-sharing agreement (carried
interest), closed-end, finite-life fund structure, limited reinvestments, and explicit negative
covenants preventing GPs from taking excessive risk and/or diverting efforts away from funds.
Recent studies suggest that these features of contracts between LPs and GPs dynamically affect
fund performance and performance persistence. Improving our understanding of the interactions
between GP incentives (that are determined by the fund structure) and fund performance is
another fruitful area for future research.
References
Acharya, V. V. and Johnson, T. C., 'More Insiders, More Insider Trading: Evidence from Private
Equity Buyouts', Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Acharya, V. V., Kehoe, C. and Reyner, M., 'Private Equity Vs. PLC Boards in the U.K.: A
Comparison of Practices and Effectiveness', Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 21 no.
1, 2009, pp. 45-56.
Admati, A. R. and Pfleiderer, P., 'Robust Financial Contracting and the Role of Venture
Capitalists', Journal of Finance, Vol. 49 no. 2, Jun, 1994, pp. 371-402.
Allen, F. and Song, W., 'Venture Capital and Corporate Governance', in P. Cornelius and B.
Kogut eds, Corporate Governance and Capital Flows in a Global Economy (Oxford University
Press, 2003), pp. 133-56.
Andrade, G. M. and Kaplan, S. N., 'How Costly is Financial (not Economic) Distress? Evidence
from Highly Leveraged Transactions that Became Distressed', Journal of Finance, Vol. 53 no. 5,
1998, pp. 1443-93.
Asness, C., Krail, R. and Liew, J., 'Do Hedge Funds Hedge?', The Journal of Portfolio
Management, Vol. 28 no. 6-19, 2001.
Axelson, U., Jenkinson, T., Stromberg, P. J. and Weisbach, M. S., ‘Borrow Cheap, Buy High?
The Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts’, Working Paper (Fisher College of
Business, 2010).
Axelson, U., Stromberg, P. and Weisbach, M. S., 'Why Are Buyouts Levered? The Financial
Structure of Private Equity Funds', Journal of Finance, Vol. 64 no. 4, Aug, 2009, pp. 1549-82.

44

Baker, G. P. and Wruck, K. H., 'Organizational Changes and Value Creation in Leveraged
Buyouts - the Case of the Om-Scott-and-Sons-Company', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.
25 no. 2, Dec, 1989, pp. 163-90.
Baker, M. and Gompers, P. A., 'The determinants of board structure at the initial public offering',
Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 46 no. 2, Oct, 2003, pp. 569-98.
Balcarcel, A., Hertzel, M. and Lindsey, L., ‘Contracting Frictions and Cross-Border Capital
Flows: Evidence from Venture Capital’, Working Paper (2010).
Barber, B. and Yasuda, A., ‘Risk-adjusted Returns in the Venture Capital and Buyout Industry’,
Working Paper (2010).
Barry, C. B., Muscarella, C. J., Peavy, J. W. and Vetsuypens, M. R., 'The Role of Venture Capital
in the Creation of Public Companies - Evidence from the Going-Public Process', Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 27 no. 2, Oct, 1990, pp. 447-71.
Bayar, O. and Chemmanur, T. J., 'IPOs versus Acquisitions and the Valuation Premium Puzzle: A
Theory of Exit Choice by Entrepreneurs and Venture Capitalists', Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Bengtsson, O., ‘Restrictive Covenants in Venture Capital Contracts’, Working Paper (University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2009).
Bergemann, D. and Hege, U., 'Venture capital financing, moral hazard, and learning', Journal of
Banking & Finance, Vol. 22 no. 6-8, Aug, 1998, pp. 703-35.
Berglof, E., 'A Control-Theory of Venture Capital Finance', Journal of Law Economics &
Organization, Vol. 10 no. 2, Oct, 1994, pp. 247-67.
Bernstein, S., Lerner, J., Sorensen, M. and Stromberg, P. J., ‘Private Equity and Industry
Performance’, Working Paper (Harvard Business School, 2010).
Bharath, S. T. and Dittmar, A. K., 'Why Do Firms Use Private Equity to Opt Out of Public
Markets?', Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 23 no. 5, May, 2010, pp. 1771-818.
Black, B. S. and Gilson, R. J., 'Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: banks versus
stock markets', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 47 no. 3, Mar, 1998, pp. 243-77.
Boone, A. L. and Mulherin, J. H., ‘Do Private Equity Consortiums Facilitate Collusion in
Takeover Bidding?’, Working Paper (University of Kansas, 2009).
Bottazzi, L., Da Rin, M. and Hellmann, T., 'Who are the active investors? Evidence from venture
capital', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 89 no. 3, Sep, 2008, pp. 488-512.
Bottazzi, L., Da Rin, M. and Hellmann, T., 'What is the role of legal systems in financial
intermediation? Theory and evidence', Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 18 no. 4, Oct,
2009, pp. 559-98.

45

Brav, A. and Gompers, P. A., 'Myth or reality? The long-run underperformance of initial public
offerings: Evidence from venture and nonventure capital-backed companies', Journal of Finance,
Vol. 52 no. 5, Dec, 1997, pp. 1791-821.
Brinkhuis, S. and De Maeseneire, W., ‘What Drives Leverage in Leveraged Buyouts? An
Analysis of European LBOs' Capital Structure’, Working Paper (Erasmus School of Economics,
2009).
Broughman, B. and Fried, J., 'Renegotiation of cash flow rights in the sale of VC-backed firms',
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 95 no. 3, Mar, 2010, pp. 384-99.
Brown, D. T., Fee, C. E. and Thomas, S. E., 'Financial leverage and bargaining power with
suppliers: Evidence from leveraged buyouts', Journal of Corporate Finance, Vol. 15 no. 2, Apr,
2009, pp. 196-211.
Campello, M. and Da Matta, R., ‘How Are Venture Capitalists Rewarded? The Economics of
Venture Capital Partnerships’, Working Paper (2010).
Cao, J., Cumming, D. J., Qian, M. and Wang, X., ‘Creditor Rights and LBOs’, Working Paper
(Singapore Management University, 2010).
Cao, J. and Lerner, J., 'The performance of reverse leveraged buyouts', Journal of Financial
Economics, Vol. 91 no. 2, Feb, 2009, pp. 139-57.
Casamatta, C., 'Financing and advising: Optimal financial contracts with venture capitalists',
Journal of Finance, Vol. 58 no. 5, Oct, 2003, pp. 2059-85.
Caselli, S., Gatti, S. and Perrini, F., 'Are Venture Capitalists a Catalyst for Innovation?', European
Financial Management, Vol. 15 no. 1, Jan, 2009, pp. 92-111.
Chan, Y. S., 'On the Positive Role of Financial Intermediation in Allocation of Venture Capital in
a Market with Imperfect Information', Journal of Finance, Vol. 38 no. 5, 1983, pp. 1543-68.
Chemmanur, T. J., 'Venture Capital, Private Equity, IPOs, and Banking: An Introduction and
Agenda for Future Research', Journal of Economics and Business, forthcoming.
Chen, H., Gompers, P., Kovner, A. and Lerner, J., 'Buy local? The geography of venture capital',
Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 67 no. 1, Jan, 2010, pp. 90-102.
Chung, J.-W., ‘Leveraged Buyouts of Private Companies’, Working Paper (The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, 2009).
Chung, J.-W., Sensoy, B. A., Stern, L. H. and Weisbach, M. S., ‘Incentives of Private Equity
General Partners from Future Fundraising’, Working Paper (2010).
Cochrane, J. H., 'The risk and return of venture capital', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 75
no. 1, Jan, 2005, pp. 3-52.
Cornelli, F. and Karakas, O., ‘Private Equity and Corporate Governance: Do LBOs Have More
Effective Boards? ’, Working Paper (2008).

46

Cornelli, F., Kominek, Z. and Ljungqvist, A., ‘Monitoring Managers: Does It Matter?’, Working
Paper (2010).
Cornelli, F. and Yosha, O., 'Stage financing and the role of convertible securities', Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 70 no. 1, Jan, 2003, pp. 1-32.
Cotter, J. F. and Peck, S. W., 'The structure of debt and active equity investors: The case of the
buyout specialist', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 59 no. 1, Jan, 2001, pp. 101-47.
Cumming, D., 'Contracts and exits in venture capital finance', Review of Financial Studies, Vol.
21 no. 5, Sep, 2008, pp. 1947-82.
Cumming, D., Siegel, D. S. and Wright, M., 'Private equity, leveraged buyouts and governance',
Journal of Corporate Finance, Vol. 13 no. 4, Sep, 2007, pp. 439-60.
Davis, S. J., Haltiwanger, J. C., Jarmin, R. S., Lerner, J. and Miranda, J., ‘Private Equity and
Employment’, Working Paper (US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies, 2008).
DeAngelo, H. and DeAngelo, L., 'Management Buyouts of Publicly Traded Corporations',
Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 43 no. 3, 1987, pp. 38-49.
DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L. and Rice, E. M., 'Going Private - Minority Freezeouts and
Stockholder Wealth', Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 27 no. 2, 1984, pp. 367-401.
Demiroglu, C. and James, C. M., 'The role of private equity group reputation in LBO financing',
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 96 no. 2, May, 2010, pp. 306-30.
Denis, D. J., 'Corporate-Investment Decisions and Corporate-Control - Evidence from GoingPrivate Transactions', Financial Management, Vol. 21 no. 3, Fal, 1992, pp. 80-94.
Denis, D. J., 'Organizational Form and the Consequences of Highly Leveraged Transactions
Krogers Recapitalization and Safeways Lbo', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 36 no. 2, Oct,
1994, pp. 193-224.
Denis, D. J., 'Entrepreneurial finance: an overview of the issues and evidence', Journal of
Corporate Finance, Vol. 10 no. 2, Mar, 2004, pp. 301-26.
Diller, C. and Kaserer, C., 'What Drives Private Equity Returns? Fund Inflows, Skilled GPs,
and/or Risk?', European Financial Management, Vol. 15 no. 3, Jun, 2009, pp. 643-75.
Driessen, J., Phalippou, L. and Lin, T.-C., ‘A New Method to Estimate Risk and Return of NonTraded Assets from Cash Flows: The Case of Private Equity Funds’, Working Paper (University
of Amsterdam, 2009).
Fang, L. H., Ivashina, V. and Lerner, J., ‘Unstable Equity? Combining Banking with Private
Equity Investing’, Working Paper (Harvard Business School 2010).
Fenn, G. W. and Liang, N., 'New resources and new ideas: Private equity for small businesses',
Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol. 22 no. 6-8, Aug, 1998, pp. 1077-84.
Field, L. C. and Hanka, G., 'The expiration of IPO share lockups', Journal of Finance, Vol. 56 no.
2, Apr, 2001, pp. 471-500.

47

Fluck, Z., Garrison, K. R. and Myers, S. C., ‘Venture Capital: An Experiment in Computational
Corporate Finance’, Working Paper (2004).
Gompers, P., 'The Rise and Fall of Venture Capital', Business and Economic History, Vol. 23 no.
2, 1994, pp. 1-24.
Gompers, P., Kovner, A. and Lerner, J., 'Specialization and Success: Evidence from Venture
Capital', Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, Vol. 18 no. 3, Fal, 2009, pp. 817-44.
Gompers, P., Kovner, A., Lerner, J. and Scharfstein, D., 'Venture capital investment cycles: The
impact of public markets', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 87 no. 1, Jan, 2008, pp. 1-23.
Gompers, P., Kovner, A., Lerner, J. and Scharfstein, D., 'Performance persistence in
entrepreneurship', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 96 no. 1, Apr, 2010, pp. 18-32.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J., 'Risk and Reward in Private Equity Investments: The Challenge of
Performance Assessment', Journal of Private Equity, Vol. 1, 1997, pp. 5-12.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J., 'Venture capital distributions: Short-run and long-run reactions',
Journal of Finance, Vol. 53 no. 6, Dec, 1998a, pp. 2161-83.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J., 'An analysis of compensation in the US venture capital partnership',
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 51 no. 1, Jan, 1999a, pp. 3-44.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J., 'Conflict of interest in the issuance of public securities: Evidence
from venture capital', Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 42 no. 1, Apr, 1999b, pp. 1-28.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J., 'Money chasing deals? The impact of fund inflows on private equity
valuations', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 55 no. 2, Feb, 2000, pp. 281-325.
Gompers, P. and Lerner, J., 'The venture capital revolution', Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Vol. 15 no. 2, Spr, 2001, pp. 145-68.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J. and Scharfstein, D., 'Entrepreneurial spawning: Public corporations and
the genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999', Journal of Finance, Vol. 60 no. 2, Apr, 2005, pp.
577-614.
Gompers, P. A., 'Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital', Journal of
Finance, Vol. 50 no. 5, Dec, 1995, pp. 1461-89.
Gompers, P. A., 'Grandstanding in the venture capital industry', Journal of Financial Economics,
Vol. 42 no. 1, Sep, 1996, pp. 133-56.
Gompers, P. A., 'Venture capital growing pains: Should the market diet?', Journal of Banking &
Finance, Vol. 22 no. 6-8, Aug, 1998, pp. 1089-104.
Gompers, P. A. and Lerner, J., 'What drives venture capital fundraising', Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1998b, pp. 149-204.
Gorman, M. and Sahlman, W. A., 'What Do Venture Capitalists Do', Journal of Business
Venturing, Vol. 4 no. 4, Jul, 1989, pp. 231-48.

48

Groh, A. P. and Gottschalg, O., ‘The Opportunity Cost of Capital of US Buyouts’, Working
Paper (IESE Business School, 2009).
Guo, S., Hotchkiss, E. S. and Song, W., 'Do Buyouts (Still) Create Value ', Journal of Finance,
forthcoming.
Gupta, A. and Rosenthal, L., 'Ownership Structure, Leverage, and Firm Value: The Case of
Leveraged Recapitalizations', Financial Management, Vol. 20 no. 3, 1991, pp. 69-83.
Hamao, Y., Packer, F. and Ritter, J. R., 'Institutional affiliation and the role of venture capital:
Evidence from initial public offerings in Japan', Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, Vol. 8 no. 5,
2000, pp. 529-58.
Harris, R., Siegel, D. S. and Wright, M., 'Assessing the impact of management buyouts on
economic efficiency: Plant-level evidence from the United Kingdom', Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 87 no. 1, Feb, 2005, pp. 148-53.
Hellmann, T., 'The allocation of control rights in venture capital contracts', Rand Journal of
Economics, Vol. 29 no. 1, Spr, 1998, pp. 57-76.
Hellmann, T., 'IPOs, acquisitions, and the use of convertible securities in venture capital', Journal
of Financial Economics, Vol. 81 no. 3, Sep, 2006, pp. 649-79.
Hellmann, T., Lindsey, L. and Puri, M., 'Building relationships early: Banks in venture capital',
Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 21 no. 2, Apr, 2008, pp. 513-41.
Hellmann, T. and Puri, M., 'The interaction between product market and financing strategy: The
role of venture capital', Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 13 no. 4, Win, 2000, pp. 959-84.
Hellmann, T. and Puri, M., 'Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up firms:
Empirical evidence', Journal of Finance, Vol. 57 no. 1, Feb, 2002, pp. 169-97.
Hite, G. L. and Vetsuypens, M. R., 'Management Buyouts of Divisions and Shareholder Wealth',
Journal of Finance, Vol. 44 no. 4, Sep, 1989, pp. 953-70.
Hochberg, Y. V., ‘Venture Capital and Corporate Governance in the Newly Public Firm’,
Working Paper (Northwestern University, 2003).
Hochberg, Y. V., Ljungqvist, A. and Lu, Y., 'Whom you know matters: Venture capital networks
and investment performance', Journal of Finance, Vol. 62 no. 1, Feb, 2007, pp. 251-301.
Hochberg, Y. V., Ljungqvist, A. and Lu, Y., 'Networking as a Barrier to Entry and the
Competitive Supply of Venture Capital', Journal of Finance, Vol. 65 no. 3, 2010a, pp. 829-59.
Hochberg, Y. V., Ljungqvist, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen, A., ‘Informational Hold-Up and
Performance Persistence in Venture Capital’, Working Paper (New York University, 2010b).
Holthausen, R. W. and Larcker, D. F., 'The financial performance of reverse leveraged buyouts',
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 42 no. 3, Nov, 1996, pp. 293-332.
Hsu, D. H., 'What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation?', Journal of Finance, Vol.
59 no. 4, Aug, 2004, pp. 1805-44.

49

Inderst, R. and Mueller, H. M., 'Early-stage financing and firm growth in new industries', Journal
of Financial Economics, Vol. 93 no. 2, Aug, 2009, pp. 276-91.
Inderst, R., Mueller, H. M. and Munnich, F., 'Financing a portfolio of projects', Review of
Financial Studies, Vol. 20 no. 4, Jul, 2007, pp. 1289-325.
Inderst, R. and Muller, H. M., 'The effect of capital market characteristics on the value of start-up
firms', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 72 no. 2, May, 2004, pp. 319-56.
Ivashina, V. and Kovner, A., ‘The Private Equity Advantage: Leveraged Buyout Firms and
Relationship Banking’, Working Paper (Harvard Business School, 2010).
Jensen, M. C., 'Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate-Finance, and Takeovers', American
Economic Review, Vol. 76 no. 2, May, 1986, pp. 323-29.
Jensen, M. C., 'Eclipse of the Public Corporation', Harvard Business Review, Vol. 67 no. 5, SepOct, 1989, pp. 61-74.
Jensen, M. C., ‘The Economic Case for Private Equity (and Some Concerns) -- pdf of Keynote
Slides’, Working Paper (Harvard University 2007).
Jensen, M. C. and Meckling, W. H., 'Theory of Firm - Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and
Ownership Structure', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 3 no. 4, 1976, pp. 305-60.
Jones, C. M. and Rhodes-Kropf, M., ‘The Price of Diversifiable Risk in Venture Capital and
Private Equity’, Working Paper (Columbia Business School 2003).
Kaplan, S., 'Management Buyouts - Evidence on Taxes as a Source of Value', Journal of Finance,
Vol. 44 no. 3, Jul, 1989a, pp. 611-32.
Kaplan, S., 'The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance and Value', Journal
of Financial Economics, Vol. 24 no. 2, Oct, 1989b, pp. 217-54.
Kaplan, S. N., 'The Staying Power of Leveraged Buyouts', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.
29 no. 2, Oct, 1991, pp. 287-313.
Kaplan, S. N., Klebanov, M. M. and Sorensen, M., 'Which CEO Characteristics and Abilities
Matter?', Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Kaplan, S. N. and Lerner, J., 'It Ain't Broke: The Past, Present, and Future of Venture Capital',
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 22 no. 2, 2010, pp. 36-47.
Kaplan, S. N., Martel, F. and Stromberg, P., 'How do legal differences and experience affect
financial contracts?', Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 16 no. 3, Jul, 2007, pp. 273-311.
Kaplan, S. N. and Schoar, A., 'Private equity performance: Returns, persistence, and capital
flows', Journal of Finance, Vol. 60 no. 4, Aug, 2005, pp. 1791-823.
Kaplan, S. N., Sensoy, B. A. and Stromberg, P., 'Should Investors Bet on the Jockey or the Horse
? Evidence from the Evolution of Firms from Early Business Plans to Public Companies', Journal
of Finance, Vol. 64 no. 1, Feb, 2009, pp. 75-115.

50

Kaplan, S. N., Sensoy, B. A. and Stromberg, P. J., ‘How Well do Venture Capital Databases
Reflect Actual Investments?’, Working Paper (University of Chicago, 2002).
Kaplan, S. N. and Stein, J. C., 'How risky is the debt in highly leveraged transactions?', Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 27 no. 1, 1990, pp. 215-45.
Kaplan, S. N. and Stein, J. C., 'The Evolution of Buyout Pricing and Financial Structure in the
1980s', Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108 no. 2, May, 1993, pp. 313-57.
Kaplan, S. N. and Stromberg, P., 'Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An empirical
analysis of venture capital contracts', Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 70 no. 2, Apr, 2003, pp.
281-315.
Kaplan, S. N. and Stromberg, P., 'Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence from venture
capitalist analyses', Journal of Finance, Vol. 59 no. 5, Oct, 2004, pp. 2177-210.
Kaplan, S. N. and Stromberg, P., 'Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity', Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 23 no. 1, Win, 2009, pp. 121-46.
Kaplan, S. N. and Stromberg, P. J., ‘Venture Capitalists as Principals: Contracting, Screening,
and Monitoring’, Working Paper (University of Chicago, 2001).
Katz, S. P., 'Earnings Quality and Ownership Structure: The Role of Private Equity Sponsors',
Accounting Review, Vol. 84 no. 3, May, 2009, pp. 623-58.
Kirilenko, A. A., 'Valuation and control in venture finance', Journal of Finance, Vol. 56 no. 2,
Apr, 2001, pp. 565-87.
Korteweg, A. G. and Sorensen, M., 'Risk and Return Characteristics of Venture Capital-Backed
Entrepreneurial Companies', Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Kortum, S. and Lerner, J., 'Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation', Rand
Journal of Economics, Vol. 31 no. 4, Win, 2000, pp. 674-92.
Kracaw, W. A. and Zenner, M., 'The wealth effects of bank financing announcements in highly
leveraged transactions', Journal of Finance, Vol. 51 no. 5, Dec, 1996, pp. 1931-46.
Krishnan, C. N. V., Ivanov, V., Masulis, R. W. and Singh, A. K., 'Venture Capital Reputation,
Post-IPO Performance and Corporate Governance', Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, forthcoming.
Krishnan, C. N. V. and Masulis, R. W., 'Venture Capital Reputation: A Survey', in D. Cumming
ed, the Handbook of Entrepreneurial Finance, Venture Capital and Private Equity (Oxford
University Press, forthcoming).
Lehn, K., Netter, J. and Poulsen, A., 'Consolidating Corporate-Control - Dual-Class
Recapitalizations Versus Leveraged Buyouts', Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 27 no. 2,
Oct, 1990, pp. 557-80.
Lehn, K. and Poulsen, A., 'Free Cash Flow and Stockholder Gains in Going Private Transactions',
Journal of Finance, Vol. 44 no. 3, Jul, 1989, pp. 771-87.

51

Lerner, J., 'The Syndication of Venture Capital Investments', Financial Management, Vol. 23 no.
3, Fal, 1994a, pp. 16-27.
Lerner, J., 'Venture Capitalists and the Decision to Go Public', Journal of Financial Economics,
Vol. 35 no. 3, Jun, 1994b, pp. 293-316.
Lerner, J., 'Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms', Journal of Finance, Vol. 50
no. 1, Mar, 1995, pp. 301-18.
Lerner, J., 'The Future of Private Equity', European Financial Management, forthcoming.
Lerner, J. and Schoar, A., 'The illiquidity puzzle: theory and evidence from private equity',
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 72 no. 1, Apr, 2004, pp. 3-40.
Lerner, J. and Schoar, A., 'Does legal enforcement affect financial transactions? The contractual
channel in private equity', Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 120 no. 1, Feb, 2005, pp. 22346.
Lerner, J., Schoar, A. and Wongsunwai, W., 'Smart institutions, foolish choices: The limited
partner performance puzzle', Journal of Finance, Vol. 62 no. 2, Apr, 2007, pp. 731-64.
Lerner, J., Sorensen, M. and Stromberg, P. J., 'Private Equity and Long-Run Investment: The
Case of Innovation', Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Li, X. and Masulis, R. W., ‘Venture Capital Investments by IPO Underwriters: Certification,
Alignment of Interest or Moral Hazard?’, Working Paper (Australian School of Business,
University of New South Wales, 2004).
Lichtenberg, F. R. and Siegel, D., 'The Effect of Ownership Changes on the Employment and
Wages of Central Office and Other Personnel', Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 33 no. 2, Oct,
1990, pp. 383-408.
Lindsey, L., 'Blurring firm boundaries: The role of venture capital in strategic alliances', Journal
of Finance, Vol. 63 no. 3, Jun, 2008, pp. 1137-68.
Ljungqvist, A. and Richardson, M. P., ‘The Cash Flow, Return and Risk Characteristics of
Private Equity’, Working Paper (New York University, 2003).
Ljungqvist, A., Richardson, M. P. and Wolfenzon, D., ‘The Investment Behavior of Buyout
Funds: Theory and Evidence’, Working Paper (New York University, 2007).
Long, W. F. and Ravenscraft, D. J., 'Lbos, Debt and Research-and-Development Intensity',
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 14, Sum, 1993, pp. 119-35.
Lopez de Silanes, F., Phalippou, L. and Gottschalg, O., ‘Giants at the Gate: Diseconomies of
Scale in Private Equity’, Working Paper (University of Amsterdam, 2010).
Maats, F., Metrick, A., Yasuda, A., Hinkes, B. and Vershovski, S., ‘On the Consistency and
Reliability of Venture Capital Databases’, Working Paper (Yale School of Management, 2010).
Marquez, R. and Singh, R., ‘The Economics of Club Bidding in Private Equity’, Working Paper
(Boston University, 2010).

52

Marquez, R. S., Nanda, V. K. and Yavuz, M. D., ‘Private Equity Fund Returns: Do Managers
Actually Leave Money on the Table?’, Working Paper (2010).
Marx, L. M., 'Efficient venture capital financing combining debt and equity', Review of Economic
Design, Vol. 3 no. 4, 1998, pp. 371-87.
Masulis, R. W. and Nahata, R., 'Venture Capital Conflicts of Interest: Evidence from Acquisitions
of Venture Backed Firms', Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Masulis, R. W. and Thomas, R. S., 'Does Private Equity Create Wealth? The Effects of Private
Equity and Derivatives on Corporate Governance', University of Chicago Law Review, Vol. 76
no. 1, Win, 2009, pp. 219-59.
Mehran, H. and Peristiani, S., 'Financial Visibility and the Decision to Go Private', Review of
Financial Studies, Vol. 23 no. 2, Feb, 2010, pp. 519-47.
Metrick, A. and Yasuda, A., 'The Economics of Private Equity Funds', Review of Financial
Studies, Vol. 23 no. 6, Jun, 2010a, pp. 2303-41.
Metrick, A. and Yasuda, A., Venture Capital and the Finance of Innovation (John Wiley & Sons,
2010b).
Muscarella, C. J. and Vetsuypens, M. R., 'Efficiency and Organizational-Structure - a Study of
Reverse Lbos', Journal of Finance, Vol. 45 no. 5, Dec, 1990, pp. 1389-413.
Nahata, R., 'Venture capital reputation and investment performance', Journal of Financial
Economics, Vol. 90 no. 2, Nov, 2008, pp. 127-51.
Neher, D. V., 'Staged financing: An agency perspective', Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 66 no.
2, Apr, 1999, pp. 255-74.
Officer, M. S., Ozbas, O. and Sensoy, B. A., 'Club Deals in Leveraged Buyouts', Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 98 no. 2, 2010, pp. 214-40.
Opler, T. and Titman, S., 'The Determinants of Leveraged Buyout Activity - Free Cash Flow Vs
Financial Distress Costs', Journal of Finance, Vol. 48 no. 5, Dec, 1993, pp. 1985-99.
Phalippou, L., 'Beware of Venturing into Private Equity', Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol.
23 no. 1, Win, 2009, pp. 147-66.
Phalippou, L., 'Venture capital funds: Flow-performance relationship and performance
persistence', Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol. 34 no. 3, Mar, 2010, pp. 568-77.
Phalippou, L. and Gottschalg, O., 'The Performance of Private Equity Funds', Review of Financial
Studies, Vol. 22 no. 4, Apr, 2009, pp. 1747-76.
Povel, P. and Singh, R., 'Stapled Finance', Journal of Finance, Vol. 65 no. 3, Jun, 2010, pp. 92753.
Puri, M. and Zarutskie, R., ‘On the Lifecycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital- and Non-VentureCapital-Financed Firms’, Working Paper (Duke University, 2010).

53

Repullo, R. and Suarez, J., 'Venture Capital: A Security Design Approach', Review of Finance,
Vol. 8, 2004, pp. 75-108.
Sahlman, W. A., 'The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital Organizations', Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 27 no. 2, Oct, 1990, pp. 473-521.
Schmidt, K. M., 'Convertible securities and venture capital finance', Journal of Finance, Vol. 58
no. 3, Jun, 2003, pp. 1139-66.
Slovin, M. B., Sushka, M. E. and Bendeck, Y. M., 'The Intraindustry Effects of Going-Private
Transactions', Journal of Finance, Vol. 46 no. 4, Sep, 1991, pp. 1537-50.
Sorensen, M., 'How smart is smart money? A two-sided matching model of venture capital',
Journal of Finance, Vol. 62 no. 6, Dec, 2007, pp. 2725-62.
Stromberg, P., ‘The New Demography of Private Equity’, Working Paper (Stockholm School of
Economics, 2007).
TheCityUK, ‘Private Equity 2010’, (TheCityUK, 2010).
Tian, X. and Wang, T. Y., ‘Tolerance for Failure and Corporate Innovation’, Working Paper
(University of Minnesota, 2010).
Trester, J. J., 'Venture capital contracting under asymmetric information', Journal of Banking &
Finance, Vol. 22 no. 6-8, Aug, 1998, pp. 675-99.
Ueda, M., 'Banks versus venture capital: Project evaluation, screening, and expropriation',
Journal of Finance, Vol. 59 no. 2, Apr, 2004, pp. 601-21.
Wieland, M. F. G., 'The role of human capital in private equity firms' investment strategies',
Department of Finance (Erasmus University Rotterdam, ESE, 2009).
Winton, A. and Yerramilli, V., 'Entrepreneurial finance: Banks versus venture capital', Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 88 no. 1, Apr, 2008, pp. 51-79.
Woodward, S. E., ‘Measuring Risk for Venture Capital and Private Equity Portfolios’, Working
Paper (2009).
Zarutskie, R., 'The role of top management team human capital in venture capital markets:
Evidence from first-time funds', Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 25 no. 1, Jan, 2010, pp. 15572.

54

Source: (Metrick and Yasuda 2010b), Exhibit 1-2.
Fig. 1. Private Equity and Hedge Funds
This figure illustrates the overlapping structure of the four main types of private equity
investing and also shows the intersection of these types with hedge funds, another
category of alternative investment

55

Table 1
Comparison of typical VC/PE fund terms with those of hedge funds and mutual funds
This chart compares typical fund terms of venture capital and buyout funds with those of
hedge funds and mutual funds. An “open-end” fund can issue and redeem shares at any
time (subject to lockups and waiting periods in case of hedge funds). A “finite-life” fund
is obligated to terminate and liquidate its holdings at a pre-specified date. Reinvestments
refer to use of fund distributions in order to invest in new or existing portfolio
companies/assets.

56

