NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEALTH INSURANCE MANDATES, MAMMOGRAPHY, AND BREAST CANCER
DIAGNOSES
Marianne P. Bitler
Christopher S. Carpenter
Working Paper 16669
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16669
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

Previously circulated as "Insurance Mandates and Mammography." We thank Brian Asquith, Charles
Hardy, Bhavanna Mannam, Ian Salas, Kathleen Wong, and Melody Yang for excellent research assistance.
We are grateful to Kathleen Adams, Laura Argys, Cathy Bradley, David Neumark, Edward Norton,
Barak Richman, Lucie Schmidt, Lara Shore-Sheppard, Kosali Simon, Madeline Zavodny, and numerous
conference and seminar participants for many useful discussions and comments. David Howard generously
shared NBCCEDP data. Bitler worked on this paper while visiting the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco. We are grateful to the American Cancer Society (Grant #RSGI- 11-003-01-CPHPS) and
the UCI School of Medicine’s Institute for Clinical Translational Science for grant funding. All errors
are our own. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted
as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, the American Cancer Society, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Marianne P. Bitler and Christopher S. Carpenter. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses
Marianne P. Bitler and Christopher S. Carpenter
NBER Working Paper No. 16669
January 2011, Revised December 2014
JEL No. I1,I18
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of state health insurance mandates requiring coverage of screening mammograms.
We find robust evidence that mammography mandates significantly increased mammography screenings
by 4.5-25 percent. Effects are larger for women with less than a high school degree in states that ban
deductibles, a policy similar to a provision of federal health reform that eliminates cost-sharing for
preventive care. We also find that mandates increased detection of early stage in-situ pre-cancers.
Finally, we find a substantial proportion of the increased screenings were attributable to mandates
that are not consistent with current recommendations of the American Cancer Society.
Marianne P. Bitler
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 96297
and NBER
mbitler@uci.edu
Christopher S. Carpenter
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B, Box #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
christopher.s.carpenter@vanderbilt.edu

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

1. Introduction
Recent federal health care reform (the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act) requires that new or substantially altered private insurance plans cover
a variety of preventive health services and prohibits insurance companies from
imposing cost-sharing for those services, with the goal of increasing utilization.
Mammography, the standard screening test for breast cancer, is one of the most
common preventive services used by adult women and played a prominent role in
debates about health reform.1 Routine mammography rates among adult women
are substantially below the recommended levels of both the United States
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) and the American Cancer Society
(ACS).
Expanding coverage of mammography through federal health care reform
therefore has the potential to increase mammography rates and affect breast
cancer outcomes, but there is surprisingly little research showing that adopting
more generous insurance coverage will, in fact, increase screening utilization. We
provide evidence on this question by studying state experimentation with very
similar insurance coverage expansions in the form of benefits mandates.
Specifically, from 1987-2000, 42 states adopted laws requiring private insurers
within the state to include screening mammography benefits in insurance plans,
and six of those states further imposed requirements similar to those in federal
health reform that insurance companies may not impose cost-sharing on women
who obtain mammograms.2 These policies have not been previously studied
using quasi-experimental methods and thus their presence provides researchers a
1

In part this was due to controversy among the USPSTF, the ACS, and other major medical
organizations regarding the appropriate age at which women should begin obtaining
mammograms as well as how frequently screening should occur. All interested parties, however,
agree that women age 50 to 74 should have regular mammograms.
2
Firms which purchase insurance are directly affected by these mandates; self-insured firms are
not required to comply with state insurance mandates due to the well-known exemption provisions
of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA).

1

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

unique opportunity to understand whether mandating insurance coverage and, in
some cases, prohibiting cost-sharing for relatively low-cost preventive health
services can increase screening utilization and affect breast cancer diagnoses. In
so doing, our research also provides valuable insight into the likely effects of
federal health reform with respect to mammography and breast cancer outcomes.
To evaluate the effects of the state mandates, we draw on data on
mammography screening from the Centers for Disease Control’s 1987–2000
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). We evaluate the effects of
these laws using state and year fixed effects models and augmented triple
differences (DDD) models, each with relative strengths and weaknesses. The
two-way fixed effects approach takes advantage of variation in the timing of
adoption across states. The DDD models augment this approach by using the fact
that the mandates specify different benefits for women of different ages, allowing
us to estimate models with fixed effects for state, year, and age group, as well as
for each of their two-way interactions.

We supplement these data with

information from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) cancer
registry system to test for effects of mandates on breast cancer diagnoses and insitu pre-cancer diagnoses using the same approaches.
To preview, we find strong evidence that state mandates requiring
insurance coverage for mammograms significantly increased past year
mammography rates among women age 25-74 by between 4.5 and 25 percent, and
these effects are driven by insured women.

We also find that mandates

prohibiting deductibles for mammography—similar to provisions in the recently
adopted federal health reform—significantly increased mammography screenings
among women with less than a high school degree relative to mandates without
such limitations on out-of-pocket costs. These results confirm that mandating
insurance coverage for low-cost preventive health services can meaningfully
increase utilization rates. They also suggest that federal health reform is likely to

2

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

further increase mammography screenings. Regarding breast cancer diagnoses,
we find that the mandates increased detection of the earliest stage in-situ precancers.

Finally, we show that a substantial proportion of the increased

screenings are attributable to mandates that are not consistent with current
guidelines of the American Cancer Society. This suggests that at least some of
the increased screenings may not have been welfare enhancing and is consistent
with our findings on in-situ diagnoses, as there is disagreement in the medical
community about whether in-situ pre-cancers are likely to progress to more
invasive stages.
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 outlines institutional details
regarding mammography and the insurance mandates we study, and Section 3
describes the relevant literature.

We describe the research design, data, and

empirical approach in Section 4, and Section 5 presents the results. Section 6
concludes.

2. Breast Cancer Screening and Institutional Details
Breast cancer is both the most commonly diagnosed cancer and the second
leading cause of cancer death among women in the United States: 40,000 women
die of breast cancer each year. Early detection of breast cancer through regular
screening mammograms is commonly understood to be a key if not the most
important determinant of survival. In mammography, a woman’s breasts are
placed on a machine that takes low-dose X-ray pictures to check for
abnormalities.

Screening mammograms are typically given to asymptomatic

women to look for suspicious markers. Diagnostic mammograms usually occur
among women who have had a previous abnormal screening mammogram
(approximately 10% of those screened in the early 1990s), have a family history
of breast cancer, or have certain symptoms (e.g., presence of lumps in a breast or

3

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

changes in a nipple or breast). Abnormal screening results can also lead to more
invasive procedures such as biopsy.
Cutler (2008) argues that increases in routine cancer screenings such as
mammography represent the most important factor behind the reversal in ageadjusted cancer mortality rates that occurred in the 1990s, while Berry et al.
(2005) find that the share of the decrease in the rate of breast cancer deaths from
1975 to 2000 due to screening ranged from 28% to 65% (with treatment
accounting for the rest). The increase in population mammography rates was
particularly broad-based from 1987 to 2000: screening rates among non-elderly
adult women about doubled for women of different age, race/ethnicity, marital
status, education, and even household income groups.
The majority of states adopted mammography benefits mandates for
qualified private health insurance plans from 1987 to 2000. The modal mandate
calls for private insurance plans within the state to cover baseline screening
mammograms for 35 to 39 year olds, biennial mammograms for 40 to 49 year
olds, and annual mammograms for women age 50 and older. These mandates
apply to the insurance companies who sell insurance to private employers (or, in
some cases, sell to individuals). Women who have their own employer-related
private insurance coverage or who have insurance through employed husbands or
others would be affected by these mandates if the firm was not self-insured.
These age-based benefits reflect the age-specific mammography frequency
recommendations supported by the American Cancer Society from 1983 until
1991 for asymptomatic women at average risk of getting breast cancer. In 1992
the ACS eliminated the recommendation that 35 to 39 year olds obtain a baseline
screening mammogram, and in March 1997 the ACS further revised its
recommendations to state that annual screening mammography should begin at

4

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

age 40.3 In recognition of these changes, some of the mammography mandates
adopted in the latter part of our sample period revised pre-existing rules to require
plans to cover (or less commonly offer) annual mammography screenings for
women age 40 and older.4 Moreover, a handful of states have used different agebased cutoffs in their laws. For example, Wisconsin’s 1990 law requires coverage
for two mammograms for women age 45 to 49, provided they have not had one
within two years (i.e., this law mandated coverage of nearly biennial
mammography beginning at age 45). Texas’ 1987 mandate requires coverage for
annual mammograms for all women age 35 and older. Thus, there is substantial
age by state by year variation in the frequency of screenings whose coverage is
required in state laws that forms the basis of one of our identification strategies
below (the fully interacted DDD model).

3. Relevant Literature

3

Notably, there is not uniform agreement across major medical organizations with respect to these
recommendations.
The USPSTF, for example, did not recommend routine screening
mammography (every 1-2 years) for women age 40 and older until 2002. Prior to 2002, the
USPSTF only recommended screening mammograms at this frequency for women age 50 and
older and in 2009 revised their recommendations to only include regular screenings for all women
age 50 and older. We take no stance on which organization’s recommendations are the most
scientifically or clinically valid, and such discussions are well beyond the scope of this paper. For
our triple difference models described below, it is important to note that our estimates of the
effects of mandates will rely only on variation at the state by age group by year level coincident
with the timing of mandate adoption; any recommendations from major medical organizations will
be absorbed by the age group times year interactions since, although the recommendations
themselves are age-based, they are nationwide (i.e., not state-specific) guidelines.
4
This discussion highlights (and Appendix Figures 1-3 make visually apparent) that the state by
year by age group identifying variation in the mandates is only weakly correlated with variation in
screening recommendations of ACS and USPSTF. That is, the failure of most states to
consistently update their laws in response to changes in national screening guidelines from ACS
and USPSTF (which are themselves contradictory) provides us substantial variation for
disentangling the independent effect of insurance-based eligibility for mammography screening
from the effect of guidelines on mammography utilization in one of our identification strategies.
For an analysis of the effects of such guidelines in the US and Canada, see Kadiyala and Strumpf
(2011a, b). For an analysis of guideline adherence, see Phillips et al. (1998).

5

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Our paper is related to a large literature in economics that has used
experimental and quasi-experimental methods to identify causal effects of
insurance coverage generosity on use of health services and health outcomes, such
as the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (HIE) (Manning et al. 1987), the
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (Finkelstein et al. 2012), and the
Massachusetts Health Reform (Kolstad and Kowalski, 2010), all of which
examined mammography screenings as a key preventive health care outcome.5
The results of those studies are mixed. Manning et al. (1987) found that costsharing deterred participants from obtaining preventive care relative to the ‘free’
plan in the controlled setting of the RAND HIE from 1971 to 1982. Lurie et al.
(1987), however, show that mammography rates among women aged 45-64 in the
RAND HIE were only around 2 percent, precluding direct tests of cost-sharing on
mammography in particular.

Regarding a closely related preventive cancer

screening – Pap tests for cervical cancer – they found no difference between
screening rates for people in the ‘free’ plan versus people randomized to costsharing. Finkelstein et al. (2012) study low-income Medicaid-eligible women and
find that participants who took-up Medicaid in the state due to winning a lottery
in 2008 (i.e., generally moved from no insurance to public insurance) were
significantly more likely to get a mammogram in the first year after the program,
an effect on the order of 60 percent relative to the control group mean. Notably,
there was no cost-sharing for participants in the Oregon plan. In contrast, Kolstad
and Kowalski (2010) find no significant change in mammography rates for
women in Massachusetts relative to women in other states after the
implementation of the state’s mandated health insurance reform in 2006. Thus,

5

Trivedi et al. (2008) show that voluntary choices by plans to impose cost sharing for screening
mammography were associated with reduced screening rates, though they do not address
unobserved heterogeneity.

6

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

the existing quasi-experimental evidence on the role of insurance coverage and
cost-sharing in screening mammography is mixed.
We complement these studies in the following ways. First, we examine
effects of a different type of policy intervention that specifically targets screening
mammography and that in some states mimics key provisions in the federal health
reform. Second, we examine effects among a much larger share of the female
population (all women 25-74 as opposed to only low-income women in the
Oregon case, only 40-64 or 45-64 year old women as in the Oregon and RAND
cases, or only women in a single state as in the Oregon and Massachusetts cases).
Third, we directly examine effects on cancer diagnoses.
There is little research that estimates the effects of state insurance benefit
mandates requiring coverage of mammography. Two public health studies find
positive associations between mammography mandates and utilization using
purely cross-sectional designs (Mor and Shackleton 2005, Pettibone 2003).6 Dans
and Wright (1996) examined claims data for outpatient mammograms for women
in Maryland’s Blue Cross Blue Shield plan before and after the state’s 1991
mammography mandate was implemented; they found evidence of a modest
increase in overall screening rates. There is, however, no quasi-experimental
work that uses the timing of mandate adoption for multiple states while
controlling for fixed differences across states or over time.
The absence of a substantial literature on the utilization effects of
mammography benefits mandates is striking given that mammography is one of
the most commonly mandated benefits (Bunce and Wieske 2008) and over this
6

A handful of studies have evaluated changes in Medicare reimbursement policy for screening
mammography. Kelaher and Stellman (2000) find that when Medicare Part B began covering
biennial mammography in 1991, past two year mammography rates for Medicare eligible women
significantly increased relative to younger women who were not eligible for Medicare. Kadiyala
and Strumpf (2012) find a substantial increase in cancer detection at age 65 (when all women who
are not already eligible for Medicare become Medicare-eligible), most of which is among cancers
with established screening tests.

7

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

time period there were unprecedented increases in mammography rates for older
women.7 Moreover, other types of state level insurance benefit mandates have
been studied extensively by economists.

These include: pregnancy benefits,

(Gruber 1994a), infertility treatment (e.g., Bitler 2010; Bitler and Schmidt 2012;
Schmidt 2007; Bundorf, Henne, and Baker 2007; Buckles 2008), mental health
parity (e.g., Pacula and Sturm 2000; Harris, Carpenter, and Bao 2007; Busch and
Barry 2008), and overnight hospital stays for newborn deliveries (e.g., Liu, Dow,
and Norton 2004; Almond and Doyle 2011).
Researchers have identified a number of considerations for understanding
the extent to which any mandated benefits laws should affect outcomes. First, it
is commonly argued that mandated benefits laws can cause employers—
particularly small firms—to reduce offers of health insurance in response to the
rising costs when mandated benefits laws are adopted.

While the empirical

evidence on this is mixed (Gruber 1994b, Jensen and Gabel 1989, Jensen and
Morrisey 1999), any such effects would reduce the potential for benefit mandates
to increase utilization.

Second, as we noted above, certain insurance plans are

exempted from compliance requirements with any state health insurance
mandates. The largest of these is the exemption because of ERISA for selffunded insurance plans which generally affects large employers (Buchmueller et
al. 2007), though there is very little evidence on how self-insured firms respond to
state insurance mandates.8 Butler (2000) estimates that about a third of women

7

Public health studies of the increasing trend in mammography over the 1980s and 1990s discuss
the role of mammography mandates as a seemingly well-documented determinant of the
improvement in women’s preventive health. Nelson et al. (2002), for example, write that
“[e]ducational campaigns directed toward health care practitioners and the general public, state
mandates for insurance coverage of mammograms, and programs for providing mammography
services to low-income women have all played a role in increasing breast cancer screening in
nearly all states.”
8
A recent piece of indirect evidence suggesting the importance of the ERISA exemption is Akosa
Antwi, Moriya, and Simon (2013) who find that state policies that did not affect ERISA plans had
smaller effects than did federal policies that did not exempt ERISA plans.

8

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

have private insurance that would potentially be affected by mandates such as
those we study here.
Third, it is possible that benefits mandates do not have much “bite” to the
extent that pre-existing private health insurance plans were already covering or
offering mammograms.

However, available evidence indicates that benefits

coverage for these services did not become widespread until the mid-1990s,
implying that there was substantial latitude for mammography benefits mandates
to affect benefits coverage. A 1986 article in The New York Times lamented that
“health insurance plans rarely, if ever, cover screening mammograms” (Brozan
1986). Multiple studies using Health Insurance Association of American (HIAA)
employer survey data from the early 1990s indicate that mammograms were
covered by less than 70 percent of private and non-self-insured plans, respectively
(Sullivan and Rice 1991; McKinney and Marconi 1992).

By 1999 the

Kaiser/HRET Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Benefits found that 94
percent of conventional plans and 98 percent of HMO plans were covering
mammography screening, suggesting a large increase in mammography coverage
over a period of significant mandate adoption (Kaiser/HRET 1999).
Finally, it is natural to ask—given the fairly low cost of low-dose
screening mammography ($50—$150 per screening according to Breen and
Brown 1994)9—why weren’t all employers and health plans covering these
screenings even in the absence of a mandate?10 Note that the population at risk of
9

We are not aware of good estimates of how the costs of mammography have changed over time.
Mammography technology, however, seems not to have changed substantially over the period we
study, in part motivating our choice to study this period (i.e., our study period is before the
widespread adoption of computer-aided detection and magnetic resonance imaging for
mammography) (Fenton et al. 2010).
10
Ideally we would observe the marginal premium cost of adding mammograms to an insurance
policy. Evidence from a 2000 Texas Department of Insurance report on the cost of mandates
suggests that the Texas mandate for mammography screening was responsible for 0.6% of total
premium costs (Albee et al. 2000). The Departments of Health and Human Services, Labor, and
the Treasury estimated a slightly larger figure (1.5%) for all preventive care services (not just
mammography) required to be covered with no cost sharing under the Affordable Care Act for

9

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

using a mammogram is very large (both absolutely and relative to other benefits
such as infertility and substance abuse treatment): currently, the ACS (USPSTF)
recommends that all women age 40 (50) and older get regular screening
mammograms. And, even though the direct costs of screening are fairly low, the
subsequent costs associated with a positive screening—diagnostic mammography,
biopsy, chemotherapy, mastectomy, and other cancer treatments—can be much
larger. Like many screening tests, mammograms have a high false positive rate
even at a point in time which can lead to high rates of false positives over a
woman’s lifetime experience of many screenings. (Upwards of 10 percent of
screening mammograms can produce abnormal results. Given that the vast bulk
of women screened do not have cancer (remember about 40,000 women are
diagnosed each year), the vast bulk of these are false positives.

4. Data Description and Empirical Approach
Our main data on mammography screening come from the Center for
Disease Control’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS). Fielded
annually since 1984, the BRFSS has included questions about mammograms in
every year since 1987 and is designed to be representative at the state level.
Surveys are fielded by the individual states and then sent to CDC to be compiled
into a public-use dataset. State participation in the BRFSS increased over the late
1980s; the last state joined in the mid-1990s. In practice, this means that we have
an unbalanced panel; because many states adopted laws prior to 1990 we use all
available data (i.e., any state/year combination with BRFSS data), though in
robustness tests we focus on the subset of states in a balanced panel.11 Our

non-grandfathered plans (Federal Register 2010). These figures are similar in magnitude to the
analogous premium shares for three of the five mandates identified as “expensive” in Gruber
(1994b) (alcohol treatment, chiropractor services, and continuation of health insurance coverage).
11
The number of states in the balanced panel changes depending on the first year of the panel.
This is because the mammography questions were only asked as part of a women’s health module

10

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

analysis focuses on the period 1987-2000; 42 states adopted or changed mandates
over this period.12
The BRFSS breast health questions allow us to create consistent measures
of mammography use along several dimensions for women age 18 and older.
Specifically, women were asked: “A mammogram is an X-ray of each breast to
look for breast cancer. Have you ever had a mammogram?” Women who report
ever having had a mammogram are then asked about the timing of their most
recent mammogram, as well as the reason for their most recent mammogram.13
We create several outcome variables related to mammography use: first, we
identify Ever Had Mammogram as equal to one if the woman reports ever having
had a mammogram and zero otherwise. Second, we create Mammogram in the
Past Year as equal to one if the woman reports that she had a mammogram within
the past year and zero otherwise.14 Third, we create Mammogram in the Past Two
Years as equal to one if the woman reports that she had a mammogram within the
past two years and zero otherwise. Because the timing of a woman’s most recent

in 1988 (questions in modules of the BRFSS are not administered by all states). The 15 states
observed in all years from 1987 to 2000 are: California, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine,
Maryland, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Washington, and Wisconsin. Another 18 states appear in 13 of the 14 years of the
sample, and another 7 states appear in 12 of the 14 years.
12
We stop our sample in 2000 because: 1) there was a significant change in reimbursement by
Medicare for digital mammography in 2000; and 2) there was a federal law passed in 2000
regarding funding for breast cancer treatments for low-income uninsured women – the Breast and
Cervical Cancer Prevention and Treatment Act (BCCPTA). Specifically, the BCCPTA gives
states the option to use their Medicaid programs to cover breast cancer treatments for previously
uninsured women who were screened through the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early
Detection Program (NBCCEDP). We control for state implementation of the NBCCEDP program
in all specifications.
13
Beginning in 1989, the survey eliminated an introductory screener question about whether the
respondent had heard of a mammogram (this screener was preceded by text informing women that
a mammogram was an X-ray of the breast to detect cancer). After this, the introduction to the
question about lifetime mammography use included a sentence defining a mammogram. We code
women in the early waves who report that they had not ever heard of a mammogram as also not
ever having had a mammogram (this is a very small share of women).
14
Item non-response is fairly low for these questions. We omit observations with a “don’t know”
or “refused” response to the mammogram questions.

11

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

mammogram beyond one year is likely to be problematic (Warnecke et al. 1997),
we focus on Mammogram in the Past Year as our main outcome of interest.
Finally, women are also asked about the reason for their most recent
mammogram. We create a variable called Routine Mammogram in the Past Year
that equals one if a woman reports she had a mammogram in the last year and also
reports that her most recent mammogram was 'routine' (as opposed to being due to
'cancer' or a 'problem'). This is the main type of screening that should be affected
by the mandates.

We also observe (and control for) standard demographic

characteristics in the BRFSS, including age, race, education, and marital status.
The BRFSS also includes a very basic measure of health insurance coverage: we
are able to identify whether the woman is covered by ‘any health plan.’15
To estimate the effects of the mandates on outcomes we use multiple
complementary quasi-experimental approaches, including two-way fixed effects
models (which control for unrestricted state and year dummies) and augmented
triple difference (DDD) models. In the standard state and year fixed effects
framework, we use variation in the timing of mandate adoption (still according to
the age groups covered by the law) across states to identify the effects of the
mammography mandates. In the augmented DDD framework we identify the
effects of the mandates using both the mandate timing variation as well as the
variation across mandates in the ages of women who are affected by the laws.
The identifying assumption in the two-way fixed effects models is that there were

15

One might be concerned that this ‘any health plan’ measure is picking up some women who
have Medicaid and should not be affected by the mandates. We have examined data from the
March Current Population Surveys for 1988-2000 to see what share of health care coverage is
from private insurance. For women age 25-74, 86 percent of those with any health coverage in the
CPS had private coverage. The share for most subgroups of interest is also at least 86 percent
(e.g., high school graduates age 25-74 (87 percent), women with some college age 25-74 (91
percent), college graduates age 25-74 (96 percent), and non-Hispanic white women age 25-74 (90
percent)). For non-Hispanic blacks and Hispanics age 25-74, the relevant figure is above 70
percent. Even for high school dropouts age 25-64, 61 percent of those with any health coverage
had private coverage.

12

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

no other variables – e.g., other public policies – that also affected mammography
outcomes that were coincident with mandate adoption.

The identifying

assumption in the DDD model requires that there be no other age-group-specific
variable correlated with mandate adoption that also affected outcomes.
Each of these approaches has its strengths and weaknesses. The strength
of the DDD approach is that it can unambiguously purge the mandate estimates
from confounders that vary at the age group-by-year level (such as changes in
national screening guidelines), the age group-by-state level (such as state
education campaigns that are always targeted at women of a certain age group),
and the state-by-year level (such as the adoption of other state policies and
programs targeted at all women in the state). A weakness of the DDD approach,
however, is that it possible that the DDD differences out some of the ‘true’ effects
of the mammography mandates if there are spillover effects of the laws to women
of other age groups. For example, suppose the laws change employer benefits
choices for women of all ages (not just the specific ages codified in the state
mandate). If so, then women who we think are ‘just untreated’ due to their age
being below the minimum law threshold are, in fact, treated by the mammography
mandate.

If the mandate increases the screening behavior of these younger

women who are otherwise ‘ineligible’, the DDD will wrongly difference out part
of the real effect of the mandate.
We therefore take multiple additional complementary strategies to test for
causal effects of mammography mandates. First, in addition to standard models
with state and year fixed effects, we also estimate models that include statespecific linear time trends and, in an additional model, state-specific linear and
quadratic trends. This is a standard approach for testing the robustness of key
policy relationships in these types of settings (Wolfers 2006); in these models we
identify the mandate effects from deviations of mammography outcomes net of
smoothly evolving trends in outcomes in each state. Second, we make use of

13

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

multiple comparison groups. Specifically, we incorporate both younger women
(25-34 year olds) and older women (65-74 year olds) into the models (recall the
modal mandate targets women age 35 and older). Neither is a perfect comparison
group. The younger women age 25-34 have screening rates that are far below the
35-64 year olds (because screening is not recommended for them by any major
medical organization unless they have a family history and because they are
typically not covered by the mandates), while most of the older women age 65-74
have access to an additional very different set of insurance benefits (i.e.,
Medicare, which is relatively generous and had two policy changes to
mammography reimbursement over our sample period) than do the vast majority
of 35-64 year old women in standard private plans. But while neither group is
ideal, their combination may help reduce omitted variables bias that may
otherwise artificially inflate estimates of the causal effects of mammography
mandates (Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon 2013).
We begin with the two-way fixed effects model which we write as:
(1)

Yiast = β0 + β1Xiast + β2(Baseline Screening Mandate)ast + β3(Biennial
Screening Mandate)ast + β4(Annual Screening Mandate)ast + β5Zst + β6Ss +
β7Tt + εiast

where Yiast are the various dichotomous screening outcomes for woman i in age
group a in state s at time t. Xiast is a vector of individual level demographic
controls that includes dummies for 5-year age groups, race/Hispanic ethnicity,
education, and marital status.

The first three policy variables reflect the

mammography mandates which vary at the age, state, and year level.16 While we
16

There is a great deal of variation across states in the language regarding when the laws are
supposed to take effect. Some states set a date after which “all policies sold or renewed after that
date” must comply with the mandate, while others state that benefits must be changed effective
immediately. We have coded plans as taking effect January 1 of the year after the year in which
they are passed, with the logic that most policies are negotiated in the fall to take effect at the
beginning of the following calendar year. Note the BRFSS questions introduce a ‘reference
window’ problem as they report use over a period stretching back across time; for details, see the

14

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

shorten the variable names for brevity in writing out equation (1), strictly
speaking each mandate variable equals the share of the relevant reference window
the woman is treated by a mammography mandate at each frequency (baseline,
biennial, and annual). Recall that the modal mandate adopted in the late 1980s
requires coverage for a baseline screening mammogram for women age 35–39, a
biennial mammogram for women age 40–49, and an annual mammogram for
women age 50 and older.17 Thus for a state with the modal mandate, the baseline
screening mammogram law would be on for women age 35–39, the biennial
screening mammogram law would be on for women age 40–49, and the annual
screening mammogram law would be on for women age 50 and older.
Zst is a vector of covariates that vary at the state and year level. These
include: the unemployment rate; the HMO penetration rate; the number of
obstetric beds in the state per 1,000 women age 15–44 (to proxy for state
infrastructure for women’s health); the share of women age 15–44 with private
health insurance; the share of women age 15–44 who work (or whose spouses
work) at private firms of various sizes (<25, 25–99, 100+); the fraction black; the
fraction Hispanic; and the fraction urban. The Zst vector also includes controls for
other relevant public policies that may be expected to affect outcomes, including:
the presence of a state law requiring women to be able to see an OB/GYN without
first obtaining a referral from her primary care provider (aka ‘direct access’ laws);
the presence of a state low-income screening program through the National Breast

Appendix. Briefly, each mandate variable represents the share of the window over which use is
measured that the law was in effect.
17
Our policy data come from the National Cancer Institute’s State Cancer Legislative Database
(SCLD) (NCI, 2005). SCLD tracks every piece of legislation pertaining to different types of
cancers, including breast cancer. We used a SCLD-produced table showing every state’s
mammography mandate activity that included information on substantive revisions to the state
laws, the year and quarter of law adoption, and the age groups and mammography frequency
described in the law. To verify the information in the SCLD table we next consulted the actual
text of each state’s laws by calling up individual records in SCLD. Discrepancies were discussed
between the two authors.

15

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

and Cervical Cancer Early Detection program; the presence of a state law
requiring insurance coverage of cervical cancer screening tests; Medicaid
expansions for pregnant women (a proxy for generosity of the states’ public
health insurance programs); and welfare reform.18 Dummy variables for each
state are captured by Ss and in the two-way fixed effects models control for timeinvariant state-specific factors.

Dummy variables for each survey year are

captured by Tt and in the two-way fixed effects specifications control for periodspecific shocks common to all states in any given year.19 Throughout, we cluster
the standard errors at the state level (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004).
Regressions are weighted to be population representative, and the main sample is
all women aged 25–74 interviewed by the BRFSS in survey years 1987–2000.20
As discussed above, in subsequent models we add state-specific linear
time trends and, in an additional model, state-specific linear and quadratic trends
in addition to the year and state fixed effects to equation (1). Linear state trends,
for example, interact each state fixed effect with a variable called TREND that
equals 1 in 1987, 2 in 1988, and so forth. We also estimate a fully interacted
triple-differences (DDD) specification which instead of the trends adds to
equation (1) a full set of state by age group dummies, a full set of year by age
group dummies, and a full set of state by year dummies (thus causing the Zst
18

Our information on the state rollout of the NBCCEDP program comes from personal
correspondence with David Howard. The NBCCEDP was created by the 1990 Breast and
Cervical Cancer Mortality Prevention Act. This program provides federal funds for cancer
screening of low-income uninsured women, and states began participating at various times from
1991–1996. Note that we set the NBCCEDP variable equal to zero for all women age 65 and
older as well as for all women 25-39, as the program was specifically targeted to women 40 and
older but under age 65. Our information on direct access laws comes from Baker and Chan
(2007). In a small number of states insurers must cover mammograms for women upon a
physician’s recommendation. We include a separate control for women in states with these laws
in the Z vector.
19
We also include month of interview dummies throughout (though not shown in the equation) to
account for idiosyncratic month effects (e.g., October is Breast Cancer Awareness Month).
20
Though not shown in equation (1), we also control for the Medicare reimbursement changes to
mammography described earlier and for Medicare reimbursement for cervical cancer screening

16

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

vector to fall out of this model). The year by age group indicators remove biases
common to all women of a particular age group in a given year. The state by age
group indicators account for other age-specific state effects. Finally, the full set
of state by year interactions account for any other efforts to increase
mammography rates in a particular state and year that would be expected to affect
women of different ages equally. In the augmented triple difference model, the
coefficients of interest, β2–β4, use variation at the age group by state by year level
to identify the effects of screening mammography mandates from differences in
screening rates for women whose age makes them treated compared to the
associated outcomes for women whose age makes them untreated coincident with
the timing of policy adoption within each state.
A nontrivial issue is the decision about how to code the mandate [and
other policy] variables for the women in the age groups that were not targeted by
the laws.

For the vast majority of younger women age 25-34, all mandate

variables are set equal to zero. The only exception is that one state explicitly
mandated screening benefits for women younger than age 35. For the older
women age 65-74, however, the decision on how to code the mandate variable is
more complex. Many women who are older than age 65 (nearly all of whom are
eligible for and are on Medicare) also have supplemental private plans either
through a prior employer or a privately purchased ‘Medigap’ plan. These plans
could plausibly make the older women treated by the state mandates we study; in
fact, a nontrivial number of the mandates explicitly mention Medigap. Super
(2002) indicates that, based on data from the 1999 Medicare Current Beneficiaries
Survey, about a third of Medicare recipients not in nursing homes have private
coverage through a current or former employer (either own or spouse), while
another 27 percent have supplemental Medigap coverage (either Medigap alone or
Medigap in combination with private employer sponsored coverage).

Thus,

around half of Medicare beneficiaries are plausibly bound by the state mandates

17

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

we study (Stanton 2004). Moreover, this is likely to be especially true for our
analyses of deductibles prohibitions because although Medicare began covering
mammograms in 1991, the program did not explicitly prohibit deductibles until
1998. Since we have no way in our data to identify source of insurance, in our
main models we set the mandate variables for 65-74 year old women equal to
whatever is true for their 50-64 year old counterparts in that state and year.21
In addition to the specification in equation (1) – which we refer to as the
‘expanded mammography mandate’ specification – we also estimate an ‘any
mammography mandate’ specification that replaces the three policy variables (for
baseline, biennial, and annual screening mandates) with a single policy variable
that equals the share of the relevant reference window the woman is treated by
Any Mammography Mandate.

We also consider a ‘scaled mammography

mandate’ specification that takes into account the fact that women who are
eligible for biennial screenings are treated half as much a women who are eligible
for annual screenings and the fact that women who are eligible for baseline
screenings (which always includes 35-39 year olds only) are treated one fifth as
much as women who are eligible for annual screenings.

Thus, the Scaled

Mammogram Mandate variable takes on a value of: one for women eligible for
annual screenings; 0.5 for women eligible for biennial screenings; and 0.2 for
women eligible for a baseline screening (all adjusted for the share of the relevant
reference window accordingly). These two specifications (Any and Scaled) are
otherwise identical to that reported in equation (1).
21

Note that there is the same issue with direct access laws as there is for the mandate variables
with respect to how we treat 65-74 year old women; we follow the same decision rule as described
above and code the direct access laws for the oldest women in our sample as equal to the same as
for the younger women in the same state and year. Results using the alternative assumption (i.e.,
that the mandate variable is set equal to zero for all 65-74 year old women) produced very similar
results to the ones we present which code these older women as experiencing the mandates faced
by women 50-64. These results are in Appendix Tables 2-9. We also note that due to explicit
differences in the language of Colorado and Ohio statutes we treat 65 year olds in those two states
the same as 64 (not 66) year olds with respect to policy coding choices.

18

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Finally, we explicitly examined provisions of mandates similar to the
federal health reform requirement that insurance plans must not impose cost
sharing for obtaining preventive services such as mammograms. Specifically, the
relevant provision of the federal health reform law says that mammograms
satisfying the USPSTF guidelines from 2002 (mammograms every 1-2 years for
women 40 and older) must be covered for non-grandfathered plans without costsharing of any kind.

We identified six states with mandates that explicitly

prohibited deductibles for obtaining a mammogram over our sample period, and
we expect that these laws should increase mammography use more than laws
without such explicit prohibitions.22

For this model we interact each main

mandate variable with an indicator variable equal to one for states that prohibit
deductibles, while including the main effect.

If this specific provision is

meaningful for increasing screening, we expect this interaction term to be positive
and statistically significant, particularly for low-educated women (which we use
as a proxy for low-income, as the prohibition on deductibles should be more
meaningful for low-income women).23

5. Results
In Figure 1 we show trends in past year mammography use from 1987 to
2000. We present trends for five age groups: 25 to 34 year olds, 35 to 39 year
olds (who were usually targeted in provisions calling for baseline mammograms),
40 to 49 year olds (who were usually targeted in provisions calling for biennial
mammograms), 50 to 64 year olds (who were usually targeted in provisions
calling for annual mammograms), and 65 to 74 year olds. Several features are
notable in Figure 1. First, there was almost no increase in recent mammography
22

The six states are: Colorado, DC, Louisiana, Maryland, Ohio, and Oklahoma.
We use education instead of income because the BRFSS only offers information on income in
large ranges, and these ranges have changed over time. Education, in contrast, is consistently
measured over our entire sample period.
23

19

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

use for women age 25 to 34 years old. Second, there was a noticeable increase in
recent mammography for 35 to 39 year old women from 1987 to until about 1993,
after which the rates fell substantially; this is likely attributable in part to the
removal of the “baseline” screening mammogram recommendation from the ACS
guidelines in 1992. Third, there were steady, long-lasting, and remarkably large
increases in mammography use for 40 to 49 year olds, 50 to 64 year olds, and 6574 year olds. Past year mammography rates among these groups of older women
roughly doubled over this period. The patterns in Figure 1 are visually consistent
with a role for mammography mandates in increasing mammography use: note
that the majority of the legislative action regarding mammography occurred in the
1987–1992 period.
Figure 2 shows these same patterns in a slightly different way.
Specifically, we show in Figure 2 the age profile of past year mammography for
three different years: 1987 (the first year of our sample), 1994 (the middle of our
sample), and 2000 (the last year of our sample). Figure 2 shows that there was a
large improvement in recent mammography screening rates for 50-74 year olds
between 1987 and 1994 – that is, the vertical distance between the lines for 1987
and 1994 at ages 50-74 is large – with slightly smaller increases for 40-49 and 3539 year olds over this same period.

From 1994 to 2000, Figure 2 shows

essentially no change in screening rates for 35-39 year olds and some modest
increase for 40-74 year olds. Again, given that the timing of mandate adoption
was mostly between 1987 and 1992 (also visible in Appendix Figures 1-3), the
visual patterns in Figure 2 are again consistent with a role for mandates at
increasing mammography rates.24

24

Again, we note that Medicare had two changes to mammography reimbursement over this time
period, so the increases for the 65-74 year old women in both Figures 1 and 2 could be driven in
part by Medicare changes as well as mammography mandates that affect some share of these older
women.

20

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of the key health outcomes and the
policy variables and shows that, as seen in Figures 1 and 2, mammography rates
are strongly increasing with age, and the same is true when we consider whether
the woman reports a mammogram in the last year and says her most recent
mammogram was routine.25 We also show in Table 1 the means of the mandate
policy variables. Specifically, we report means of the “share of the previous
year” policy variables that take into account the reference windows for past year
outcomes. We find that over half of our sample (54.1 percent) is treated by the
‘any mammography mandate’ for one of baseline, biennial, or annual screenings,
and this figure is increasing in age.

Turning to the alternative approach to

measuring all the policies at once which scales baseline mandates to .2, biennial
to .5, and annual to 1 and thus defines the share of the year during which
screenings are mandated to be covered, we see the average woman age 25-74 is
covered for about 40 percent of a year’s screening. Table 1 also shows the share
of women treated by mandates for baseline screenings, biennial screenings, and
annual screenings, respectively.

The majority of women treated by any

mammogram mandate are treated by a mandate for an annual mammogram (34.4
of the 54.1 percentage points). Finally, we show that a nontrivial proportion of
women in our sample are subject to mandates that explicitly prohibit deductibles
for obtaining a mammogram; nearly 5 percent (2.7/54.1) of the mandates prohibit
deductibles.
We present the first set of regression results in Table 2 for the
Mammogram in the Past Year outcome. Each column of each panel is from a
separate model. We present coefficient estimates on the key mandate variables of
interest, and in each column we add successively more controls. We present
results for the ‘scaled mammography mandate’ specification in the top panel, the
25

Information on descriptive statistics regarding demographic variables is presented in Appendix
Table 1.

21

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

‘any mammography mandate’ specification in the middle panel, and the
‘expanded mammography mandate’ specification in the bottom panel. Column 1
shows estimates from the two-way fixed effects model that controls for: age group
dummies; other individual demographic characteristics; state/time varying
demographic and economic controls; other state and federal policies; and state,
year, and month fixed effects. Column 2 adds linear state trends, Column 3 adds
linear and quadratic state trends, and Column 4 replaces the state trends with state
by age group, year by age group, and state by year fixed effects and is the fully
saturated DDD model.
The results in column 1 of Table 2 with state and year fixed effects (and
other covariates) indicate that there is a strong effect of mammography mandates
on the probability that a woman age 25–74 reports having had a mammogram in
the past year, and this finding is insensitive to how we specify the mandate
variable. For example, we estimate that the presence of mammography mandate
in the ‘scaled’ specification in the top panel of column 1 is associated with a
statistically significant 5 percentage point increase in the probability of past year
mammography screening. In the bottom panel we find that the presence of a
mandate for annual mammography is associated with a 5 percentage point
increase in the probability of past year mammography screening. In columns 2
and 3 we find that these relationships are largely unchanged when we add controls
for linear and quadratic state trends, respectively. Turning to the fully interacted
DDD model in column 4 with a full set of two-way interactions for age, state, and
year, we continue to estimate in the ‘scaled’ specification in the top panel that
mammography mandates increase the likelihood of reporting a past year
mammogram by 1 percentage point, though the estimate is not statistically
significant. Taken together, the estimates from the scaled specification in Table 2
fall in the range of 1 to 5.5 percentage point effects, or about a 4.5-25 percent

22

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

effect relative to the baseline pre-mandate annual mammography rate.26 Using
instead the coefficient on annual mandates in the expanded bottom panel, the
point estimates vary from .9 to 5.5 percentage points or the same 4.5-25 percent
effect.

Measured differently, and given that past year mammography rates

increased by about 25.7 percentage points over our time period (see Figure 2), we
estimate that mandates for annual mammography account for about 3.5-21.4
percent of the overall increase.
In Figure 3 we present event study estimates of the effect of mandates for
annual screening on past year mammography corresponding to the two-way fixed
effects model from column 1 of Table 2. This is a commonly used approach for
examining the validity of the common trends assumption required for differencein-differences models, and it also allows us to examine how the effects of
insurance mandates vary over time. A challenge is that our institutional setting is
not particularly well suited to a classic event study, as there are different types of
laws for women of different age groups, and some states amend or repeal their
laws in the middle of our sample period. To operationalize the event study, then,
we focus attention on 40-64 year old women only, and we also restrict attention to
mammography mandates for annual screenings (which explicitly targeted women
in this age group over our sample and which the expanded specification in the
bottom row of Table 2 shows are the most important types of mandates for
increasing screenings). Our analysis sample for the event study is women in
states that adopted exactly one mandate for annual screenings for women in this
age group and never changed or repealed it, and we further require that states be
observed in all years of the sample to guard against composition bias and to allow
26

Coefficients on the demographic controls generally have the expected signs. Older women are
more likely to be screened. Women with low education are less likely to be screened than those
with more education. Married women are more likely than others to be screened. Conditional on
all of these things plus the various interactions, Hispanics and black non-Hispanics are more likely
than white non-Hispanics to report being screened.

23

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

for meaningful estimates before and after policy adoption.27

We estimate a

variant of equation (1) where we replace the annual mandate policy variable into a
series of ‘event-time’ or ‘re-centered time’ policy dummy variables capturing the
number of quarters in each state relative to the time the state adopted a mandate
for annual screening (which we fix at time zero), and we also include state and
age-group fixed effects (with standard errors clustered at the state level). The
results of this exercise are presented in Figure 3 and show event study estimates
for 15 quarters before and 25 quarters after mandate adoption. Figure 3 strongly
supports our research design: specifically, there are no systematic pre-trends in
outcomes for the women who were targeted by annual mammography mandates,
and the increases in mammography use are consistently statistically significant as
early as 10 quarters after adoption.
For the sake of brevity, in all subsequent models for mammograms we
only report results from the ‘scaled’ mandate specification, though the full set of
results from all specifications (which were very similar) is reported in the
Appendix. We present result for the other mammography outcomes in Table 3.
The results in the top panel of Table 3 indicate that mandates increased the
likelihood that a woman reports she received a mammogram in the last year and
that her most recent one was routine by 1.6 to 5.5 percentage points, and these
estimates are all statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Having a nonroutine mammogram in the last year is not significantly associated with the
mandates (not shown in table but available upon request). Since the bulk of any
increase in mammograms driven by changes in coverage should be for routine
27

This is due to the nature of the timing of policy adoption relative to the nature of the timing of
the BRFSS sample. The policy variation for 50-64 year old women occurs near the beginning of
the sample period, while the policy variation for 40-49 year old women occurs near the end of the
sample period; thus, requiring states to be observed for the entire 1987-2000 period is especially
important for meaningful pre-period estimates for 50-64 year old women and meaningful postperiod estimates for 40-49 year old women. Separate event studies for these two age groups are
shown in the Appendix.

24

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

reasons, this supports our interpretation that the mandates increased coverage of
screening mammography and that this increased coverage led to more routine
mammograms.28 In the middle panel of Table 3, we find that the mandates
significantly increased the likelihood a woman reports having had a mammogram
within the past two years by approximately 1.4 (column 4) to 5.9 (column 3)
percentage points, and all four of these effects are statistically significant.
Finally, in the bottom panel of Table 3 we estimate that mammography mandates
significantly increased the likelihood a woman reports ever having had a
mammogram by 0.3 (column 4) to 4.5 (column 3) percentage points, with the
results from the models in columns 1-3 all being statistically significant.
In Table 4 we provide more direct evidence on the most likely mechanism
through which mandates affect utilization: a change in whether mammography is
a covered insurance benefit.

We begin by ruling out that mandates were

associated with changes in health plan coverage; specifically, we estimate the
same models as above but where the outcome variable is an indicator for whether
the woman currently has any health plan. This is the closest proxy we have to
health insurance coverage in the BRFSS; as noted above the overwhelming
majority (86%) of women with 'any health plan' are actually covered by private
insurance for women age 25-74 over this time period according to our tabulations
of March CPS data. Recall that one possible employer response to rising costs of
state mandates is to reduce offers of health insurance to employees; as such, it is
possible that mandates such as those we study here could reduce health insurance
coverage.

28

While some share of women whose most recent mammogram was not routine might have also
had a routine one in the last year, it seems unlikely that the most recent one would be for routine
reasons if a previous recent one was diagnostic. Also note that any causal effect on diagnostic use
would be a very small share of the effect on screenings, as only a small share of screenings result
in diagnostic mammograms.

25

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

In the top panel of Table 4 we show that the insurance mandates are not
meaningfully associated with changes in health plan coverage of women.29 In the
second panel we simply report the full-sample estimate for the same period over
which the health insurance questions were asked (1991-2000) for women with no
missing information on health insurance (a very small share fails to report health
plan coverage).

These models continue to indicate economically significant

increases in past year mammography screenings associated with mandate
adoption, though the point estimates are smaller than those in Table 2 (recall we
lose many states who adopted mandates between 1987 and 1991 for this analysis).
In the third and fourth panels we directly examine the past year mammography
outcome separately for women with a health plan (third panel) and for women
without a health plan (fourth panel).

The results indicate that there are

statistically significant utilization effects of mandates for women with a health
plan in every specification in the third panel of Table 4. In contrast, we find much
smaller (very near zero) and/or wrong-signed estimates of the effects of mandates
on past year screening for the sample of women without a health plan in the
bottom panel of Table 4, and none of these estimates is statistically significant.
In the Appendix we present the results of several other robustness tests.
For example, Appendix Table 14 shows that when we estimate similarly specified
models predicting other women’s preventive health behaviors such as clinical
breast exams (CBE) (manual examinations of the breast performed by a physician
that do not involve X-rays) and Pap tests (the standard screening for cervical
cancer) which were not covered by these insurance laws, the mandate estimates
are much smaller in magnitude, suggesting the effects we identify are unlikely to

29

We also estimated models of the likelihood of private health insurance using the March CPS.
These models similarly returned no consistent significant evidence that the mammography
mandates were associated with changes in private health insurance coverage and are presented in
Appendix Table 11.

26

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

be proxying for changes in women’s health more generally.30 Appendix Table 16
shows that our main results for past year mammography are robust to: 1)
restricting attention to states constituting a balanced panel in the BRFSS data; 2)
replacing our 5-year age group dummy variables with single year of age dummy
variables; and 3) separately considering cover from offer mandates (whereby
cover mandates have larger and more precisely estimated effects).31 We also
performed other robustness exercises not reported in the Appendix. We also
estimated models dropping women who were exactly 35, 40, or 50, as some of
these women may have received their mammograms before reaching the age
when the laws apply; this had no significant effect on our main findings. The
Appendix also contains results by race/ethnicity (Appendix Table 17) and by
education (Appendix Table 18); we found very broad-based mandate-induced
increases in screenings.
Next we present evidence on the effectiveness of provisions in several
state mandates that prohibit insurance companies from charging deductibles to
women for obtaining mammograms. This type of provision is very similar to one

30

The small estimated increases for CBE and Pap tests may also reflect spillover effects of
mammography mandates if, for example, a woman who is induced by the mandate to get a
mammogram also finds out she needs a CBE or Pap test. In Appendix Table 15 we show that the
relationship between mammography mandates and mammography use is very similar when we
restrict attention to the sampled years in which we observe the other outcomes.
31
Cover mandates require privately sold plans to include coverage of mammography while offer
mandates only require that insurers offer at least one such plan to an employer. We would
typically expect the effects of offer mandates to be weaker than cover mandates (i.e., have smaller
or no effects on utilization) since the latter should much more strongly reduce barriers to screening
mammography for those privately insured women who did not have coverage previously. If there
were no incentives to adjust coverage decisions besides the text of the laws, employers in offer
states who did not wish to add the coverage could simply choose plans which did not include the
“offered” coverage of mammograms. In practice, the bulk of our results pertain to cover mandates
because they are far more common in our setting than are offer mandates: only three states ever
had an offer mandate for screening mammography which did not subsequently become a cover
mandate over our sample period. Measured differently, the proportion of women in our sample
subject to any type of mammography mandate is 54.1 percent; 49.9 percent of these are cover
mandates. That is, mandates to ‘cover’ represent over 90 percent of the women subject to any
mandate.

27

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

in recently adopted federal health reform, which prohibits all out of pocket costs
for eligible individuals obtaining certain preventive health services recommended
by the USPSTF, including mammograms.

Do mammography mandates that

prohibit use of deductibles have larger effects at increasing mammography use
than mandates without such provisions, and if so are these effects concentrated
among low-income women (who should be more sensitive to limits on out of
pocket costs)? We address this question by re-estimating equation (1) but also
including interactions between a dummy variable indicating the state has this type
of provision and the relevant mandate variables. To conserve space, we only
report the coefficients on the scaled mandate variable and its interaction with the
variable indicating the state mandate prohibits deductibles. We also only report
estimates from the DDD specification (i.e., the specification of column 4 in
Tables 2-4), but the patterns are similar using the other parameterizations of the
mammography mandate variable and in the less saturated two-way fixed effects
models.
In Table 5 we find evidence that these provisions matter, especially for
women with low levels of education. For the full sample in column 1 we estimate
a positive but statistically insignificant main effect and a positive, economically
meaningful, and marginally significant interaction coefficient.

In columns 2

through 5 we show the results from similar models where we restrict attention to
high school dropouts (column 2), women with a high school degree (column 3),
women with some college (column 4), and women with at least a college degree
(column 5). Prohibitions on deductibles for obtaining mammograms should be
expected to have larger effects on low-educated women who are likely to have
lower incomes and lower ability to pay such out-of-pocket costs. Indeed, we find
in column 2 that, in addition to the positive (but insignificant) main effect of the
scaled mammography mandate variable, there is also a large and statistically
significant and large positive interaction coefficient, suggesting that for high

28

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

school dropout women the prohibition on deductibles for obtaining mammograms
significantly increased mammography rates over and above the main mandate
effect.32 These results suggest that similar rules in federal health reform are likely
to further increase screening among low-income women with health insurance
coverage.
Next, we provide evidence on the effects of the mandates on breast cancer
diagnoses. If screening of asymptomatic women were effective, we might expect
to see that the mandate-induced mammograms led to more breast cancers being
detected at an early stage than would occur in the absence of screening. To test
this, we examine total cancer incidence as well as diagnoses of the earliest stage
‘in-situ’ pre-cancers using data from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End
Results (SEER) system, which are registry data on the universe of breast cancer
diagnoses (and also on in-situ pre-cancers) within nine areas/states that have been
collected since 1973 (SEER Research Data 1973-2010).33 These are the standard
cancer diagnosis data used in the field. Returning to the bottom panel in Table 1,
we report the overall and age group specific incidence rates per 100,000 women
for total cancer incidence and in-situ pre-cancers (not included in the total cancer
incidence). The age gradient in diagnoses is clear from the patterns by age group.
32

Note that there is a strong education gradient in the presence of health insurance: while 34
percent of women age 25-64 with less than a high school degree do not have a heath plan, only 16
(6) percent of women in this age group with a high school degree (some college) lack a health
plan. The fact we estimate larger effects of deductibles prohibitions for less educated women
suggests the true effect for this group is likely even larger.
33
We study 1985-2000. The 9 states in SEER are: Georgia, Connecticut, Michigan, Hawaii, Iowa,
New Mexico, California, Washington, and Utah. Note that when the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) refers to total cancer incidence, it generally excludes the earliest stage in-situ cancers but
includes a very small number of unstaged cancers (National Cancer Institute, 2013). These
earliest stage ‘in situ’ diagnoses are independently interesting and potentially important in our
context, and so we analyze them separately. ‘In-situ’ refers both to ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) and to the less common lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). Erbas et al. (2006) discuss
uncertainty about what share of DCIS tumors will progress to invasive breast cancer. Regarding
uncertainty about LCIS, the American Cancer Society’s “Breast Cancer Facts and Figures 20112012” report indicates that “many oncologists believe … that LCIS is not a true cancer, but an
indicator of increased risk for developing invasive cancer in either breast” (p1).

29

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

While the total cancer incidence rate is only 17 per 100,000 for women 25-34, it
is 438 per 100,000 for women 65-74. The in-situ pre-cancers are about 10% of
the overall cancers, with about 27 diagnoses per 100,000.
We examine the effects of mammography mandates on in-situ cancer
detections by estimating models where the outcome is the log of the count of the
number of in-situ cancers detected for women in each 5-year age group, state, and
year, and we include the same right hand side variables as in equation (1) where
possible.34 (The SEER data do not include all of the Xs (e.g., education, marital
status), and it would also be hard to get appropriate population cells by these other
cuts.) We assume a 1-month delay between initial screening and diagnosis, and
we control for population as an additional independent variable. These results are
presented in Table 6 which follows the format of Table 2 (i.e., state and year fixed
effects, linear and quadratic trends, and the fully interacted DDD models) and
presents results for the ‘scaled mandate’ specification (top panel), the ‘any
mammography mandate’ specification (middle panel), and the ‘expanded
mammography mandate’ specification (bottom panel). Unlike the earlier results,
we present p-values in parentheses for the usual inference calculations for the key
coefficients and present alternative p-values in brackets for the Wild-bootstrap
procedure which adjusts for the small number of clusters (Cameron et al. 2008).
The results in Table 6 provide strong evidence that mammography
mandates increased detection of the earliest stage in-situ pre-cancers.

34

For the small number of cells with zero cancer detections we add one because the log of zero is
not defined. Note that we combine black, white, and other race women together for this analysis
because there are some SEER sites with very small populations of black and other race women
and thus the ‘zero cancer detections’ problem is substantially worse if we consider race groups
separately. Alternatively, models restricted only to whites returned very similar results. We also
estimated fixed-effects Poisson models which returned qualitatively similar results for the ‘any’
and ‘expanded’ mandate specifications and are available in Appendix Table 19. We present the
log counts models for ease of interpretation and because these models allow us to adjust p-values
for the small number of clusters (Cameron et al. 2008). We do so with Mammen (1993) weights
and imposing the null hypothesis.

30

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Specifically, we find statistically significant increases associated with mandates in
all specifications, even after adjusting for the small number of clusters.35 The
estimates in the top panel range from 0.156 to 0.216 for a one unit increase in the
scaled mandate variable. This means that if the law were to change such that a
woman went from living in a state with no mandate to having a value of one for
the variable (i.e., living in a state where she were eligible for an annual
mammogram), given the log linear model this would lead to increases in the range
of 16 to 22% in the number of in-situ pre-cancer diagnoses. Taking the values in
the bottom panel, implementing an annual mandate would lead to an increase of
up to 27% in the number of in-situ diagnoses. These estimates are somewhat
larger than those we found for screenings. Larger effects on diagnoses compared
to screenings may reflect the fact that the most financially constrained women
may be the ones who are induced to have mammograms when they gain coverage,
and these may be the women who have the highest unmet need for screening.36
We also estimated similar models for total cancer incidence (all diagnoses except
in-situ pre-cancers); these results were small in magnitude and inconclusive and
are available upon request.
We acknowledge that the welfare implications of these mandate-induced
changes in cancer screenings and detection of the earliest stage pre-cancers are
not unambiguous. Thus, while the increased screenings documented in Tables 25 surely lead to some earlier cancer detection they are also associated with some
35

We also considered estimating models of breast cancer mortality, but we chose not to examine
deaths for several reasons. First, there is usually a long and variable lag between mammography
and breast cancer death that has changed considerably over time as treatment technologies have
changed. This means there is not a clear econometric strategy that consistently yields a particular
lag structure for linking particular types of diagnoses to later expected declines in mortality across
our time period. Second, when a person has breast cancer, there are usually multiple
mammograms involved [e.g., an initial screening one and subsequent diagnostic ones] which
additionally complicates decisions about how to appropriately attribute mandate-induced
screenings to breast cancer deaths. We leave this important question to future work.
36
Of course, the confidence intervals around the estimates in Table 6 include the effect sizes from
the screening analyses presented earlier.

31

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

increase in false positives (and associated harms) that we cannot track with our
BRFSS or SEER data. Further, some researchers believe that a share of the
increase in in-situ detections documented in Table 6 might not progress and may
be treated unnecessarily. Recognizing the importance of this welfare question, we
present in Table 7 the results of additional BRFSS-based analyses that essentially
ask whether the mandate-induced increases in mammography obtained in Tables
2-5 are consistent with the current recommendations and guidelines of the
American Cancer Society.

The intuition is that the ACS bases its

recommendations, in part, on its own critical evaluation of the state of medical
science. As science has evolved, so have the ACS guidelines. At any point in
time, then, a state’s insurance mandate is either consistent with current ACS
guidelines or inconsistent with current ACS guidelines (it cannot be both).37 This
allows us to ask whether the increases in screenings were mainly attributable to
mandates that are or are not consistent with current ACS guidelines. A finding
that screening increases were due primarily to mandates that are consistent with
current ACS guidelines would lend stronger support to the idea that the mandateinduced screenings were welfare enhancing, while the opposite finding would
lend more support to the idea that the screening increases had more ambiguous
welfare effects.
We present the results from this analysis in Table 7 using the ‘expanded’
specification (as the ‘scaled’ and ‘any mandate’ specifications do not lend
themselves naturally to this analysis). Moreover, as there are no mandates for
baseline or biennial screening that are consistent with current ACS guidelines, we
only show the coefficient estimates for the mandate variable that requires annual
37

Note that ideally we would examine an alternative dependent variable indicating whether each
mammogram was consistent or not consistent with the ACS guidelines. Unfortunately, women are
only asked about their most recent mammogram, and we are unable to create meaningful variables
for consistency with ACS guidelines without having each woman's entire mammography history
at each age in each year.

32

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

screening (separately for annual mandates that are and are not consistent with
current ACS guidelines).38 The results in Table 7 show an important role for
annual mandates that are consistent with today’s ACS guidelines, but we also find
an important role for annual mandates that are not consistent with today’s ACS
guidelines. For example, the coefficients on the variable indicating the mandate is
not consistent with current ACS guidelines regarding annual screening in the
bottom row of columns 1-3 of Table 7 are all positive and statistically significant,
and account for about the same increase in screening as adherent laws. Moreover,
the fully saturated specification of column 4 returns a still large and statistically
significant coefficient, and the associated coefficient on the variable indicating the
mandate is consistent with current ACS guidelines regarding annual screening in
that same specification is smaller and statistically insignificant (though still
positive and economically meaningful in magnitude). Overall, our read of the
results in Table 7 is that there is consistent evidence that a substantial proportion –
and in some cases the vast majority – of the increases in mammography due to
mandates for annual screenings are not consistent with the state of current medical
science as espoused in today’s guidelines of the ACS. This suggests that at least
from the perspective of current knowledge, not all the mandate-induced increases
in mammograms were likely to have been beneficial at the population level.39
38

Note that we cannot do the variant of this test using current USPSTF guidelines because there
are no annual mandates that are consistent with current USPSTF guidelines, which means none of
the increase we find is driven by guidelines that are consistent with current knowledge as specified
by USPSTF. Another interesting exercise would be to separate the mandate variables into
mandates that are and are not consistent with the ACS guidelines in place at the time of interview
(as opposed to current ACS guidelines). We present those results in Appendix Table 20; they
generally suggest that most of the mandate-induced screenings were consistent with the state of
science as the ACS interpreted it when the women were being screened. We think that the
analysis of consistency with the current ACS guidelines provides a more direct commentary on
possible welfare effects.
39
We note that there is lack of agreement within the medical community about whether the ACS
guidelines (or even the USPSTF guidelines) are too aggressive. To the extent that this is true, this
might suggest even less alignment between best medical practice as is known now and the
mandates which drove increased screenings.

33

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

6. Conclusion
Our results suggest that state laws requiring private insurers to cover
screening mammograms played an important role at increasing the rates of past
year mammography over an unprecedented period of improved preventive health
behaviors among women from 1987 to 2000. Specifically, we estimate that a
mandate requiring coverage of an annual mammogram significantly increased the
likelihood a 25-74 year old woman reported getting screened in the past year by
about 0.9-5.5 percentage points, or about 5-25 percent. These results hold up to
numerous validation checks and robustness analyses. Moreover, we show that
mandates specifically prohibiting deductibles were particularly effective at
increasing mammography screenings among low-educated women (the group for
whom such provisions are most likely to matter). We also find that the mandates
led to increases in detection of the earliest stage in-situ pre-cancers. Finally, we
find that at least some of the increased screenings are attributable to mandates that
are not consistent with current recommendations of the American Cancer Society.
This suggests that some of the mandate-induced increases in screenings were
plausibly not welfare enhancing.
Given that nearly all states have already adopted mammography mandates,
what are the public policy implications of our study in general and specifically
with respect to the federal health reform? There are several. First, there is still
wide variation in the ages of women who are targeted by these laws. Moreover,
as noted above, most states’ existing recommendations are not in accordance with
current recommendations from the ACS or the USPSTF.

Specifically, the

majority of state mandates still cover annual screening mammograms for women
age 50 and older, despite that the ACS now recommends annual mammograms
for women beginning at age 40 and the USPSTF now recommends biennial
mammograms for women beginning at age 50. If a greater scientific consensus

34

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

were to be reached regarding the most appropriate screening frequencies for
women of different ages, policies could be amended accordingly.
Second, recently adopted federal health care reform has the potential to
further increase screening rates because the state mandates are not binding for
firms that self-insure under well-known provisions of ERISA. Since most selfinsured firms will have to comply with the federal reform’s requirement that no
cost-sharing can be imposed on mammography, it is possible that women whose
insurance is from a self-insured organization will see increases in the generosity
of insurance coverage for mammography. Also, a minority of state mandates
include provisions prohibiting insurance companies from imposing deductibles
for obtaining a mammogram.

Our estimates suggest that these deductible

prohibitions led to an even larger increase in screenings for women with low
education. Since federal health reform prohibits these out of pocket costs for any
new or substantially revised private insurance plans, this further suggests potential
for public policy to increase screening rates among low-income women.40
Finally, it is highly plausible that people may not have known about the provision
in federal health reform requiring no deductibles for preventive care (even if the
provision existed), and the federal change (and earlier state changes) may have
increased awareness of this benefit due to widespread news coverage about the
provision and changes in how plans present information about coverage of

40

We note that that copays and coinsurance can - and do - exist even in the presence of a provision
whereby individuals do not have to meet the deductible before obtaining preventive services
(which is true of 75-90 percent of workers with health insurance according to a 2009 Kaiser
Family Foundation Annual Survey). Thus, the total out-of-pocket costs in a zero deductible plan
for preventive health services might still be nontrivial. Since the federal health reform requires
zero out-of-pocket costs, not just elimination of deductibles, our results on cost-sharing remain
highly relevant for predicting the likely effects of federal reform. For example, the Kaiser Family
Foundation Survey for 2011 suggests 23% of workers faced changes in cost-sharing due to ACA,
and 31% of workers were in plans which changed what services were considered preventative.
This is relevant as ACA in addition to stating that preventive services must be covered without
cost-sharing imposed explicit rules as to what services were preventive: those with a grade of B or
higher from USPSTF.

35

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

preventive care. This too suggests a potential meaningful role for federal health
reform to affect mammography screenings and breast cancer diagnosis outcomes,
thus speaking to the relevance of this research.

36

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

REFERENCES
Akosa Antwi, Y., A. Moriya, and K. Simon (2013). “Effects of Federal Policy to
Insure Young Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act’s
Dependent Coverage Mandate,” American Economic Journal – Economic
Policy, 5(4): 1-28.
Albee, S., E. Blount, T. Lee, M. Litow, and M. Sturm. (2000) “Cost Impact Study
of Mandated Benefits in Texas: Report # 1.” Milliman & Robertson, Inc.,
for
the
Texas
Department
of
Insurance.
http://www.tdi.state.tx.us/reports/documents/benefits1_00.pdf
accessed
3/9/2009.
Almond, D. and J.J. Doyle (2011). “After Midnight: A Regression Discontinuity
Design in Length of Postpartum Hospital Stays,” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 3(3): 1-34.
Baker, L. and J. Chan (2007). “Laws Requiring Health Plans to Provide Direct
Access to Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and Use of Cancer Screening
by Women,” Health Services Research, 42(3): 990-1006.
Berry, DA, KA Cronin, SK Plevritis, DG Fryback, L Clarke, M Zelen, JS
Mandelblatt, AY Yakovlev, DF Habbema, and EJ Feuer . (2005). “Effect
of Screening and Adjuvant Therapy on Mortality from Breast Cancer,”
New England Journal of Medicine, 352(17): 1784-1792.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004). “How Much Should We
Trust Difference-In-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 119(1): 249-275.
Bitler, M. (2008). “Utilization of Infertility Treatments: The Effects of Insurance
Mandates.” Mimeo.
Bitler, M. and L. Schmidt (2012). “Utilization of Infertility Treatments: The
Effects of Insurance Mandates.” Demography.
Breen, N. and M. Brown (1994). “The Price of Mammography in the United
States: Data from the National Survey of Mammography Facilities,”
Milbank Quarterly, 72(3): 431-450.
Brozan, N. (1986). “Cost of Mammography is a Major Deterrent,” The New York
Times, September 22, 1986.
Buchmueller, T., P. Cooper, M. Jacobson, and S. Zuvekas (2007). “Parity for
Whom? Exemptions and the Extent of State Mental Health parity
Legislation,” Health Affairs, 26(4): 483-487.
Buckles, Kasey. (2007). “Stopping the Biological Clock: Infertility Treatments
and the Career-Family Tradeoff.” Mimeo.
Bundorf, M. Kate, Melinda Henne, and Laurence Baker. (2007). “Mandated
Health Insurance Benefits and the Utilization and Outcomes of Infertility
Treatments.” NBER WP 12820.

37

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Bunce, V. and J. Wieske (2008). “Health Insurance Mandates in the States 2008”
report from Council for Affordable Health Insurance available at:
http://www.cahi.org/cahi_contents/resources/pdf/HealthInsuranceMandate
s2008.pdf accessed 10/31/2008.
Butler, P (2000). ERISA Preemption Manual for State Health Policy Makers.
Washington, DC, Kaiser Family Foundation.
Busch, S. and C. Barry (2008). “New Evidence on the Effects of State Mental
Health Mandates,” Inquiry, 45: 308-322.
Cameron, A., J. Gelbach, and D. Miller (2008). “Bootstrap-Based Improvements
for Inference with Clustered Errors,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 90(3): 414-427.
Cutler, D. (2008). “Are We Finally Winning the War on Cancer?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 22(4): 3-26.
Dans, P. and A. Wright (1996). “Effect of a Legislative Mandate on
Mammography Use and Coding Practices in Maryland,” Radiology, 198:
647-660.
Erbas, B., E. Prevenzano, J. Armes, and D. Gertig (2006). “The Natural History
of Ductal Carcinoma In Situ of the Breast: A Review.” Breast Cancer
Research and Treatment, 97(2): 135-44.
Federal Register (2010). “Interim Final Rules for Group Health Plans and Health
Insurance Issuers Relating to Coverage of Preventive Services Under the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,” Federal Register, 75(137):
41726-60.
Fenton, J., Foote, S., Green, P., and Baldwin, L.-M. (2010). “Diffusion of
Computer-Aided Mammography after Mandated Medicare Coverage,”
Archives of Internal Medicine, 170(11): 987-989.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber,
Joseph P. Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon
Health Study Group (2012). “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
Evidence from the First Year,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):
1057-1106.
Gruber, J. (1994a). “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits,” American
Economic Review, 84(3): 622-641.
----- (1994b). “State Mandated Benefits and Employer Provided Insurance,”
Journal of Public Economics, 55(3): 433-464.
Harris, K., C. Carpenter, and Y. Bao (2006). “The Effects of State Parity Laws on
the Use of Mental Health Care,” Medical Care, 44(6): 499-505.
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research Educational Trust
(1999). “Employer Health Benefits: 1999 Annual Survey” accessed
online at: http://www.aone.org/hret/publications/content/1999.pdf.

38

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Jensen, G. and J. Gabel (1992). “State Mandated Benefits and the Small Firm’s
Decision to Offer Insurance,” Journal of Regulatory Economics, 4: 379404.
Jensen, G. and M. Morrissey (1999). “Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance and
Mandated Benefits Laws,” Milbank Quarterly, 77(4): 425-59.
Kadiyala, S. and E. Strumpf (2011a). “How Effective is Population-Based
Cancer Screening? Regression Discontinuity Estimates from the U.S.
Guideline Screening Initiation Ages,” SSRN working paper.
----- (2011b). “Are United States and Canadian Cancer Screening Rates
Consistent with Guideline Information Regarding the Age of Screening
Initiation?” International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 23(6): 611620.
----- (2012). “How Does Health Insurance Impact Health? The Case of Medicare
and Cancer Detection.” SSRN working paper.
Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust (2011).
“Employer Health Benefits: 2011 Annual Survey,” available online at:
http://ehbs.kff.org/?page=charts&id=2&sn=30&ch=2218.
--- (2009). “Employer Health Benefits: 2009 Annual Survey,” available online at:
http://ehbs.kff.org/pdf/2009/7936.pdf.
Kelaher, M. and J. Stellman (2000). “The Impact of Medicare Funding on the
Use of Mammography Among Older Women: Implications for Improving
Access to Screening,” Preventive Medicine, 31: 658-664.
Kolstad, Jonathan and Amanda Kowalski (2010). “The Impact of Health Care
Reform on Hospital and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts,”
NBER Working Paper #16102.
Liu, Z., W. Dow, and E. Norton (2004). “The Effect of Drive-Through Delivery
Laws on Postpartum Length of Stay and Hospital Charges,” Journal of
Health Economics, 23(1): 129-155.
Lurie, Nicole, Willard G. Manning, Christine Peterson, George A. Goldberg,
Charles A. Phelps, and Lee Lillard (1987). “Preventive Care: Do We
Practice What We Preach?” American Journal of Public Health, 77(7):
801-804.
McKinney, M. and K. Marconi (1992). “Legislative Interventions to Increase
Access to Screening Mammography,” Journal of Community Health,
17(6): 333-349.
Mammen, Enno (1993). “Boostrap and Wild Bootstrap for High Dimension
Linear Models,” The Annals of Statistics, 21(1): 255-285.
Manning, Willard, Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, and
Arleen Leibowitz (1987). “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical
Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,” American Economic
Review, 77(June): 251-277.

39

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Mor, V., and R. Shackleton (2005). “The Effects of State Mandated Coverage of
Mammography,” Abstracts of the AcademyHealth Meetings, 2005,
available
at:
http://gateway.nlm.nih.gov/MeetingAbstracts/ma?f=103623574.html and
through personal correspondence with V. Mor.
National Cancer Institute (2013). “SEER Stat Fact Sheets: Breast,” available at:
http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/breast.html#survival. Last accessed
10/18/2013.
----- (2005). “State Laws Requiring Third-Party Payers to Offer or Provide
Coverage for Screening Mammograms,” table available at
http://www.scld-nci.net/Data/mam_6_30_05.pdf accessed 10/31/2008.
Nelson, David, Shayne Bland, Eve Powell-Griner, Richard Klein, Henry Wells,
Gary Hogelin, and James Marks, (2002), “State Trends in Health Risk
Factors and Receipt of Clinical Preventive Services Among US Adults
During the 1990s,” Journal of the American Medical Association,
287(20): 2659-2667.
Pacula, R. and R. Sturm (2000). “Mental Health Parity Legislation: Much Ado
About Nothing?,” Health Services Research, 35(1Pt2): 263-275.
Pettibone, K. (2003). “Mandating Cancer Screening Reimbursement Coverage:
Does it Improve Women’s Rates of Breast and Cervical Cancer Screening
Use?” Abstracts of the AcademyHealth Meetings, 2003, available at:
http://gateway.nlm.nih.gov/MeetingAbstracts/ma?f=102275235.html.
Phillips, K. A., K. Kerlikowske, L. Baker, S. W., Chang, and M. L. Brown
(1998). "Factors Associated with Women's Adherence to Mammography
Screening Guidelines," Health Services Research, 33(1): 29-53.
Schmidt, L. (2007). “Effects of Infertility Insurance Mandates on Fertility,”
Journal of Health Economics, 26(3): 431-446.
SEER
Research
Data
1973-2010
-ASCII
Text
Data:
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program
(www.seer.cancer.gov) Research Data (1973-2010), National Cancer
Institute, DCCPS, Surveillance Research Program, Surveillance Systems
Branch, released April 2013, based on the November 2012 submission.
Stanton, M. (2004). “Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance: Trends in Cost and
Access,” Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) Research
In Action Issue #17. Dated September 2004.
Sullivan, C. and T. Rice (1991). “The Health Insurance Picture in 1990,” Health
Affairs, Summer (1991): 104-115.
Super, N. (2002). “Medigap: Prevalence, Premiums, and Opportunities for
Reform,” National Health Policy Forum Issue Brief No. 782. Dated
September 9, 2002.

40

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Trivedi, A., W. Rakowski, and J. Ayanian (2008). “Effect of Cost Sharing on
Screening Mammography in Medicare Health Plans,” The New England
Journal of Medicine, 358(4): 375-383.
Warnecke, R., S. Sudman, T. Johnson, D. O’Rourke, A. Davis, and J. Jobe
(1997). “Cognitive Aspects of Recalling and Reporting Health-related
Events: Papanicolaou Smears, Clinical Breast Exams, and Mammograms,”
American Journal of Epidemiology, 146(11): 982-992.
Wolfers, J. (2006). “Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A
Reconciliation and New Results.” American Economic Review 96(5):
1802-1820.

41

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Figure 1 presents weighted mean share of women of various ages in pooled 1987-2000 BRFSS
sample who report having had a mammogram in the previous year.

Figure 2 presents share of women of each age in pooled 1987-2000 BRFSS sample who report
having had a mammogram in the previous year for survey years 1987, 1994, and 2000.

42

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

-.2

0

.2

.4

Figure 3
Event Study Estimates of the Effect of Mandates for Annual Screening on
Past Year Mammogram
BRFSS 1987-2000, Adult Women 40-64

-20

-10

0

Event time

Coeff. on Q dum.
Lower bound of 95% CI

10

20

30

Upper bound of 95% CI

Figure 3 shows an event study for past year mammography. Time 0 is the time when each state
implemented the first and only annual mandate for women of the relevant ages. The coefficients
are those on dummies for each quarter before and after the law change in each state while also
controlling for state and 5-year age groups, with the standard errors clustered at the state level, and
using BRFSS weights. States are included only if they had only 1 law change and were in the
BRFSS data for the whole 1987-2000 sample period.

43

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
Mammogram Outcomes, Mandate Variables, and Breast Cancer Diagnosis Rates, BRFSS and SEER
Variable
All 25–74 Age 25–34 Age 35–39 Age 40–49 Age 50–64 Age 65–74
BRFSS – Mammography Data
Ever had mammogram
.586
.174
.459
.760
.817
.791
Had mammogram w/in past year
.379
.080
.241
.469
.583
.566
Had mamm. w/in past year & most recent was routine
.334
.058
.200
.416
.528
.509
Had mamm. w/in past year & most recent was not routine
.045
.021
.041
.054
.056
.058
Had mammogram w/in past 2 years
.486
.115
.344
.636
.709
.687
Means of policy variables for past year outcomes:
Share treated by any mandate, scaled (baseline=.2,
.418
.008
.199
.478
.747
.724
biennial=.5, annual=1)
Share treated by any mandate
.541
.008
.686
.737
.747
.724
Share treated by mandate for baseline screening
.080
0
.609
0
0
0
Share treated by mandate for biennial screening
.116
0
0
.517
0
0
Share treated by mandate for annual screening
.344
.008
.077
.220
.747
.724
Share treated by any mandate prohibiting deductibles
.027
.006
.037
.038
.036
.027
N – BRFSS
696,761
170,352
97,610
162,580
163,195
102,641
SEER – Cancer Registry Data
Total cancer incidence rate per 100,000 women
234.7
17
62.6
157.4
298.3
438
In-situ breast pre-cancer incidence rate per 100,000
27.1
1.6
9.5
37
59.2
67.6
women
Notes: Top panel: author calculations from 1987–2000 BRFSS adult females 25–74. Statistics are weighted. N is maximum possible N; a
small number of observations are missing for various measures (e.g., individuals who did not answer questions about the timing of their last
mammogram are not asked why they had it). Past year outcomes are the share of the prior calendar year (relative to the respondent’s interview
date) that a law has been in effect, assuming it first impacted health insurance policies as of January 1 of the year after it was passed. The
variable 'Had mammogram w/in past year' does not exactly equal the sum of the variables 'Had mammogram w/in past year & most recent was
routine' and 'Had mammogram w/in past year & most recent was not routine' because of a small amount of non-response to the question about
the reason for the most recent mammogram. Bottom panel: author calculations from 1985-2000 SEER.

44

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Table 2
Mammography Insurance Mandates Increased Past Year Mammography
BRFSS 1987-2000, Adult Women 25-74
Model is 
Mandate specification is ↓
Scaled Mandate Specification
[Annual=1; Biennial=.5; Baseline=.2]
Adjusted R squared
Any Mandate Specification
Treated by any mammography mandate

(1)
State and year fixed
effects

(2)
(1) + linear state
trends

(3)
(2) + quadratic state
trends

(4)
DDD

.050***
(.013)
.21

.050***
(.013)
.21

.054***
(.014)
.21

.010
(.007)
.22

.037***
(.007)
.21

.037***
(.007)
.21

.040***
(.007)
.21

.005
(.007)
.22

Adjusted R squared
Expanded Mandate Specification
Treated by mandate for baseline
.005
.003
.006
-.015*
mammogram
(.008)
(.008)
(.007)
(.009)
.035***
.035***
.038***
.011
Treated by mandate for biennial
mammogram
(.009)
(.009)
(.009)
(.012)
Treated by mandate for annual
.050***
.050***
.055***
.009
mammogram
(.012)
(.012)
(.012)
(.007)
Adjusted R squared
.21
.21
.21
.22
Notes: Each panel of each column shows the results from a separate regression model. Sample size for all models is 693,154. The dependent
variable in all models is had a mammogram in the past year. Additional controls in all models include: five-year age group dummies; Pap test
mandates; state NBCCEDP implementation; laws mandating access to OB/GYNs; Medicare coverage of Pap tests and mammograms for
women age 65 and older; race/ethnicity; education; marital status; share of women 15–44 with private health insurance; share of women who
work or who have a husband who works at a firm with 24 or fewer employees, 25–99 employees or 100 or more employees; the unemployment
rate; welfare reform; the level of HMO penetration (as a share of the population); the number of obstetric beds per 100 women 15–44; the
eligibility threshold for Medicaid eligibility for a pregnant woman in the state as a share of the FPL; share urban; share black; share Hispanic;
and state, year, and month of interview fixed effects. Models in column 2 add linear state trends. Models in column 3 add quadratic state
trends. Models in column 4 replace the trends with state by age group, year by age group, and state by year fixed effects. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the state level and estimates are weighted.

45

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Table 3
Mandates Also Increased Other Mammography Screening Outcomes
BRFSS 1987-2000, Adult Women 25-74, Scaled Mandate Specification
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
State and year fixed
(1) + linear state
(2) + quadratic state
DDD
Outcome is ↓
effects
trends
trends
Mammogram in past year and last one was routine
Scaled mandate
.050***
.050***
.055***
.016**
(.013)
(.013)
(.014)
(.007)
.20
.20
.20
.20
Adjusted R squared
N
691,488
691,488
691,488
691,488
Mammogram in past two years
Scaled mandate
.056***
.055***
.059***
.014*
(.016)
(.016)
(.017)
(.008)
Adjusted R squared
.28
.28
.28
.29
N
693,154
693,154
693,154
693,154
Ever had a mammogram
Scaled mandate
.044***
.043***
.045***
.003
(.012)
(.013)
(.013)
(.008)
Adjusted R squared
.33
.33
.33
.34
N
695,109
695,109
695,109
695,109
Notes: Each entry shows the results from a separate regression model. The dependent variable in panel 1 is mammogram in past two years,
that in panel 2 is ever had a mammogram, and that in panel 3 is mammogram in past year and most recent one was routine screening
mammogram. All specifications in the table report coefficients on the Scaled Mandate variable. The mandate variable for the specification in
panel 1 accounts for the share of the last two calendar years the law was in effect. The mandate variable for the specification in panel 2
accounts for whether a mandate has been implemented as of January of the survey year. The mandate variable for the specification in panel 3
accounts for the share of the last calendar year the law was in effect. See notes to Table 2 for additional control variables. * significant at 10%;
** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the state level and estimates are weighted.
Specification is 

46

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Table 4
Mandates Not Related to Probability a Woman Has a Health Plan and
Mandate Effects Driven by Women with a Health Plan
BRFSS 1991–2000, Adult Women 25–74, Scaled Mandate Specification
Specification is 
Outcome is ↓
Has a Health Plan
Scaled mandate

(1)
State and year fixed
effects

(2)
(1) + linear state
trends

(3)
(2) + quadratic state
trends

(4)
DDD

-.001
.001
.002
.004
(.006)
(.006)
(.007)
(.007)
Adjusted R squared
.11
.11
.11
.11
N
591,650
591,650
591,650
591,650
Mammogram in past year, 1991-2000 (when health plan questions were asked)
Scaled mandate
.018
.019
.020
.014
(.011)
(.012)
(.013)
(.010)
.22
.22
.22
.23
Adjusted R squared
N
589, 431
589,431
589,431
589,431
Mammogram in past year, among those with a health plan
Scaled mandate
.023**
.024**
.025**
.017*
(.011)
(.011)
(.012)
(.010)
.23
.23
.23
.23
Adjusted R squared
520,312
520,312
520,312
520,312
N
Mammogram in past year, among those without a health plan
Scaled mandate
.0004
.002
.004
-.022
(.011)
(.012)
(.012)
(.028)
Adjusted R squared
.11
.11
.11
.12
N
69,119
69,119
69,119
69,119
Notes: Each entry is from a separate regression model. All specifications report coefficients on the Scaled Mandate variable. The mandate
variable for the specification in panel 1 accounts for whether a mandate has been implemented as of January of the survey year. The mandate
variable for the specification in panels 2, 3, and 4 account for the share of the last calendar year the law was in effect. See notes to Table 2 for
additional control variables. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the
state level and estimates are weighted.

47

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Table 5:
Mandates that Prohibit Deductibles Increased Screenings Among Women with Less than a High School Degree
Outcome is past year mammogram
BRFSS 1987-2000, Adult Women 25-74, Scaled Mandate Specification, DDD Models
(1)
All women

Scaled mandate

.009
(.007)

(2)
Less than a high
school degree
.014
(.027)

Scaled mandate * State mandate prohibits
deductibles

.014*
(.008)

.059***
(.016)

Sample is 

(3)
High school
degree
-.001
(.011)

(4)
Some college
-.001
(.017)

(5)
College degree
or more
.019
(.017)

-.017
(.021)

.013
(.026)

.022
(.021)

Adjusted R-squared
.20
.12
.20
.24
.29
N
693,154
86,575
236,187
190,376
178,983
Notes: Each column shows the results from a separate DDD regression model. Column 1 sample is all women, column 2 sample is women
with less than a high school degree; column 3 sample is women with exactly a high school degree; column 4 sample is women with some
college education; and column 5 sample is women with at least a bachelor’s degree. See notes to Table 2 for additional control variables. All
models also include controls for the baseline and biennial mandate variables, as well as their interactions with the indicator for laws that
prohibit deductibles. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the state
level and estimates are weighted.

48

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Table 6:
Mandates Increased Detection of Earliest Stage In-Situ Pre-Cancers
SEER 1985-2000, Adult Women 25-74

Scaled Mandate Specification
Annual=1; Biennial=.5; Baseline=.2

R-squared
N
Any Mandate Specification
Treated by any mammography
mandate
R-squared
N
Expanded Specification
Treated by mandate for baseline
mammogram

(1)
DD

(2)
DD+linear
trends

(3)
DD+quadratic trends

(4)
DDD

.199
(.024)**
[.048]**
.93
1,440

.214
(.026)**
[.036]**
.93
1,440

.216
(.028)**
[.032]**
.93
1,440

.156
(.014)**
[.000]***
.96
1,440

.265
(.015)**
[.000]***
.93
1,440

.283
(.017)**
[.000]***
.93
1,440

.287
(.018)**
[.000]***
.93
1,440

.256
(.006)***
[.000]***
.96
1,440

.321
.333
.326
.328
(.025)**
(.028)**
(.032)**
(.046)**
[.000]***
[.000]***
[.000]***
[.024]**
Treated by mandate for biennial
.288
.304
.307
.250
(.032)**
(.030)**
(.028)**
(.035)**
mammogram
[.000]***
[.004]***
[.000]***
[.000]***
Treated by mandate for annual
.242
.262
.268
.235
(.017)**
(.018)**
(.019)**
(.004)***
mammogram
[.004]***
[.004]***
[.016]**
[.000]***
R-squared
.93
.93
.93
.96
N
1,440
1,440
1,440
1,440
Notes: Each entry shows the coefficient from a separate regression model. The dependent variable
is one plus the log of the number of breast cancer diagnoses to women in various age groups using
SEER-9 data. Though not shown, all models also include various fixed effects (column 1: state
and year; column 2: state, year and state specific time trends; column 3: state, year, and a quadratic
in state specific time trends; and column 4: state by age group, state by year, and age group by
year fixed effects). All models include dummies for the relevant populations of women in the age
group. Models in columns 1-4 include all the state-level Xs discussed in the text. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the
state level; p-values for this process are reported in parentheses; p-values calculated using Wild
Bootstrap are in brackets.

49

Health Insurance Mandates, Mammography, and Breast Cancer Diagnoses

Table 7:
A Substantial Proportion of Increased Screenings are Attributable to Mandates that are Not Consistent with
2014 ACS Recommendations
BRFSS 1987-2000, Women age 25-74, Expanded Mandate Specification
Model is 
Mandate specification is ↓
Expanded Mandate Specification
Mandate is consistent with current [2014]
ACS guideline for annual
Mandate is not consistent with current
[2014] ACS guideline for annual

(1)
State and year fixed
effects

(2)
(1) + linear state
trends

(3)
(2) + quadratic state
trends

(4)
DDD

.050***
(.013)
.046***
(.012)

.050***
(.013)
.047***
(.011)

.054***
(.015)
.052***
(.011)

.010
(.006)
.031*
(.017)

Adjusted R squared
.21
.21
.21
.22
N
693,154
693,154
693,154
693,154
Notes: Each column shows the results from a separate regression model. The dependent variable in all models is had a mammogram in the
past year. See notes to Table 2 for additional control variables. All models also include a variable indicating that the mandate is not consistent
with current ACS guideline for baseline screening and a variable indicating that the mandate is not consistent with the current ACS guideline
for biennial screening. Models in column 2 add linear state trends. Models in column 3 add quadratic state trends. Models in column 4
replace the trends with state by age group, year by age group, and state by year fixed effects. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%. Standard errors throughout are clustered at the state level and estimates are weighted.

50

