                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            TRADE AND THE GLOBAL RECESSION

                                           Jonathan Eaton
                                           Samuel Kortum
                                            Brent Neiman
                                            John Romalis

                                        Working Paper 16666
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16666


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




We thank Costas Arkolakis, Ariel Burstein, Christian Broda, Lorenzo Caliendo, Marty Eichenbaum,
Chang-Tai Hsieh, Erik Hurst, Anil Kashyap, and Ralph Ossa as well as participants at numerous seminars
for helpful comments. George Alessandria, Chris Edmond, Tim Kehoe, Andrei Levchenko, Kanda
Naknoi, Denis Novy, Andy Rose, Jonathan Vogel, and Kei-Mu Yi gave excellent discussions. Max
Perez Leon, Fernando Parro, and Kelsey Moser provided outstanding research assistance. This research
was funded in part by the Neubauer Family Foundation and the Charles E. Merrill Faculty Research
Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Eaton and Kortum gratefully acknowledge
the support of the National Science Foundation under grant number SES-0820338. Neiman gratefully
acknowledges the support of the National Science Foundation under grant number 1061954. The Appendix
that accompanies the paper, as well as notes and derivations from a simplified version of the model,
can be found on the authors' web pages. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Jonathan Eaton, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade and the Global Recession
Jonathan Eaton, Samuel Kortum, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis
NBER Working Paper No. 16666
January 2011, Revised January 2016
JEL No. E3,F1,F4

                                            ABSTRACT

We develop a dynamic multi-country general equilibrium model to investigate forces acting on the
global economy during the Great Recession and ensuing recovery. Our multi-sector framework accounts
completely for countries' trade, investment, production, and GDPs in terms of different sets of shocks.
Applying the model to 21 countries, we investigate the 29 percent drop in world trade in manufactures
during 2008-2009. A shift in final spending away from tradable sectors, largely caused by declines
in durables investment efficiency, account for most of the collapse in trade relative to GDP. Shocks
to trade frictions, productivity, and demand play minor roles.


Jonathan Eaton                                     Brent Neiman
Department of Economics                            University of Chicago
Pennsylvania State University                      Booth School of Business
303 Kern Graduate Building                         5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
University Park, PA 16801                          Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                           and NBER
jxe22@psu.edu                                      brent.neiman@chicagobooth.edu

Samuel Kortum                                      John Romalis
Department of Economics                            The University of Sydney
Yale University                                    School of Economics
P.O. Box 208264                                    H04 - Merewether
New Haven, CT 06520                                NSW 2006 Australia
and NBER                                           and NBER
samuel.kortum@yale.edu                             jromalis@gmail.com
1       Introduction
International trade in manufactures plunged 29 percent during the global recession of 2008-2009.
That trade would fall in line with other economic magnitudes such as GDP is perhaps not sur-
prising, but, as shown in Figure 1, global trade fell 20 percent relative to global GDP.1 What
happened during the crisis that led trade to collapse?
    Answering this question forces us to confront multiple dimensions of complexity surrounding
the global crisis. Some sectors and some countries were hit much harder than others. Trade fell,
but trade also played a role in transmitting shocks from one country to another.
    To capture this geographical, sectoral, and temporal richness, we attack this question by
embedding a multi-sector general equilibrium model of international trade into a multi-country
real business cycle model. We divide economic activity into the manufacture of durables, the
manufacture of nondurables, construction, and everything else (called “services”). Only the
outputs of the first two sectors are tradable. Output of the durable manufacturing sector goes into
stocks of equipment while construction activity creates structures. The framework incorporates
economic geography, an input-output structure, and capital accumulation. With saving and
investment chosen optimally in each country, trade imbalances emerge endogenously. Quantifying
this framework, we use it to assess the contribution of different types of shocks occurring in
different countries to the collapse of trade.
    Our framework attributes what happened to six types of country-specific shocks: (i) to the cost
of trade in each manufacturing sector between each pair of trading partners, (ii) to productivity in
each sector, (iii) to the efficiency of investment in each type of capital, (iv) to aggregate demand,
(v) to the demand for nondurable manufactures, and (vi) to employment.2 Through international
trade, shocks in one country have implications elsewhere. Through capital accumulation, past
shocks affect the future while, through their anticipation, future shocks affect the past.
    We apply the framework to a period spanning the run-up to the recession through the end
    1
      We measure the drop from the third quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of 2009. The data are trade in
manufactures and GDP, both in current U.S. dollars. Appendix Figure A.1 plots trade in goods and services
relative to GDP for the four largest economies in the world: the United States, Japan, China, and Germany. In
2007 trade in manufactures constituted 68.6 percent of the total trade of the 20 countries in our study while in 2009
manufactures constituted 66.7 percent of their trade. Hence trade in manufactures was both the bulk of trade and
the largest participant in the trade collapse. We focus on trade in manufactures because we lack comprehensive
data on bilateral trade in services, while the small amount of trade in other merchandise, such as oil, is subject to
idiosyncratic forces outside the scope of our analysis.
    2
      Shocks (i) to (iii) are to technology, shocks (iv) and (v) are to preferences, and shocks (vi) are to endowments.
Since we don’t model trade in services, to respect accounting identities we introduce exogenous services deficits,
which we treat as transfers, as our seventh type of shock. While services deficits are exogenous, overall deficits
emerge as equilibrium outcomes. Services deficits turn out to play only a very small role in our quantitative
analysis.



                                                          1
of the subsequent recovery. We assemble quarterly data on nominal and real GDP as well as on
prices, production, and bilateral trade by sector for 21 countries (including Rest of World) that
encompass the entire globe. We apply our framework to these data to extract time series of the
different shocks over the period from 2000 to 2012.
   Our model embeds a gravity equation for trade in each manufacturing sector, which allows
us to extract shocks to trade costs using movements in bilateral trade shares and prices. We
apply the dual to extract shocks to total factor productivity in each sector using output and
input prices and, for the two traded sectors, the import share. We extract shocks to the efficiency
of investment in each type of capital to reconcile data on investment spending with the model’s
implication for the dynamics of the capital stock. Our assumption of complete markets allows us
to back out shocks to demand from shifts in consumption spending across countries and in the
composition of consumption spending within countries. Since we treat labor as exogenous, we
take the labor shock directly from data on changes in employment.
   If we feed in all the shocks, the dynamic solution of our model will reproduce exactly the
quarterly data on GDP, prices, production, and trade in each country. Instead, we introduce
various subsets of these shocks and run dynamic general equilibrium counterfactuals to address
two questions:3 What type of shocks drove what happened? Where did these shocks originate?
We look not only at trade, but also at manufacturing production and GDP around the world.
Several results stand out.
   Declines in the efficiency of investment in durable manufactures, an intensively traded sector,
were the major driver of the overall collapse in trade, as well as the decline in manufacturing
production, during the global recession. The efficiency of investment in durables for the world as
a whole plummeted at an annual rate of 23 percent during the recession, having been quite flat
in the eight years before. These declines shifted final spending away from durables toward the
nontraded sectors. A counterfactual with these shocks on their own generates almost two-thirds
of the collapse in global trade relative to GDP.
   Moreover, cross-country differences in these shocks were the primary determinant of cross-
country variation in the declines both in trade and in manufacturing production. For example,
China was the only country that experienced growth in durables investment efficiency during the
recession and was also the country with the mildest decline in durables trade and the largest
    3
      Just as growth accounting uses a theoretical framework to decompose output growth into factor accumulation
and the Solow residual, we use our model to decompose changes in output, trade, and prices into our sets of
shocks. Unlike growth accounting, however, evaluating the contribution of individual shocks requires solving a
counterfactual equilibrium, as in the Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007) “wedges” approach to closed-economy
business-cycle accounting.



                                                       2
increase in durables production. At the other extreme, Romania and Spain had the steepest
declines in durables investment efficiency and among the steepest declines in durables trade. Our
results complement the literature, discussed below, pointing to the importance of investment
efficiency shocks in quantitative business cycle models.
    Other types of shocks made more modest contributions to the trade collapse. Declines in the
demand for nondurable manufactures (also highly traded) shifted expenditures toward services,
which are not traded. Higher trade frictions in a few large countries, such as China and the
United States, led them to source a larger share of their traded goods domestically.
    Productivity in nontraded sectors generally declined, but for tradable sectors productivity
often rose. Productivity shocks therefore had little impact on global trade. Increases in a country’s
aggregate demand raise spending on consumption of nondurables and services there, leading to
higher factor prices, lower exports, higher imports, and higher GDP relative to other countries.
Such shocks had a limited impact on trade during the recession, but were the primary source of
fluctuations in relative GDPs.4
    The global nature of the trade collapse was primarily the result of simultaneous declines in
investment efficiency in many countries. The extent to which an individual country was affected
depended both on the severity of the decline domestically and its severity in major export markets.
We find, for example, that if the United States had not itself experienced directly the shocks
underlying the global recession, its limited amount of trade would have shielded it from shocks
originating elsewhere. For Germany, in contrast, we find that shutting down its own shocks would
have barely mitigated its production slowdown. Its trading relationships with the rest of the world
meant that shocks elsewhere played a significant role in its downturn.
    Unlike the decline of trade during 2008-2009, its recovery during 2009-2011 reflected a more
balanced contribution of several sets of shocks. Reduced trade frictions played the largest role.
The partial recovery in the efficiency of investment in durables was the second most important
contributor to the trade recovery, followed by shocks to demand for nondurables. By 2012,
however, global trade had leveled off below its pre-recession peak.
    Finally, we ask how our shocks account for fluctuations in real GDP. Shocks to productivity
in nontraded sectors and shocks to labor supply had the greatest impact. Hence we attribute the
decline in real GDP during the global recession primarily to a different set of shocks (productivity
and labor supply) than those most responsible for the decline in trade and in manufacturing
   4
      We report all nominal values in terms of nominal global GDP. We use the term relative GDP (or simply GDP
if there is no ambiguity) to mean a country’s nominal GDP translated into U.S. dollars relative to the dollar value
of global GDP. To distinguish this concept from that of real GDP, we use the term real GDP when referring to
this second concept.


                                                        3
production (investment efficiency).
    Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature while Section 3 provides
an overview of the data. Section 4 presents our model, deriving equilibrium relationships from
the solution to a global planner’s problem. In Section 5 we show how the equilibrium links
observable outcomes to underlying shocks. Section 6 describes how to extract these shocks from
data on GDP, production, trade, and prices. Section 7 then uses the model to conduct a set of
counterfactuals which identify the role of different types of shocks in the global recession. Section
8 concludes.


2       Related Literature
Our work bridges several literatures. First, our results complement various papers investigat-
ing the forces driving the trade collapse during the global recession. Second, our methodology
contributes to efforts to integrate quantitative models in macroeconomics and in international
trade.


2.1      The Trade Collapse
Baldwin (2009) serves as a forum in which a number of researchers put forth various hypotheses
for why trade plummeted. Explanations fall into several categories. One attributes the collapse
to forces increasing barriers to trade, captured in our analysis by trade friction shocks. The
literature points to two specific trade barriers. Since a banking crisis was a major component of
the global recession, several authors, including Amiti and Weinstein (2011) and Chor and Manova
(2011), blame the trade collapse on tightening trade credit. Others, including Brock (2009), cite
increased protectionism.
    Another literature has attributed the collapse in trade to the differential impact of the recession
on different sectors of the economy.5 A third hypothesis put forth in Eichengreen (2009) and Yi
(2009) is that international vertical supply chains disintegrated.
    In their survey, Bems, Johnson, and Yi (2013) write “The key to understanding how trade
can fall more than GDP lies in understanding how asymmetries in expenditure changes across
sectors map to international trade. The global recession saw large declines in spending on final
goods (as opposed to services), specifically durable goods.” They conclude that the composition
of expenditures played a critical role in the collapse and that trade finance and protectionism
    5
    See, for example, Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar (2010) for a detailed analysis of the United States, Behrens,
Corcos, and Mion (2013) for Belgium, Bricongne, Fontagne, Gaulier, Taglioni, and Vicard (2011) for France, and
Bems, Johnson, and Yi (2010) for an analysis of multi-country trade and production data.

                                                      4
did not. Our bottom line largely supports their conclusion. We attribute 64 percent of the trade
collapse to negative shocks to the efficiency of investment in durables and 18 percent to declines in
demand for nondurables, both of which shift spending away from tradable goods. Trade frictions
account for roughly 11 percent of the decline in global trade relative to GDP. What our analysis
adds is the ability to trace outcomes in general equilibrium for any country or sector to shocks
emanating from any country or sector.


2.2     Macroeconomics and Trade
Our work relates to a large open-economy macroeconomics literature that studies the behavior of
trade, predominantly using dynamic two-country models. Stockman and Tesar (1995) highlight
the importance of shocks to intertemporal preferences while Boileau (1999) and Engel and Wang
(2011) explain the greater volatility of trade by recognizing that a large share of what is traded
consists of durable intermediates rather than final goods.6 Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan
(2010a,b) develop dynamic two-country models in which inventories play a central role. Leibovici
and Waugh (2012) emphasize the time-to-ship friction for explaining trade dynamics, while in-
vestment shocks play a critical role in Boileau (2002), Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust (2008), and
Jacob and Peersman (2013).7
    Our methodology builds on a literature that studies the role of trade barriers in segmenting
financial markets as well as goods markets. A pioneering paper by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001)
provides a series of stylized models of the world economy in which trade barriers separate indi-
vidual countries subject to individual shocks. Their analysis is limited to two countries, so is not
amenable to realistic quantification. Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2007, 2008) and Eaton, Kortum,
Neiman, and Romalis (2011) develop multi-country models that can be confronted with the rich
data on bilateral trade, but their models are static and treat deficits and shocks to the demand
for tradables as exogenous.
    Alvarez and Lucas (2009) and Fitzgerald (2012) also embed multi-country models with trade
barriers into explicitly dynamic frameworks. Alvarez and Lucas study transition dynamics and
steady state responses to tariff changes in a model with balanced trade. Fitzgerald tests for
asset-market completeness and, among rich counties, is unable to reject it. We push our frame-
   6
       Kose and Yi (2001), Ambler, Cardia, and Zimmermann (2004), Huang and Liu (2007), Arkolakis and Rama-
narayanan (2009), and Johnson (2014) address the role of trade in intermediates for business cycle transmission
and for the correlation of consumption across countries.
     7
       Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988) introduce shocks to investment efficiency. A large subsequent
literature in closed-economy macroeconomics identifies such shocks as a major driver of aggregates, particularly of
investment, over the business cycle. See, for instance, Fisher (2006), Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010,
2011), Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2012), and Jurado (2015).


                                                        5
work much further, adapting it to measure the shocks hitting the world economy, to assess their
contributions to the global recession, and to track their transmission across countries.
    The real business cycle literature has sought to uncover the ergodic processes driving business
cycles over a long horizon. We zero in on one episode, the recent global recession and recovery.
We consequently adopt the business-cycle-accounting strategy of Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan
(2007), which extracts from the data the exact realizations of each of a set of shocks. Given that
our analysis incorporates many countries and sectors, applying the states-of-nature approach as in
Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007) would be infeasible. Instead we adopt the perfect-foresight
methodology used by Kehoe, Ruhl, and Steinberg (2014) in their study of the joint dynamics of
employment in the traded sector and the U.S. trade deficit.


3       A First Look at the Data
Along with the collapse of trade, other features of the global recession were a decline in con-
struction and a drop in manufacturing production. The long-dashed line in Figure 1 shows that
construction didn’t start its persistent slide until 2009:Q2. By contrast, trade and manufactur-
ing production both fell sharply after 2008:Q3 and rebounded after 2009:Q2. For the purposes of
studying the trade collapse we thus identify the period 2008:Q3 to 2009:Q2 as the global recession.
    During these quarters global manufacturing production (plotted with the short-dashed line
in Figure 1) fell by 13 percent while global trade in manufactures (plotted with the sold line)
declined by an even larger 20 percent. To what extent was the sharper decline in trade due to
compositional effects between countries or between durable and nondurable manufacturing within
countries?
    To perform the first component of this decomposition, we divide the world into the 21 countries
listed in Table 1.8 We can account for nearly half (49 percent) of the decline in manufacturing
trade relative to manufacturing production with the relatively larger declines in production in
(mostly smaller) countries with higher ratios of trade to production.9
    8
      The data shown in the table are for 2008:Q3, the base period before the global trade collapse. Not including
Rest of World, the other 20 countries comprise nearly three-fourths of global GDP. Appendix Section A describes
the data used here and throughout the paper.
    9
      We decompose the global decline in the ratio of trade to production in manufactures into within and between
country effects as follows. Let TnM be trade in manufactures and YnM production of manufactures in country
n = 1, ..., N . The decomposition is:
                                           N                                      N
                              TM                                    TnM                                    YnM
                                         X                                    X                           
                      ∆                =         YnM /Y M × ∆                 +         TnM /YnM × ∆             ,
                              YM           n=1
                                                                    YnM           n=1
                                                                                                           YM
                                           |            {z                }       |            {z              }
                                                   Within-Country                        Between-Country




                                                                    6
   As for the second component, Engel and Wang (2011) and Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar
(2010) point out that durables, which were particularly hard hit during the recession, are more
intensively traded. During the recession, the ratio of trade to production was 31 percent for
durables compared with 22 percent for nondurables, and the share of durables in total production
declined by 2.2 percentage points during the recession.10 Combining this sectoral reallocation
with the country reallocation discussed above, we find that compositional effects account for 60
percent of the decline in global trade relative to global production.
   In Figure 2(a), we separately plot each country’s change in durables trade and production (in
solid squares) and nondurables trade and production (in hollow circles). (Here and in what follows
we report changes as the value at the end of the period divided by the value at the beginning of
the period. Hence no change delivers 1.) Several points stand out. First, the declines in trade
and manufacturing production were widespread. Second, the declines in trade and production for
durables were almost always more pronounced than for nondurables. Third, where production
fell more trade fell more. Figure 2(b) plots the corresponding changes during the recovery from
the recession, which we define as 2009:Q2 to 2011:Q1. The picture is largely a mirror image of
the recession.
   Several authors have examined the role of construction in the global recession.11 Figure
2(c) plots changes in construction against manufacturing production both in the recession and
recovery. Where construction declined at all, it never fell more than production. Remarkably, for
most countries construction failed to rebound during the recovery, with many countries, including
Greece, Spain, and the United States, experiencing declines even more extreme than during the
recession.
   Finally, Figure 2(d) compares changes in countries’ real GDPs with changes in their relative
GDPs during the recession and recovery. During the recession real GDP declined in most countries
by from three to six percent. China, India, and Poland are the only countries where real GDP
grew. Changes in relative GDP were more extreme, with China, Japan, and the United States
displaying the largest increases.12 Not only did real global activity decline in the recession, there
was also a major cross-country realignment in incomes.
where x (with no subscript) denotes the global total of xn , ∆xn denotes its value in 2009:Q2 less its value in
2008:Q3, and xn denotes the average of its value in these two quarters.
   10
      Appendix Table A.1 lists the industries we classify as durable and nondurable manufactures (as well as
construction and services).
   11
      Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2013) look at U.S. manufacturing and construction employment while
Hoffmann and Lemieux (2014) compare construction employment in Canada, Germany, and the United States.
   12
      These changes in relative GDPs, of course, in part reflect the appreciations of the Chinese renminbi, the
Japanese yen, and the U.S. dollar in this period.




                                                      7
4        The Model
We now turn from the data to our dynamic multi-country model in which durable and nondurable
manufactures take center stage, with a role for construction as well. We then return to these data
to quantify our model in order to isolate the factors driving the global collapse of trade and
production during the recession.


4.1      Technology
We first describe the static technology for production at any date. We then turn to how investment
connects endowments of capital across time.

4.1.1     The Static Framework

Our static framework builds on the trade models of Eaton and Kortum (2002), Alvarez and Lucas
(2007), and Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2008).13 The economy has n = 1, ..., N countries each
with four sectors: construction (C), durable manufactures (D), nondurable manufactures (N ),
and services (S).14 We let Ω = {C, D, N, S} denote the set of all sectors.
                                                                                         k
     In addition to its labor endowment Ln,t , at any date t country n has an endowment Kn,t of
capital of type k ∈ ΩK = {C, D}. At any date households and firms consume the services of
these stocks of capital. The output of sectors k ∈ ΩK can serve as investment to build these
stocks of capital. In addition, each sector j ∈ Ω uses the output of each sector as intermediate
inputs. Outputs of nondurables and services (Ω∗K , the complement of ΩK ) are also used directly
for consumption.
     In each sector, total output is a CES aggregate (with elasticity of substitution σ) of the outputs
of a unit continuum of goods (a separate one for each sector) indexed by z ∈ [0, 1].15 Country
n’s efficiency ajn,t (z) at making good z in sector j is the realization of a random variable ajn,t with
distribution:                                                                  !−θ 
                              j                                         a
                                  (a) = Pr ajn,t ≤ a = exp −
                                                   
                             Fn,t                                                  ,                           (1)
                                                                       γAjn,t

drawn independently for each z across countries n. Here, Ajn,t > 0 is a parameter that reflects
    13
      Papers that have introduced interindustry interaction into this framework include Shikher (2011) and Caliendo
and Parro (2015).
   14
      When we connect the model to data, services will represent the largest share of the S sector, although it also
includes agriculture and commodities such as petroleum and other raw materials.
   15
      Our analysis would emerge largely unscathed if we modelled output of each sector in each country as ho-
mogeneous but differentiated according to source, as in Armington. Our approach does not require specifying
production technology as requiring inputs classified by both sector and provenance.



                                                         8
country n’s overall productivity in sector j. The parameter θ is an inverse measure of the disper-
sion of efficiencies.16
   Production of good z in each sector combines the services of labor, the services of each type
of capital, and intermediates from each of the four sectors. Technology is Cobb-Douglas with
constant returns to scale. The output elasticities in country n and sector j of labor, capital of
                                                                                              0
type k, and intermediates from sector j 0 are given by βnL,j , βnK,jk , and βnM,jj for j, j 0 ∈ Ω, k ∈ ΩK .
   As has been standard in trade models since Ricardo, the endowments of labor and capital are
not traded. Trade in the outputs of the four sectors incurs standard iceberg trade costs, so that
delivering one unit of a good from country i to country n requires shipping djni,t ≥ 1 units, with
djnn,t = 1. We treat sectors l ∈ ΩT = {D, N } as tradable so that dlni,t are finite. Construction is
not traded and we treat services as nontraded, so that for sectors j ∈ Ω∗T = {C, S} we treat djni,t
as infinite for i 6= n.

4.1.2      Capital Stock Dynamics

Capital of type k in country n accumulates according to:

                                k
                                                      αk          1−αk
                                      = χkn,t In,t
                                               k             k
                                                                           + 1 − δ k Kn,t
                                                                                     k
                               Kn,t+1                       Kn,t                          ,                (2)

       k
where In,t is investment, χkn,t governs the efficiency of investment, 0 < αk ≤ 1 governs adjustment
costs, and δ k is the depreciation rate. In introducing shocks to the efficiency of investment we
follow recent developments in the business cycle literature described in Section 2.2. Setting αk < 1
means that investment is less efficient when done in a large amount relative to the stock of capital,
as in Lucas and Prescott (1971).


4.2       Preferences
At each date t the representative household in country n consumes output of the nondurables
                                 N        S
and services sectors in amounts Cn,t and Cn,t . It also consumes the services of the stocks of
                                    H,D      H,C
durables and structures in amounts Kn,t and Kn,t . The utility function aggregates these flows
                                          j
of consumption with Cobb-Douglas weights ψn,t ≥ 0, where ψ C + ψ D + ψn,t
                                                                      N      S
                                                                          + ψn,t = 1. Note that
we treat the weights on household capital services as fixed across countries and over time, but
  16
       To simplify the expressions that follow, we introduce:
                                                      1/(1−σ)
                                                  θ−σ+1
                                            γ= Γ                  ,
                                                    θ

where Γ denotes the gamma function and where we assume that θ > σ − 1. As long as this inequality is satisfied,
the value of the parameter σ doesn’t matter for our analysis.

                                                             9
allow for country-specific shifts between nondurables and services over time. The lifetime utility
of the representative agent in country n is:
                                                                                                   
                             ∞
                             X                 X                                  X
                                                          j       j                              H,k 
                      Un =         ρt φn,t              ψn,t ln Cn,t +                  ψ k ln Kn,t   ,   (3)
                             t=0               j∈Ω∗K                              k∈ΩK


where ρ is a constant discount factor and φn,t is a shock to intertemporal preferences for country
n at date t, which we call an aggregate demand shock.


4.3    Market Structure and the Planner’s Problem
Markets are perfectly competitive and complete. Foresight is perfect. Since there are no market
failures, we can reformulate the problem, following Lucas and Prescott (1971), and solve for the
market allocation as the solution to a world planner’s problem.
    The world planner assigns a weight ωn to the representative consumer in country n. We
restrict aggregate demand shocks to have no global component, setting N
                                                                     P
                                                                       n=1 ωn φn,t = 1. The

planner’s objective at date 0 is to maximize:

                                                                  N
                                                                  X
                                                 W =                    ωn Un ,                            (4)
                                                                  n=1

                                                                                        k
where she takes as given the initial stocks of each type of capital in each country n, Kn,0 .
   She is subject to the following sets of constraints:

  1. The labor assigned to production of each good z in each sector j in country n at date t,
      Ljn,t (z), can’t exceed the labor endowment Ln,t :

                                               XZ             1
                                                                  Ljn,t (z)dz ≤ Ln,t .
                                               j∈Ω        0



  2. Capital of type k assigned to production of each good z in each sector j in country n at date
          jk
      t, Kn,t (z), along with capital available to households, can’t exceed the capital endowment
       k
      Kn,t :
                                       XZ           1
                                                         jk           H,k    k
                                                        Kn,t (z)dz + Kn,t ≤ Kn,t .
                                       j∈Ω      0


                                                  j
  3. In each country n at each date t the output yn,t (z) of good z in sector j can’t exceed what’s




                                                                  10
  implied by inputs and technology:

                                              !βnL,j                                  !βnK,jk              jj 0
                                                                                                                      !βnM,jj0
            j                     Ljn,t (z)                     Y          jk
                                                                         Kn,t (z)               Y        Mn,t   (z)
           yn,t (z) ≤ ajn,t (z)                                                                                  0               ,
                                   βnL,j                       k∈ΩK
                                                                          βnK,jk                j 0 ∈Ω
                                                                                                         βnM,jj

         jj  0
  where Mn,t (z) are intermediates from sector j 0 used to make good z in sector j.

4. The world’s use of the output of good z in sector j from country n at date t can’t exceed
  what n produces:
                                          N
                                          X
                                                   djmn,t xjmn,t (z) ≤ yn,t
                                                                        j
                                                                            (z),
                                          m=1

  where xjmn,t (z) is country m’s absorption of good z in sector j from country n (and djmn,t
  takes into account what’s lost in transport).

5. Country n’s total absorption of good z in sector j, xjn,t (z), can’t exceed what it absorbs
  from each source i:
                                                                       N
                                                                       X
                                               xjn,t (z)          ≤          xjni,t (z).
                                                                       i=1


6. Absorption from each sector j in country n (for final use as investment or consumption or
  for intermediate use) xjn,t aggregates across the goods for that sector:

                                              Z           1                          σ/(σ−1)
                                  xjn,t   ≤                    xjn,t (z)(σ−1)/σ dz                  .
                                                       0


7. What its households consume and what it uses as intermediates can’t exceed country n’s
  absorption from sector h ∈ Ω∗K :

                                     XZ            1
                                                        jh           h
                                                       Mn,t (z)dz + Cn,t ≤ xhn,t .
                                      j∈Ω      0



8. What its firms invest and what it uses as intermediates can’t exceed country n’s absorption
  from sector k ∈ ΩK :
                                      XZ           1
                                                        jk           k
                                                       Mn,t (z)dz + In,t ≤ xkn,t .
                                      j∈Ω      0


9. Capital of type k available in country n at date t + 1 can’t exceed what’s accumulated from
                      k                   k
  the previous stock Kn,t and investment In,t at date t:

                            k
                                                                αk               k
                           Kn,t+1 ≤ χkn,t In,t
                                           k                            k 1−α
                                                                      (Kn,t ) + (1 − δ k )Kn,t
                                                                                           k
                                                                                               .

                                                                 11
We assume that the parameters of preferences and technology ensure that the planner’s objective
(4) is bounded.


4.4     Equilibrium Relationships
Appendix Section B sets up the planner’s problem as one of intertemporal constrained optimiza-
tion. The solution, together with the distributional assumption (1), delivers simple expressions
for sectoral allocations and the shadow prices on the associated constraints. We interpret the
appropriate shadow prices, for each country n at each date t, as a price index pjn,t for absorption
                                                       k
in sector j, a wage to labor wn,t , and a rental rate rn,t for each type of capital. With this reinter-
pretation of the relevant shadow prices as competitive prices, we turn to the expressions that we
take to the data.

4.4.1   Prices and Trade Shares

The cost cjn,t of a bundle of inputs in country n for producing in sector j, combining labor, capital,
and intermediates, is:

                                               L,j                K,jk      Y          0
                                                                                              βnM,jj0
                                                             k βn
                                              βn
                                                     Y
                          cjn,t   = (wn,t )                 rn,t                      pjn,t              ,   (5)
                                                     k∈ΩK                    j 0 ∈Ω


while the associated price index for sector j in country n, combining production costs in each
country is:
                                               
                                                 N
                                                                           !−θ −1/θ
                                                X           cji,t djni,t
                                      pjn,t   =                                        .                   (6)
                                                     i=1
                                                               Aji,t

The share of country n’s absorption of sector j imported from country i is:
                                                                           !−θ
                                                j           cji,t djni,t
                                               πni,t =                           .                           (7)
                                                            Aji,t pjn,t

4.4.2   Household Spending

Household spending on consumption of good h ∈ Ω∗K is:

                                               phn,t Cn,t
                                                      h              h
                                                          = ωn φn,t ψn,t ,                                   (8)

while household spending on capital k ∈ ΩK is:

                                                k    H,k
                                               rn,t Kn,t = ωn φn,t ψ k .                                     (9)

                                                             12
Summing these two expressions across all sectors and countries, our restriction on global aggre-
gate demand shocks together with our normalization of the ψ’s implies that the value of world
consumption is 1, which serves as our numéraire.17

4.4.3     Investment

Investment in sector k satisfies the Euler equation:
                 !1−αk                                                                                                 !1−αk 
  pkn,t    k
          In,t               k k
                                                       k
                                       1 − αk pkn,t+1 In,t+1   1 − δ k pkn,t+1                                    k
                                                                                                                 In,t+1
                         = ρα rn,t+1 +                       +                                                                  . (10)
  χkn,t     k
          Kn,t                                 k
                                           αk Kn,t+1             αk χkn,t+1                                        k
                                                                                                                 Kn,t+1

The left-hand side is the sacrifice in period t required to attain another unit of capital in period
t + 1. The right-hand side is the benefit of another unit of capital in period t + 1, both to rent
out that period and to carry over to the future. Our assumption of perfect foresight implies that
date t + 1 magnitudes are known at date t.18

4.4.4     Market Clearing
                                                            j
We define the value of country n’s spending on sector j as Xn,t = pjn,t xjn,t . Defining Yn,t
                                                                                           j
                                                                                              as the
value of country n’s gross production in sector j, world goods-market clearing implies that:

                                                                 N
                                                                 X
                                                        j               j     j
                                                      Yn,t   =         πmn,t Xm,t .                                                 (11)
                                                                 m=1

   17
     This choice of numéraire gives the cleanest analytic expressions in the derivations that follow. To make our
numerical results in line with our presentation of the data, we report them relative to global GDP. In our model,
global GDP is:
                                    XN h                                           i
                                                      C    C      D      D      H,D
                               Yt =      wn,t Ln,t + rn,t Kn,t + rn,t   Kn,t − Kn,t    ,
                                       n=1
                                                                         k    k
where labor income wn,t Ln,t is given below by (13) and capital incomes rn,t Kn,t by (14). Consistent with national
accounting practices, we include rental payments by households on structures, but exclude rental payments by
households on durables, in our measure of GDP.
   18
      The Euler equation appears more familiar when written in terms of preferences. Defining the function:
                                                         S             S       S
                                                  un,t (Cn,t ) = φn,t ψn,t ln Cn,t ,
                               S
the first-order condition for Cn,t is:
                                                         ωn u0n,t (Cn,t
                                                                    S
                                                                        ) = pSn,t .
                                          S        S
Inserting the first-order conditions for Cn,t and Cn,t+1 into (10) and imposing a standard capital accumulation
            k     k      k
equation, α = χn,t = χn,t+1 = 1, gives:
                                                                                                         !
                                          pkn,t                         pkn,t+1         k
                                                                                      rn,t+1
                             u0n,t (Cn,t
                                     S
                                         ) S      =   ρu0n,t+1 (Cn,t+1
                                                                 S
                                                                       ) S                    + 1 − δk       .
                                          pn,t                          pn,t+1        pkn,t+1




                                                                    13
                                                      F,h                               F,k
We denote final spending on sector h in country n as Xn,t = phn,t Cn,t
                                                                   h
                                                                       for h ∈ Ω∗K and Xn,t = pkn,t In,t
                                                                                                     k


for k ∈ ΩK . Total spending on sector j output is the sum of country n’s final spending on sector
j plus the use of sector j output as intermediates by each sector j 0 :

                                                 j      F,j
                                                                      X              0   j 0
                                                Xn,t = Xn,t +                  β M,j j Yn,t .                                           (12)
                                                                      j 0 ∈Ω


Clearing in the market for country n’s labor implies that labor income equals labor demand across
sectors:
                                                                     X             j
                                                     wn,t Ln,t =           βnL,j Yn,t ,                                                 (13)
                                                                     j∈Ω

while clearing in the market for its capital of type k ∈ ΩK implies, using (8) and (9), that:

                           k    k
                                          X
                                                    K,jk     j           ψk     
                                                                                   F,N    F,S
                                                                                              
                          rn,t Kn,t   =         β          Yn,t   +               Xn,t + Xn,t .                                         (14)
                                          j∈Ω
                                                                    1 − ψC − ψD

   To acknowledge that deficits in manufactures don’t correspond to total deficits in the data
                                            S                                     C       C
we introduce an exogenous services deficit Dn,t to make up the difference. Hence Xn,t = Yn,t and
 S       S     S
                   , where N     S
                          P
Xn,t = Yn,t + Dn,t          n=1 Dn,t = 0.



4.5     The Exogenous Variables
We divide the exogenous variables of our model into those we treat as time-invariant parameters
Θ and those we treat as time-varying shocks Ψt :

                                                           0
   Θ = {ρ, θ, αk , δ k , ψ k , βnL,j , βnK,jk , βnM,jj }           and         Ψt = {dlni,t , Ajn,t , χkn,t , φn,t , ψn,t
                                                                                                                      N             S
                                                                                                                          , Ln,t , Dn,t },

for j, j 0 ∈ Ω, k ∈ ΩK , l ∈ ΩT , and n = 1, ..., N . (Since ψn,t
                                                              S
                                                                  = 1 − ψ C − ψ D − ψn,t
                                                                                     N
                                                                                         , the demand
shock for services is redundant.) Equations (5) through (14) determine paths of the endogenous
                                                    k                                     l
variables, which include wages wn,t , rental rates rn,t for sectors k ∈ ΩK , trade share πni,t for sectors
l ∈ ΩT , prices pjn,t , total spending Xn,t
                                        j                     F,j
                                            , final spending Xn,t                j
                                                                  , and output Yn,t for sectors j ∈ Ω. The
                                        k                                          k      F,k
state variables are the capital stocks Kn,t , which evolve according to (2), with In,t = Xn,t /pkn,t .


4.6     A Stationary State
In a stationary state Ψ is constant and the capital stocks have settled down to constant levels
Knk . In this case the Euler equations (10) and capital accumulation equations (2) determine, for




                                                                     14
each type of capital, the ratio of investment to the capital stock:
                                                                     1/αk
                                                Ink            δk
                                                           
                                                    =
                                                Knk            χkn

and the ratio of the rental income to investment spending:

                                            rnk Knk       1 − ρ + ρδ k αk
                                                      =                   ,                                     (15)
                                            XnF,k             ρδ k αk

where the absence of a time subscript indicates a stationary value. The stationary values of the
other endogenous variables follow from (5) through (14).


5        Shocks and Outcomes
A common solution technique is to linearize the model around this stationary state. We instead
solve the model exactly, after expressing it in changes, as in Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2007,
2008).19 For any variable x we define its change as x̂t+1 = xt+1 /xt . Expressing the model in
                                                                            k
changes eliminates the need to identify Ln , χjn , φn , ψnN , Ajn , dlni , Kn,0 , pjn , wn , and rnk in levels.


5.1      Shocks
In changes, our shocks in t + 1 are Ψ̂t+1 = {dˆlni,t+1 , Âjn,t+1 , χ̂kn,t+1 , φ̂n,t+1 , ψ̂n,t+1
                                                                                           N                  S
                                                                                                 , L̂n,t+1 , Dn,t+1 }
consisting of: (i) trade cost shocks dˆlni,t+1 for l ∈ ΩT , (ii) productivity shocks Âjn,t+1 for j ∈ Ω,
(iii) investment efficiency shocks χ̂kn,t+1 for k ∈ ΩK , (iv) aggregate demand shocks φ̂n,t+1 , (v)
                           N
nondurable demand shocks ψ̂n,t+1 , (vi) labor supply shocks L̂n,t+1 , and (vii) services deficit shocks
 S
Dn,t+1 (in levels).


5.2      Outcomes
                                                       j      l        S          k
In this section we show how, given initial values for Xn,t , πni,t , Yn,t , and K̂n,t+1 , we can use Ψ̂t+1
                                                           j        l          S            k
to solve for a set of outcomes the next period, including Xn,t+1 , πni,t+1 , Yn,t+1 , and K̂n,t+2 . Hence,
knowing Ψ̂t+2 , we can iterate forward another period, and so on.
                            j      l        S          k
     The initial values of Xn,t , πni,t , Yn,t , and K̂n,t+1 are themselves, of course, equilibrium outcomes.
                                                                                             j    l
In Section 6.2 below we describe how, starting at some initial period t, we use data on Xn,t   , πni,t ,
                                                            n      o∞
  S                                                                                      k
Yn,t , along with assumptions about the future evolution of Ψ̂t+s       , to solve for K̂n,t+1 under
                                                                                 s=1
                                         k
perfect foresight. But for now we take K̂n,t+1 as given.
    19
    Prior to our work, this “changes” approach has been used only in static settings. Caliendo, Dvorkin, and
Parro (2015) have recently applied it to a perfect-foresight model of trade and labor-market dynamics.

                                                           15
We now turn to the key equations that relate outcomes to shocks:

1. From (7), using (5), we can express changes in trade shares for sectors l ∈ ΩT as:
                                                                             !−θ
                                           l
                                                        ĉli,t+1 dˆlni,t+1
                                         π̂ni,t+1 =                                ,                                          (16)
                                                        Âli,t+1 p̂ln,t+1

   where:
                                              L,l   Y                βnK,lk Y                    βnM,lj
                       ĉln,t+1 = (ŵn,t+1 )βn               k
                                                           r̂n,t+1                     p̂jn,t+1             ,                 (17)
                                                    k∈ΩK                       j∈Ω

   is the change in the cost of the input bundle.

2. Similarly, from (6), using (17), changes in prices for sectors j ∈ Ω solve:
                                          
                                            N
                                                                                !−θ −1/θ
                                           X               ĉji,t+1 dˆjni,t+1
                             p̂jn,t+1   =     j
                                              πni,t                                              ,                           (18)
                                            i=1                Âji,t+1

                         j             j
   where, for j ∈ Ω∗T , πnn,t = 1 and πni,t = 0 for i 6= n.

3. From (8), changes in nondurables consumption spending satisfy:

                                              F,N               N
                                            X̂n,t+1 = φ̂n,t+1 ψ̂n,t+1 .                                                       (19)


4. From (8), changes in services consumption spending satisfy:

                                              F,S               S
                                            X̂n,t+1 = φ̂n,t+1 ψ̂n,t+1 .                                                       (20)


5. From (10), using (2) in changes, changes in investment spending on durables and construc-
          F,k
   tion X̂n,t+1 solve the Euler equation:

              k
    1       K̂n,t+1              rk K k
                               k n,t+1 n,t+1
                           = α         F,k
                                             +                                                                                (21)
    ρ K̂n,t+1
        k
              − (1 − δ k )           Xn,t
                                                                                                 !αk                          
                                                                             p̂kn,t+1 K̂n,t+1
                                                                                        k                             k
                                                                                                                          
                                F,k                           1                                                1−δ
                                        1 − αk +
                                              
                             X̂n,t+1                                                                                           ,
                                                            χ̂kn,t+1                F,k
                                                                                  X̂n,t+1                 k
                                                                                                        K̂n,t+1 − (1 − δ k )

                                               k      k
   for k ∈ ΩK . Payments to capital in t + 1, rn,t+1 Kn,t+1 , come from (23) below.




                                                      16
   6. From (13), changes in wages satisfy:

                                                                         X              j
                                       ŵn,t+1 L̂n,t+1 wn,t Ln,t =              βnL,j Yn,t+1 .                     (22)
                                                                         j∈Ω



   7. From (14), changes in rental rates for sectors k ∈ ΩK satisfy:

                  k       k      k    k
                                                X              j             ψk     
                                                                                       F,N      F,S
                                                                                                     
                r̂n,t+1 K̂n,t+1 rn,t Kn,t   =         βnK,jk Yn,t+1   +               Xn,t+1 + Xn,t+1 .            (23)
                                                j∈Ω
                                                                        1 − ψC − ψD


   8. To update the change in capital stocks we manipulate (2) to get:

                                                                    F,k
                                                                                !αk
                      k
                                                                  X̂n,t+1                                    
                    K̂n,t+2 − (1 − δ k ) = χ̂kn,t+1                                         k
                                                                                          K̂n,t+1 − (1 − δ k ) .   (24)
                                                             p̂kn,t+1 K̂n,t+1
                                                                        k



          j      l        S      k
   Given Xn,t , πni,t , Yn,t , K̂n,t+1 , and Ψ̂t+1 , we can use equations (16) through (24) , along
                                                                    l
with (11) and (12), to solve for: (i) changes in the trade shares π̂ni,t+1 , (ii) changes in prices
p̂jn,t+1 , (iii) changes in final nondurable spending X̂n,t+1
                                                        F,N
                                                              , (iv) changes in final services spending
  F,S                                          F,k
X̂n,t+1 , (v) changes in investment spending X̂n,t+1 , (vi) changes in wages ŵn,t+1 , (vii) changes
                  k                                   j                                   j
in rental rates r̂n,t+1 , (viii) changes in output Ŷn,t+1 , (ix) changes in absorption X̂n,t+1 , and (x)
                                       k                l          l       l       j         j      j
subsequent changes in capital stocks K̂n,t+2 . Setting πni,t+1 = π̂ni,t+1 πni,t , Xn,t+1 = X̂n,t+1 Xn,t ,
      S         S      S              k
and Yn,t+1 = Ŷn,t+1 Yn,t and using K̂n,t+2 gives us what we need to iterate forward another period.


5.3    Connecting Outcomes to Shocks
Shocks have both direct effects and indirect effects through changes in prices and factor costs. If
shocks are anticipated, they have an effect on prior outcomes, and, even if they are temporary,
their effects linger in capital. We can use equations (16) through (23) to examine their direct
impact.
   To get insight into the implications of shocks irrespective of where they occur, consider first a
type of shock hitting worldwide, eliminating any geographic dimension: (i) From (16), increases
in trade costs dˆjni,t+1 (meaning dˆjni,t+1 > 1 for n 6= i) reduce import shares within sector j
as countries divert sourcing from abroad to home. (ii) From (18), increases in productivity
Âjn,t+1 lower the sectoral price index for sector j output relative to input costs. (iii) From (22),
increases in the efficiency of investment χ̂kn,t+1 raise investment spending in sector k. (iv) From
                                                       N
(19), increases in demand for nondurable consumption ψ̂n,t+1 shift spending from (nontradable)
services to (tradable) nondurable manufactures. (v) Increases in labor supply L̂n,t+1 show up in


                                                             17
(22), generating an offsetting decline in wages.
                                                     N
    Increases in demand for nondurable consumption ψ̂n,t+1 and in investment efficiency in durables
χ̂D
  n,t+1 raise spending on tradables at the expense of nontradables. Overall trade goes up even if

the share of trade within the sector doesn’t change.
    Since we restrict the φn,t ’s to average to one, shocks to aggregate demand φ̂n,t+1 can’t be
worldwide. An increase in φ̂n,t+1 for country n acts to increase n’s spending on nontraded goods,
which raises its factor prices and hence its absorption and its GDP relative to the rest of the
world. Its imports rise and its exports fall.20
    We can also consider the effect of other shocks when they occur in one country in isolation.
As in the classic Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson (1977) model, an increase in productivity
Âjn,t+1 in a tradable sector j lowers country n’s cost of producing varieties in that sector. The
relative wage in country n rises as does the range of sector j varieties it produces and exports.
An increase in country n’s labor supply L̂n,t+1 lowers its wage but also increases the range of
varieties it produces and exports. An increase in investment efficiency χ̂D
                                                                          n,t+1 increases country

n’s production and imports of durables. In line with the Lerner symmetry theorem, an increase
in country n’s trade costs as an importer dˆjni,t+1 or as an exporter dˆjin,t+1 (for all i 6= n) lowers
both country n’s imports and its exports.
    An issue in the literature on real business cycles (see, e.g., Stockman and Tesar, 1995) has
been the observed negative comovement of GDP and the trade balance. An increase in durables
productivity ÂD
               n,t+1 in country n raises both its GDP and its trade balance. In contrast, an

increase in aggregate demand φ̂n,t+1 or in durables investment efficiency χ̂D
                                                                            n,t+1 raises GDP but

lowers the trade balance, in line with the data.
    A country-specific increase in ÂD
                                     n,t+1 raises output of durables in the affected country while

decreasing it elsewhere, generating negative comovement in durables output across countries. In
contrast, a country-specific increase in χ̂D
                                           n,t+1 raises durables output everywhere, creating positive

comovement.
    In most cases we find the news effect of a shock, the period before it materializes, to be in
the same direction but much smaller in magnitude than the effect on impact. Major exceptions
are with country-specific increases in productivity ÂD
                                                      n,t+1 and in investment efficiency in durables

χ̂D
  n,t+1 . Both production and absorption rise on impact, but contract the period before, as agents

   20
     We base our description of the effects of country-specific shocks on exercises described in Appendix Section
C. We perturb the stationary state of the model and compute the impulse response. Agents learn of the shock
one period in advance. We consider both temporary and permanent changes (in levels). A 25 percent permanent
increase in the level of shock s in period t + 1 means setting ŝt+1 = 1.25 and ŝτ = 1 for τ 6= t + 1. A 25 percent
temporary increase means setting ŝt+1 = 1.25, ŝt+2 = 1/1.25, and ŝτ = 1 for τ 6= t + 1, t + 2. In the experiments we
describe, temporary and permanent changes have qualitatively similar effects, so we don’t discuss each separately.


                                                          18
delay investment until the subsequent period when durables will be cheaper or contribute more
to the capital stock.


6        Quantification
To quantify the model, we need to calibrate the parameters, solve for the paths of capital stocks,
and back out the shocks. We apply the procedure to quarterly data from the 21 countries
                                                                                              j
appearing in Table 1, from 2000:Q1 to 2012:Q4.21 We take (in levels) series corresponding to Xn,t
      j                        F,j      S                 l
and Yn,t for j ∈ Ω (and hence Xn,t and Dn,t ) as well as πni,t for l ∈ ΩT . We take (in changes)
series corresponding to L̂n,t+1 and p̂jn,t+1 .


6.1      Parameter Values
We now discuss our calibration of the parameters in Θ. We set the quarterly discount factor
ρ = 0.987 to be consistent with a real interest rate of 5 percent per year. We set the trade
elasticity θ = 2 to be between the smaller values typically used in the open-economy macro
literature, such as in Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1995), and the larger values used in the trade
literature, such as in Eaton and Kortum (2002).22 We choose αC = 0.5 and αD = 0.55. (A larger
αj means lower capital adjustment costs.) We choose δ C = 0.011 to correspond to an annual
depreciation rate for structures of 4 percent, a value in between that used by Krusell, Ohanian,
Rios-Rull, and Violante (2000) and the U.S. BEA’s measured rate of depreciation in private
structures in 2008. We choose δ D = 0.026 to correspond to an annual durables depreciation rate
of 10 percent.
     To calibrate preference parameters ψ C and ψ D we assume that the world as a whole is close
to a stationary state. For each country, the stationary state relationship (15), together with (23),
becomes:
                             
            1 − ρ 1 − δ k αk     F,k     k k
                                               X
                                                     K,jk j        ψk       F,N     F,S
                                                                                        
                               X n   = r  K
                                        n n  =     β n   Yn +             X n   + X n     .
                 ραk δ k                       j∈Ω
                                                              1 − ψC − ψD

Denoting the time average of variable Zt as Z̄, we calculate ψ k by summing the equation above
    21
      Data from China and France become available in 2006:Q1.
    22
      The response to a trade friction shock of a given size depends crucially on the value of the trade elasticity θ.
Our counterfactuals, however, are based on shocks to trade costs that are extracted given θ. Thus we will extract
larger shocks to trade costs if we impose a smaller value of θ. As a consequence, our main results for the recession
are, for the most part, insensitive to θ. As discussed below, we report alternative results for the case of θ = 0.5 in
the Appendix.




                                                         19
across countries:                                 N         N
                               k 1 − ρ 1 − δ k αk X F,k X X K,jk j
                             ψ =                      X̄n −         βn Ȳn ,                                           (25)
                                      ραk δ k     n=1       n=1 j∈Ω
                                           PN                       
where we exploit the result that                 n=1   XnF,N + XnF,S = 1 − ψ C − ψ D . This calculation yields
ψ C = 0.33, which is within one percent of the average annual expenditure share of housing in the
2008 U.S. consumer expenditure survey, and ψ D = 0.08.
   We calculate the input-output coefficients using the most recent available table for each coun-
try in the 2009 edition of the OECD’s input-output tables.23 To calculate βnL,j we divide com-
pensation of employees in sector j by that sector’s total output. We measure capital’s share of
output as value added less compensation of employees divided by total output in sector j. We
assume that nonresidential structures represent 43 percent of the business sector’s capital share,
βnK,jC /(βnK,jC + βnK,jD ) = 0.43, consistent with Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997). To
                    0
determine βnM,jj we divide total spending in sector j on inputs from sector j 0 by sector j’s total
output.


6.2        Paths of Capital
To extract the baseline shocks {Ψ̂t+1 } during the period of our analysis (2000:Q1 to 2012:Q4), we
                                                              k
need to know the paths of the changes in the capital stocks K̂n,t+1 over that period. Computing
                                       k
the associated baseline paths of the K̂n,t+1 in turn requires assumptions about the {Ψ̂t+1 } beyond
the period of our data. We denote the period at which our data end, 2012:Q4, as tE and freeze
the levels of all subsequent shocks at their 2012:Q4 values. That is, Ψ̂s = {1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, DtSE } for
s > tE .
   This world with unchanging shocks converges to the stationary state described in Section 4.6
in which all endogenous magnitudes are constant. Appendix Section C describes our algorithm
                    k
for computing the K̂n,t E +1 that, using equations (16) through (24), lead the economy along a

                                                        j       l             S
perfect foresight path to this stationary state, given Xn,tE , πni,tE , and Yn,tE .

          k                                                    k              E
   With K̂n,t E +1 in hand, we iterate backwards and extract K̂n,t+1 for t < t  by incorporating
the Euler equation (22) into the capital accumulation equation (24):
                                                                                                               !
                      k
                    K̂n,t                αk       k    k          F,k         k
                                                                                             1 − δk
                k
                                   =ρ    F,k
                                                 rn,t Kn,t +   ρX̂n,t   1−α         +     k
                                                                                                                   .   (26)
              K̂n,t − (1 − δ k )        Xn,t−1                                          K̂n,t+1 − (1 − δ k )

Since our substitution of the Euler equation has eliminated χ̂kn,t+1 , extracting the path of K̂n,t+1
                                                                                                k

                                                                                       F,k
requires no knowledge of any shocks. What is required are data on investment spending Xn,t and
  23
       Appendix Table A.1 shows how the 48 sectors used in these tables correspond to our four sectors j ∈ Ω.

                                                               20
                                                                                      k    k
the spending and production terms on the right-hand side of equation (23) to deliver rn,t Kn,t .
                                   C           D
    Figure 3 shows the paths for K̂n,t+1 and K̂n,t+1 that this procedure gives us for the three largest
countries, the United States, China, and Rest of World. There are two regimes. In the period
after 2012:Q4 the capital stocks glide smoothly toward the stationary state in which K̂nk = 1. In
the period of our analysis the capital stocks fluctuate according to the data that we feed into
equation (26). The stock of durables is more volatile and converges fully by 2050, while structures,
with their lower depreciation rate, need longer.24


6.3      Paths of Shocks
                                     k
Given paths for changes in capital K̂n,t+1 , equations (16) through (24) deliver the following
equations to back out the shocks during the period of our data:

   1. Expression (16), as it applies to n 6= i relative to how it applies to n = i, gives us trade cost
        shocks in sectors l ∈ ΩT :25
                                                                       !−1/θ
                                                              l
                                                            π̂ni,t+1            p̂ln,t+1
                                             dˆlni,t+1 =      l
                                                                                         .                         (27)
                                                            π̂ii,t+1            p̂li,t+1


   2. Expression (16), as it applies to n = i, gives us productivity shocks Âjn,t+1 for sectors j ∈ Ω:

                                                           1                  1/θ
                                           Âjn,t+1 =                j
                                                                   π̂nn,t+1          ĉjn,t+1 ,                    (28)
                                                        p̂jn,t+1

                               j
        where, for j ∈ Ω∗T , π̂nn,t+1 = 1.26 The changes in factor prices needed to evaluate ĉjn,t+1 come
        from (22) and (23).

   3. We back out investment efficiency shocks χ̂kn,t+1 using the law of motion for capital in
        changes (24):
                                                      F,k
                                                                   !−αk
                                                                            k
                                                    X̂n,t+1               K̂n,t+2 − (1 − δ k )
                                  χ̂kn,t+1 =                                                      .                (29)
                                                p̂kn,t+1 K̂n,t+1
                                                           k                k
                                                                          K̂n,t+1 − (1 − δ k )

                                                              N      S
   4. We use (19) and (20), together with the condition that ψn,t + ψn,t = 1 − ψ C − ψ D , to back
   24
      We cut the simulation off at 2050 to save on computing time. Extending it out long enough for structures to
                                                k
reach stationary state delivers values of K̂n,t   E +1 , what matters for our analysis, that are indiscernibly different.
   25
      Taking the product dˆlni,t+1 dˆlin,t+1 cancels the price terms, leaving the index of two-way trade costs proposed
by Head and Ries (2001). By exploiting data on price changes in (27), we uncover asymmetries in trade costs.
   26
      Expression (28) corresponds to the dual measure (based on input and output prices) of total factor produc-
tivity, adjusting for selection in the sector j goods actually produced by country n, as in Costinot, Donaldson, and
Komunjer (2011).



                                                            21
       out the aggregate demand shocks:
                                                                        F,N      F,S
                                                                       Xn,t+1 + Xn,t+1
                                                 φ̂n,t+1 =               F,N    F,S
                                                                                                 .                                 (30)
                                                                        Xn,t + Xn,t

   5. We use (30) together with data on final spending on nondurables to back out the nondurable
       demand shocks:
                                                                                   F,N
                                                              N
                                                                                 X̂n,t+1
                                                            ψ̂n,t+1         =                .                                     (31)
                                                                                   φ̂n,t+1

   6. We take the changes in labor L̂n,t directly from the data.

                                       S
   7. We take services trade deficits Dn,t+1 directly from the data.

    This procedure delivers our baseline set of shocks {Ψ̂t+1 }, with all values frozen as described
above for t ≥ tE .27 By construction, the solution to the model with the baseline shocks replicates
our data for the period of 2000:Q1 to 2012:Q4.


6.4     Values of Shocks
Tables 2 to 4 summarize the baseline shocks. We report the average change in the shocks for each
country during the quarters leading up to 2008:Q3, during the period we identify as the global
recession, 2008:Q3 to 2009:Q2, and during the period we identify as the trade recovery, 2009:Q2
to 2011:Q1. All figures are annualized.
   We start in Table 2, which summarizes the behavior of trade frictions. Since there are 420
trade friction shocks dˆlni in each tradable sector, one for each ordered pair of separate countries,
we report only a trade-weighted average for each country (as both exporter and importer).28
The world as a whole experienced a mild decline in its trade frictions prior to the recession, as
shown by the values 0.991 and 0.980 for dˆD and dˆN . This decline continued during the recession.
                                                         ni                 ni

Several countries go against this trend, exhibiting a substantial increase in trade frictions in
  27
      We have backed out baseline shocks under alternative assumptions about their behavior in the period after
our data. One such exercise introduces a set of future demand shocks that significantly reduce the size of deficits
in the stationary state. We find little quantitative and no qualitative effect on our results.
   28
      In line with our theory, we calculate the average change in the trade barrier for country n in sector j as:
                                                                                                                      −1/θ
                                          j                      −θ                     j                       −θ
                               X         Xni                               X           Xin          
                       dˆjn =                           dˆjni         +                                 dˆjin                ,
                              i6=n
                                     XnE,j + XnI,j                          i6=n
                                                                                   XnE,j + XnI,j

         j                                                                   j
           is the value of country n’s imports from country i, XnI,j = i6=n Xni
                                                                      P
where Xni                                                                       is country n’s total imports, and
  E,j
        P        j
Xn = i6=n Xin is country n’s exports, all for sector j. We aggregate across countries, in a similar manner, to
create the global average.


                                                                       22
the recession, particularly for durables.29 At the same time, some countries appear to have
experienced large declines in trade frictions. (The higher variation in changes in trade frictions
during the recession relative to other periods partly reflects its brevity.) The decline in overall
trade barriers accelerated during the recovery. Only Greece missed this trend.
    Table 2 also reports each country’s services deficit and labor shocks. Services deficits decline
for 17 of our 21 countries in the recession, reflecting in part the fact that most of them are oil
importers, and oil prices fell in this period. By construction, there is never a services deficit for the
world. World employment, calculated as the GDP-weighted average across countries, increased
by 1 percent in the pre-recession period but fell by nearly 2 percent during the recession, with no
overall reversal in the recovery. The countries with the largest negative labor shocks during the
recession were Spain and the United States.
    Table 3 shows that most countries experienced declines in construction productivity in the
recession, with the world average dropping to 0.934 from a previously flat trajectory. These
productivity losses were reversed during the recovery. Services productivity followed a similar
pattern, but with slower growth in the recovery. In contrast, productivity in both manufacturing
sectors grew faster during the recession in many countries.30
    Table 4 shows that there was only a mild worldwide decline in investment efficiency in con-
struction during the recession. The increases in China and Japan largely offset small declines in
most countries. The recovery period looks similar.
    What most dramatically separates the recession from surrounding periods is the decline in
investment efficiency in durables, χ̂D
                                     n,t+1 < 1, also shown in Table 4.
                                                                       31
                                                                          In the pre-recession period,
these shocks are tightly centered around 1. The world as a whole experienced a decline in durables
investment efficiency of 22.8 percent during the recession. This decline was widespread, with the
only increase occurring in China, at a rate slightly below its pre-recession average. For most
countries these declines in efficiency in durables investment were only partially reversed in the
recovery, with Denmark and Greece experiencing substantial further drops.
  29
      The modest increase in trade frictions for durables that Table 2 reports for the United States (dˆD
                                                                                                        US = 1.004)
masks a substantial increase for imports (1.182) and decrease for exports (0.855). Using our value of θ = 2, the
implied impact on the U.S. import share in durables (in logs) is −θ ln 1.182 = −0.334. This result is in line with
Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar (2010)’s “wedge” decomposition of U.S. imports during 2008:Q2-2009:Q2. Their
wedge is a residual from an import demand equation imposing price elasticities  of 1.5 and 6. Their  corresponds
to our θ + 1. Taking a weighted average of their results for durables consistent with  = 3 (θ = 2) delivers a
reduction in the durables import share of −0.251, slightly less extreme than what we find. Appendix Section D
further explores the connection between Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar (2010) and what we do.
   30
      As discussed in Appendix Section A.5, we can use Domar (1961) weights to aggregate our sectoral produc-
tivities into an economy-wide productivity shock. Appendix Figure A.2 compares our aggregate measure for the
United States with the quarterly TFP series for the U.S. business sector in Fernald et al. (2012). The two series
align quite well and have a correlation of 0.78.
   31
      We calculate the global χ̂j shock as investment-spending weighted averages of the country shocks.


                                                        23
    Declines in nondurables demand largely match the declines in durable investment efficiency,
with the steepest drops in Denmark, Italy, Romania, Spain, and the United States. As we show
in the next section, however, since nondurables is a smaller sector than durables, the shocks to
nondurables demand had less overall effect.
    Finally, Table 4 reports the aggregate demand shocks. China and Japan exhibit the largest
increases and Poland and Romania the largest decreases. Note that the United States also
experienced a positive aggregate demand shock.32 By construction, this shock has no global
component.


6.5     Forces at Work in the Recession and Recovery
As described in Section 3, a major feature of the global recession was the widespread collapse
in trade and in manufacturing production, particularly in durables. This collapse was reversed
in the recovery. Construction activity also fell in the recession, but continued to fall during the
recovery. The magnitude of the changes varied substantially by country. Another striking feature
of the recession was the big realignment of GDPs.
    How do our shocks explain these outcomes? Globally, the biggest shocks in the recession were
the drops in investment efficiency in durables and in the final demand for nondurables, each of
which plummeted by 22.8 percent. Declines in investment efficiency χ̂D
                                                                     n,t+1 and in the demand
                             N
for nondurable consumption ψ̂n,t+1 lowered spending in these sectors. As spending shifted into
nontraded sectors, trade and manufacturing production fell. Trade frictions limited the geographic
scope of the shocks. Where the shocks were more pronounced, so were the reductions in imports
and in manufacturing production.
    Table 4 suggests that shocks to aggregate demand φ̂n,t+1 , whose average around the world is
constrained to equal one in any period, were much more dispersed during the global recession
than before. Equation (30) shows the tight connection between final spending on nondurables
and on services, a large share of total spending, and aggregate demand shocks φ̂n,t+1 . As shown
below, these shocks accounted for the large swings in relative GDPs during the recession, plotted
on the vertical axis of Figure 2(d).
   If anything, trade frictions dˆj  ni,t+1   decreased, and they continued to fall during the recovery.
While productivity in construction ÂC                    S
                                     n,t+1 and services Ân,t+1 was procyclical, productivity in

manufactures, ÂD           N
                n,t+1 and Ân,t+1 , was not.

  32
     Aggregate demand shocks are largely picking up changes in relative GDPs, driven largely by swings in
exchange rates. During the recession the Japanese yen appreciated substantially against the U.S. dollar while the
dollar appreciated modestly against the euro.



                                                       24
7        Counterfactuals
Having backed out the shocks that account fully for the changes that occurred from 2008:Q3
to 2012:Q4, we can ask how to assign responsibility for the collapse of trade during the global
recession and for the subsequent recovery. To do so we consider how the world would have evolved
in a counterfactual in which only one set of shocks is active, shutting down other shocks by fixing
them at their 2008:Q2 level.
     Within the period of our counterfactuals, we focus separately on the global recession, 2008:Q3
to 2009:Q2, and the recovery, 2009:Q2 to 2011:Q1.33 If a counterfactual with a particular type of
shock delivers an evolution similar to what’s in the data, we attribute what happened to these
shocks. If the evolution implied by a counterfactual is quite different from the data, we conclude
that these shocks were not major players.


7.1      Computation
To compute a counterfactual, we need to take a stand on how agents foresee the future. Since
we back out baseline shocks under an assumption of perfect foresight, any counterfactual is a
surprise. We assume that the surprise occurs in 2008:Q3, on the eve of the trade collapse, with
agents acting as if they have perfect foresight of the counterfactual shocks at that point but not
before.34 A consequence of this assumption is that, in a counterfactual, the Euler equation (22)
holds for changes from 2008:Q3 to 2008:Q4 and onward, but does not hold for the initial change
from 2008:Q2 to 2008:Q3. See Appendix Section C for a description of the numerical algorithm.


7.2      Global Trade
Figure 4 summarizes our main findings. It plots the path of global trade from 2000:Q2 to 2012:Q4
in the data as well as in counterfactuals with the following types of shocks acting in isolation:
(i) nondurables demand, (ii) aggregate demand, (iii) productivity in all sectors, (iv) investment
efficiency in durables, (v) investment efficiency in construction, (vi) trade frictions (combining
nondurables and durables), and (vii) services deficits.
     Negative shocks to investment efficiency in durables are overwhelmingly the driver of the trade
collapse. Lower nondurables demand and higher trade frictions also contribute to the decline but
    33
      In reporting changes over multiple quarters, as with the shocks, we multiply the relevant quarterly changes
together. For instance, we look at changes over the recession by multiplying together the three quarterly changes
from 2008:Q3 to 2009:Q2. We report all counterfactual nominal outcomes relative to global GDP in that counter-
factual.
   34
      We have also solved counterfactuals under the assumption that the surprise occurs in 2008:Q4. Some country-
level dynamics differ, but our conclusions about the drivers of the global trade collapse do not change.


                                                       25
play a modest role. Other shocks contribute little or nothing.35
    To be more quantitative, the first row of Table 5 reports the contributions of each different
type of shock to the cumulative decline in world trade over the recession. Shocks to investment
efficiency in durables account for 64 percent (i.e., 13.2 percentage points) of the 20.5 percent
decline in world trade. Declines in demand for nondurable manufactures contribute 18 percent
and increases in trade frictions contribute 11 percent to the decline.36 (The contributions from
each type of shock need not and do not exactly sum to one.)
    The recovery in trade, as evident in Figure 4, is not just a reversal of these forces. A rise
in investment efficiency in durables is a major component of the recovery but declining trade
frictions play an even larger role. (See Appendix Table A.5 for details.)


7.3     Country-Level Results by Type of Shock
To what extent do our findings about the contributions of these forces at the world level across
time carry over to explaining variation across countries? Table 5 reports, for each of our 21
countries, the change in trade from 2008:Q3 to 2009:Q2 generated by different types of shocks.
    The decline in investment efficiency in durables delivered a big hit to every country’s trade,
with demand for nondurables playing a more modest role. Trade frictions were important for a
few countries. In China and India trade frictions and investment efficiency in durables contribute
about equally to the (relatively modest) trade declines there.
    Figure 5 illustrates how different sets of shocks explain the decline in trade in the cross section.
The figure plots the change in trade accounted for by various sets of shocks (on the y-axis) against
a country’s actual change in trade (on the x-axis). Hence the horizontal line at one corresponds
to no change in the counterfactual and the 45-degree line to the actual change. Note that only
shocks to investment efficiency in durables investment strongly covary with the declines in trade.
    Figure 6 shows the analogous results for manufacturing production during the recession.
Shocks to investment efficiency in durables were primarily responsible for the declines in most
countries. Combined shocks to aggregate and nondurable demand also played important roles in
the declines in Greece, Italy, Japan, Romania, Spain, and the United States. As shown in Ap-
pendix Table A.2, positive productivity shocks (across durables and nondurables) drove China’s
and India’s substantial rise in manufacturing production. The main message, though, is that
  35
     The story for production (shown in Appendix Figure A.4) is similar, except trade frictions play no role.
  36
     Using a trade elasticity of θ = 0.5, these results remain largely unchanged. Durables investment efficiency
shocks and nondurables demand shocks in this case explain 65 percent and 17 percent of the decline, respectively.
The biggest difference with the baseline case is that with the lower value of θ, the contribution of trade frictions
to the trade collapse increases from 11 to 16 percent. Further results for the case of θ = 0.5 can be found in
Appendix Figures A.5 to A.7 and Appendix Tables A.12 to A.14.

                                                        26
shocks to investment efficiency in durables were the main driver of the decline in both trade and
in manufacturing production relative to global GDP across the world during the global recession.
    Changes in relative GDP are a different story, as shown in Figure 7 and in Appendix Table A.3.
Aggregate demand shocks are the primary mover here, except for China and India, where, again,
productivity (not pictured) is the source of their relative GDP growth. Shocks to investment
efficiency in construction contributed to the declines in Mexico and Poland and to the moderate
increases in China and Japan.
    Another outcome of interest is the decline of each country’s trade relative to its own GDP.
Figure 8 shows what happens to these ratios with shocks only to investment efficiency, to demand
for nondurables, and to aggregate demand. Together these shocks generate most of the decline
and the cross-country variation in the ratio of trade to GDP, leaving little room for trade frictions
or productivity.
    Which sets of shocks drove the declines in real GDP during the recession? Productivity shocks,
emanating overwhelmingly from nontradables, drive outcomes for real GDP at the country and
world level, generating over 70 percent of the decline in global real GDP on their own. The decline
in labor contributes about 10 percent to the decline.37 Figure 9 shows that the combination of
shocks to productivity and to labor explain most of the cross-country differences in real GDP
during the recession.38
    To summarize our results for the recession, not only was the drop in the efficiency of investment
in durables the major factor behind the collapse in global trade and manufacturing production,
it was the major factor for individual countries as well. Relative GDPs, on the other hand,
were driven primarily by demand shocks and secondarily by investment efficiency in construction.
Shocks to trade frictions, productivities, and services deficits do little. Shocks to productivity
and, to some extent, labor drove changes in real GDP.
    During the recovery (2009:Q2 to 2011:Q1) trade bounced back everywhere except for Greece.
Appendix Table A.5 reports how our counterfactuals account for what happened. Decreased trade
frictions and, to a lesser extent, a rebound in durables investment efficiency were major factors,
with increases in the demand for nondurables also contributing.39
  37
      Labor was particularly important for the real GDP declines in Spain and the United States.
  38
      Appendix Table A.4 reports the behavior of real GDP in our main counterfactuals during the global recession.
   39
      Productivity and trade frictions were the most critical shocks generating real GDP growth during the recovery
(See Appendix Table A.8). That declining trade frictions would have a perceptible role in driving growth in real
GDP is surprising. An explanation is that, as shown in Appendix Table A.17, the share of purchases from home
producers fell substantially during the recovery. Applying the Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2011)
formula with θ = 2 to these drops implies large gains from trade. (With θ = 0.5 the gains are even larger.)




                                                        27
7.4     Cross-Border Transmission of Shocks
We now examine the geographic location of shocks rather than the type of shock. We first consider
what would have happened if shocks emanating only from the United States were at work. We
then consider whether outcomes in Germany were primarily the result of local or of foreign shocks.

7.4.1    The United States

As the world’s largest economy and as the country considered the epicenter of the financial crisis
that set off the global recession, to what extent was the collapse in global trade and manufacturing
production the consequence of shocks in the United States? Consider a counterfactual in which
only the United States experiences shocks, with shocks elsewhere set equal to one (and services
deficits fixed at their pre-recession levels).40 U.S. shocks alone reduce global trade by 3.6 percent,
as opposed to the actual decline of 20.5 percent, and reduce global manufacturing production by
2.9 percent, as opposed to the actual decline of 13.0 percent. As seen in Table 1, the United
States contributes about 12 percent of world trade and about 14 percent of world manufacturing
production. Hence, in either case, U.S. shocks by themselves reduce global trade and production
by about 50 percent more than their respective U.S. shares, reflecting how the world trading
system amplifies the effect of shocks.
    Figure 10 shows the implications of U.S. shocks for individual countries. The decline in U.S.
demand for manufactures, both from the decline in investment efficiency in durables and from
the decline in demand for nondurables, dramatically reduces U.S. imports and manufacturing
production. U.S. exports actually increase substantially since we’ve eliminated the decline in
demand for manufactures elsewhere. Manufacturing production and exports decline in other
countries, most dramatically in Canada and Mexico. For these two countries U.S. shocks account
for most of the actual decline in exports. The decline in U.S. imports reduces manufacturing
production in Canada so much that Canadian imports fall as well. The effect on imports of other
countries is slightly positive as exports are diverted away from the United States and Canada
toward other destinations.
    The opposite experiment in which only non-U.S. shocks are at work is mostly the mirror image.
Declines in the rest of the world are close to their actual ones, whereas, except for exports, the
U.S. is largely unscathed.
  40
      We include the actual shocks to trade frictions between the United States and other countries, while setting
trade friction shocks between pairs not including the United States equal to one. In order   P toSobey adding-
up constraints we need to scale deficits and demand shocks around the world to satisfy         i Di,t+1 = 0 and
        N      S                C     D
P
   i (Xi,t + X   ) φ̂
              i,t i,t+1 = 1 − ψ   − ψ   .



                                                       28
7.4.2     Germany

The U.S. experiment may suggest that countries suffered primarily from home-grown shocks
during the recession. The equivalent experiment for Germany, however, shows how a country
much more exposed to world trade can suffer a significant decline in activity due solely to shocks
from abroad.
     Figure 11 shows the result of a counterfactual in which only shocks not involving Germany
are at work. Note that there are only moderate changes from what actually happened, meaning
that much of what happened in Germany can be explained by shocks from elsewhere. German
imports, which remain at their pre-recession level, are the exception. Removing German shocks
only partly mitigates the effect of the recession on manufacturing production in Germany, Austria,
and Poland, on German GDP, and on the exports of Austria and Poland.


8        Conclusion
We find that a decline in the efficiency of investment in durable manufacturing capital stocks
drove the stunning collapse in trade and in manufacturing production that accompanied the
global recession. These shocks reduced final spending on tradable sectors. Our results thus
support the view that changes in the composition of demand, rather than higher trade barriers
or negative productivity shocks, led to the trade collapse.
     Our model offers a way to analyze jointly the macroeconomic experiences of many countries
connected by trade. The framework allows us to identify where shocks originate and how they
spread from country to country, providing a richer picture of the common and idiosyncratic
characteristics of global fluctuations. It also suggests some promising avenues for future research,
both in terms of expanding the scope of this analysis and in terms of furthering the methodology.41
     The analysis can readily be extended to include trade in services such as agriculture and,
particularly critical for macroeconomic fluctuations, oil. Also straightforward is adapting it to
incorporate additional factors of production and unemployment.42
     Other extensions are more challenging. In assuming global asset market completeness, the
current framework eliminates any role for financial market frictions in creating or in propagat-
    41
       For example, Eaton, Kortum, and Neiman (2015) use the framework to run counterfactuals with greatly
reduced trade frictions to assess quantitatively the hypothesis in Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001) that trade costs are
the key drivers of major puzzles in international macroeconomics, such as the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) puzzle.
Reyes-Heroles (2015) uses a closely related framework to uncover the role of reduced trade barriers in driving huge
increases in trade imbalances.
    42
       Tombe (2014) and Lagakos and Waugh (2013) have integrated world food trade into a static general equilib-
rium framework. Farrokhi (2015) provides a quantitative general equilibrium model of world trade in crude and
refined oil. Eaton, Kortum, and Neiman (2013) introduce unemployment in a simple way.

                                                        29
ing macroeconomic fluctuations. In treating competition as perfect it rules out such phenomena
as pricing to market. In assuming perfect foresight, it rules out uncertainty or a richer treat-
ment of the response to unexpected news. Incorporating asset market incompleteness, imperfect
competition, and uncertainty would allow the framework to address a much wider range of issues.
   We have used the framework to disentangle the forces acting on the world economy over
the past decade, making a transparent but stark set of assumptions about shocks beyond the
horizon of our data. In providing this anatomy, therefore, the methodology does not provide a
window into the future. To use the framework to look forward requires a better understanding of
the time-series properties of the model’s underlying shocks, which are hard to discern from our
narrow window over this turbulent period. We await more data. These items point to a long road
ahead, but we think that our structure takes some useful first steps.




References
Alessandria, G., J. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan (2010a): “The Great Trade Collapse of
 2008-09: An Inventory Adjustment?,” IMF Economic Review, 58(2), 254–294.

         (2010b): “Inventories, Lumpy Trade, and Large Devaluations,” American Economic
  Review, 100(5), 2304–2339.

Alvarez, F., and R. E. Lucas (2007): “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum
 Model of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6), 1726–1768.

         (2009): “Capital Accumulation and International Trade,” Working Paper.

Ambler, S., E. Cardia, and C. Zimmermann (2004): “International Business Cycles: What
 are the facts?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(2), 257–276.

Amiti, M., and D. Weinstein (2011): “Exports and Financial Shocks,” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 126(4), 1841–1877.

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2011): “New Trade Theories,
 Same Old Gains?,” American Economic Review.

Arkolakis, C., and A. Ramanarayanan (2009): “Vertical Specialization and International
 Business Cycle Synchronization*,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 111(4), 655–680.

Backus, D., P. Kehoe, and F. Kydland (1995): “International Business Cycles: Theory and
 Evidence,” in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. by T. Cooley, chap. 11, pp. 331–356.

Baldwin, R. (2009): The Collapse of Global Trade, Murky Protectionism, and the Crisis: Rec-
 ommendations for the G20. Vox EU Ebook.

Behrens, K., G. Corcos, and G. Mion (2013): “Trade Crisis? What Trade Crisis?,” The
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 702–709.

                                               30
Bems, R., R. Johnson, and K.-M. Yi (2010): “The Role of Vertical Linkages in the Propa-
 gation of the Global Downturn of 2008,” IMF Economic Review, 58(2), 295–326.

Bems, R., R. C. Johnson, and K.-M. Yi (2013): “The Great Trade Collapse,” Annual Review
 of Economics, 5, 375–400.

Boileau, M. (1999): “Trade in Capital Goods and the Volatility of Net Exports and the Terms
 of Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 48(2), 347–365.

         (2002): “Trade in Capital Goods and Investment-specific Technical Change,” Journal
  of Economic Dynamics & Control, 26(6), 963–984.

Bricongne, J.-C., L. Fontagne, G. Gaulier, D. Taglioni, and V. Vicard (2011):
 “Firms and the Global Crisis: French Exports in the Turmoil,” Journal of International Eco-
 nomics, 87(1), 134–146.

Brock, W. (2009): “Comments in ‘Collapse in World Trade: A Symposium of Views’,” The
 International Economy, Spring, 28–38.

Caliendo, L., M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2015): “Trade and Labor Market Dynamics,”
 Working paper.

Caliendo, L., and F. Parro (2015): “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,”
 The Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 1–44.

Chari, V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2007): “Business Cycle Accounting,”
 Econometrica, 75(3), 781–836.

Charles, K., E. Hurst, and M. Notowidigdo (2013): “Manufacturing Decline, Housing
 Booms, and Non-Employment,” Working Paper.

Chor, D., and K. Manova (2011): “Off the Cliff and Back: Credit Conditions and Interna-
 tional Trade during the Global Financial Crisis,” Journal of International Economics, 87(1),
 117–133.

Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and I. Komunjer (2011): “What Goods do Countries Trade?
 A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas,” The Review of Economic Studies, p. rdr033.

Dekle, R., J. Eaton, and S. Kortum (2007): “Unbalanced Trade,” American Economic
 Review: Papers and Proceedings, 97(2), 351–355.

         (2008): “Global Rebalancing with Gravity: Measuring the Burden of Adjustment,” IMF
  Staff Papers, 55(3), 511–540.

Domar, E. D. (1961): “On the Measurement of Technological Change,” The Economic Journal,
 pp. 709–729.

Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. Samuelson (1977): “Comparative Advantage, Trade,
 and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic Review,
 67(5), 823–839.

Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5),
 1741–1780.

                                             31
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and B. Neiman (2013): “On Deficits and Unemployment,” Revue
 économique, 64(3), 405–420.

         (2015): “Obstfeld and Rogoff’s International Macro Puzzles: A Quantitative Assess-
  ment,” Working Paper.

Eaton, J., S. Kortum, B. Neiman, and J. Romalis (2011): “Trade and the Global Reces-
 sion,” NBER Working Paper 16666.

Eichengreen, B. (2009): “Comments in ‘Collapse in World Trade: A Symposium of Views’,”
  The International Economy, Spring, 28–38.

Engel, C., and J. Wang (2011): “International Trade in Durable Goods: Understanding
 Volatility, Cyclicality, and Elasticities,” Journal of International Economics, 83(1), 37–52.

Erceg, C. J., L. Guerrieri, and C. Gust (2008): “Trade Adjustment and the Composition
 of Trade,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32(8), 2622–2650.

Farrokhi, F. (2015): “Global Sourcing in Oil Markets,” Working paper.

Feldstein, M., and C. Horioka (1980): “Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows,”
 The Economic Journal, 90(358), 314–29.

Fernald, J., et al. (2012): “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Produc-
 tivity,” Federal reserve bank of San Francisco working paper, 19, 2012.

Fisher, J. D. (2006): “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technology
  Shocks,” Journal of Political Economy, 114(3), 413–51.

Fitzgerald, D. (2012): “Trade Costs, Asset Market Frictions and Risk Sharing,” American
  Economic Review, 6(102), 2700–2733.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. Huffman (1988): “Investment, Capacity Utilization,
 and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 78(3), 402–417.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997): “Long-Run Implications of
 Investment-Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 87(3), 342–62.

Head, K., and J. Ries (2001): “Increasing Returns versus National Product Dierentiation as an
 Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade,” American Economic Review, 91, 858–876.

Hoffmann, F., and T. Lemieux (2014): “Unemployment in the Great Recession: A Compar-
 ison of Germany, Canada, and the United States,” Working Paper.

Huang, K. X., and Z. Liu (2007): “Business Cycles with Staggered Prices and International
 Trade in Intermediate Inputs,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(4), 1271–1289.

Jacob, P., and G. Peersman (2013): “Dissecting the Dynamics of the U.S. Trade Balance in
  an Estimated Equilibrium Model,” Journal of International Economics, 90(2), 302–315.

Johnson, R. C. (2014): “Trade in Intermediate Inputs and Business Cycle Comovement,”
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(4), 39–83.



                                             32
Jurado, K. (2015): “Advance Information and Distorted Beliefs in Macroeconomic and Finan-
  cial Fluctuations,” Working Paper.
Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010): “Investment Shocks and Business
  Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(2), 132–145.
       (2011): “Investment Shocks and the Relative Price of Investment,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 14(1), 101–121.
Kehoe, T., K. Ruhl, and J. Steinberg (2014): “Global Imbalances and Structural Change
 in the United States,” Working Paper.
Kose, M. A., and K.-M. Yi (2001): “International Trade and Business Cycles: Is Vertical
 Specialization the Missing Link?,” American Economic Review, pp. 371–375.
Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. Rios-Rull, and G. L. Violante (2000): “Capital-Skill
 Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica, 68(5), 1029–
 1053.
Lagakos, D., and M. Waugh (2013): “Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productivity
  Differences,” American Economic Review, 103(2), 948–980.
Leibovici, F., and M. Waugh (2012): “International Trade and Intertemporal Substitution,”
  Working Paper.
Levchenko, A. A., L. T. Lewis, and L. L. Tesar (2010): “The Collapse of International
  Trade During the 2008-2009 Crisis: In Search of the Smoking Gun,” IMF Economic Review,
  58(2), 214–253.
Lucas, R. E., and E. C. Prescott (1971): “Investment Under Uncertainty,” Econometrica,
 39(5), 659–681.
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (2001): “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeco-
 nomics: Is there a Common Cause?,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000. MIT: Cambridge,
 MA.
Reyes-Heroles, R. (2015): “The Role of Trade Costs in the Surge of Trade Imbalances,”
 Working paper.
Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2012): “What’s News in Business Cycles,” Econometrica,
  80(6), 2733–2764.
Shikher, S. (2011): “Capital, Technology, and Specialization in the Neoclassical Model,” Journal
  of International Economics, 83(2), 229–242.
Stockman, A., and L. Tesar (1995): “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of the
  Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” American Economic Review, 85(1),
  168–185.
Tombe, T. (2014): “The Missing Food Problem,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
 nomics, forthcoming.
Yi, K.-M. (2009): “The Collapse of Global Trade: The Role of Vertical Specialization,” in The
  Collapse of Global Trade, Murky Protectionism, and the Crisis: Recommendations for the G20,
  ed. by R. Baldwin, and S. Evenett, vol. 20, pp. 45–48. VoxEU.org.

                                              33
                                           Share of        Share of
             Country          Code       Global GDP      Global Trade     Trade / GDP       Production / GDP       Construction / GDP
                                           (percent)       (percent)        (percent)           (percent)               (percent)


      (1)    Austria          AUT             0.7             1.5               39.5                57.8                     16.0
      (2)    Canada           CAN             2.6             3.0               19.9                40.0                     57.6
      (3)    China            CHN              7.5            10.3              24.0                153.1                    18.1
      (4)    Czech Republic   CZE             0.4             1.3               56.7                95.9                     63.5
      (5)    Denmark          DNK             0.6             0.9               28.0                37.6                     83.1
      (6)    Finland          FIN              0.5             0.8              29.2                 71.2                    44.7
      (7)    France           FRA              4.7             5.3              19.7                 42.8                    54.0
      (8)    Germany          DEU              6.0            11.1              32.4                 68.2                    48.1
      (9)    Greece           GRC              0.6            0.4               13.4                 31.5                    55.4
      (10)   India            IND              2.1             1.6              13.3                 56.1                    28.8
34




      (11)   Italy            ITA             3.8             4.4               20.1                69.6                     31.6
      (12)   Japan            JPN              7.4            5.3               12.5                 71.7                    19.6
      (13)   Mexico           MEX              1.9            2.4               21.4                 55.2                    55.9
      (14)   Poland           POL              0.9             1.6              29.6                 65.6                    53.8
      (15)   Romania          ROU              0.3             0.5              27.4                 48.9                    66.4
      (16)   South Korea      KOR              1.6             3.2              36.0                138.2                    28.4
      (17)   Spain            ESP              2.6             2.7              17.7                 50.1                    39.8
      (18)   Sweden           SWE             0.8             1.4               30.5                57.7                     53.5
      (19)   United Kingdom   GBR             4.5             4.2               16.6                34.4                     58.2
      (20)   United States    USA             23.9            12.3               9.0                 37.1                    32.0
      (21)   Rest of World    ROW             26.5            25.7              17.0                 61.6                    30.4


                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics for 20 Countries and Rest of World, 2008:Q3

     Notes: Trade and production data are for manufactures. Trade is defined as the average of exports and imports. Trade data do not
     include flows between countries within Rest of World. See Appendix Section A for details.
                                                                                                    S
                                    dˆD
                                      n                           dˆN
                                                                    n                          ∆ YDFn                         L̂n
                                                                                                   n
                         Prior     Global     Recov    Prior     Global     Recov    Prior     Global     Recov    Prior     Global     Recov
                         Period   Recession   Period   Period   Recession   Period   Period   Recession   Period   Period   Recession   Period



      World              0.991     0.992      0.948    0.980     0.973      0.972    0.000     0.000      0.000    1.010     0.983      0.999

      Austria            0.999     1.114      0.933    0.976     0.959      1.029    0.000     -0.018     0.006    1.012     0.994      1.007
      Canada             1.005     1.060      0.944    0.987     1.042      0.988    -0.002     0.048     -0.002   1.019     0.982      1.010
      China              0.990     1.028      0.935    0.999     1.002      0.933     0.014    -0.017      0.032   1.004     1.001      1.002
      Czech Republic     0.942     0.959      0.908    0.968     0.950      0.941     0.007    -0.033      0.011   1.007     0.994      0.991
      Denmark            0.981     1.052      0.732    0.971     0.892      0.951     0.001     0.032     -0.004   1.008     0.981      0.976
      Finland            0.996     1.124      1.004    0.991     1.033      0.951     0.000    -0.005      0.001   1.011     0.975      0.993
      France             1.019     0.970      0.984    0.992     0.968      0.983     0.003    -0.014      0.008   1.008     0.992      0.999
      Germany            0.984     0.993      0.977    0.974     0.977      0.985     0.000    -0.025      0.003   1.007     1.010      1.004
35




      Greece             1.024     0.963      1.033    0.998     1.017      1.011    0.008     -0.020      0.003   1.015     0.987      0.973
      India              0.959     1.100      0.936    0.958     1.044      0.966    -0.001    -0.014      0.015   1.018     1.001      1.003
      Italy              0.994     1.004      0.982    0.985     0.972      0.968    0.003     -0.017     0.004    1.014     0.984      0.994
      Japan              1.016     0.927      0.951    0.970     0.996      0.996    0.003     -0.041     0.012    0.999     0.988      0.994
      Mexico             0.979     0.941      0.881    0.991     0.964      0.987    0.001      0.006     -0.002   1.020     1.009      1.015
      Poland             0.953     0.903      0.974    0.964     0.886      0.980    0.004     -0.017     -0.003   1.009     1.018      0.982
      Romania            0.952     0.911      0.894    0.975     0.915      0.937     0.005    -0.015     -0.015   1.007     0.974      0.991
      South Korea        0.994     0.916      0.977    0.996     0.917      0.949     0.011    -0.101      0.040   1.014     0.995      1.011
      Spain              0.995     1.039      0.926    0.977     0.954      0.971     0.003    -0.028      0.006   1.037     0.920      0.977
      Sweden             0.995     1.006      0.950    0.979     0.982      0.998    -0.004    -0.008      0.008   1.012     0.984      1.000
      United Kingdom     0.999     0.990      0.897    0.984     0.868      0.958     0.000    -0.003     -0.002   1.009     0.985      0.998
      United States      0.991     1.004      0.939    0.983     0.985      0.982     0.002    -0.026      0.002   1.010     0.960      0.990
      Rest of World      0.989     0.991      0.963    0.979     0.983      0.973    -0.007     0.062     -0.023   1.012     0.994      1.007


                                      Table 2: Trade Frictions, Services Deficits, and Labor Supply Shocks

     Notes: Global Recession is 2008:Q3 to 2009:Q2. Prior Period begins in 2000:Q1 with exceptions documented in Appendix Section A.
     Recovery Period is 2009:Q2 to 2011:Q1. Shocks are annualized. Trade friction shocks are calculated as a trade-weighted average of the
     bilateral shocks (see Footnote 28). The services trade deficit shocks are the changes in the deficits divided by GDP at the beginning of
     the quarter, averaged over the period.
                                   ÂCn                          ÂD
                                                                   n                           ÂN
                                                                                                 n                           ÂSn
                        Prior     Global     Recov    Prior     Global     Recov    Prior     Global     Recov    Prior     Global     Recov
                        Period   Recession   Period   Period   Recession   Period   Period   Recession   Period   Period   Recession   Period



      World             0.995     0.934      1.043    1.011     1.030      1.009    1.006     1.057      1.007    1.012     0.962      1.019

      Austria           1.008     0.940      0.988    1.023     1.141      0.916    0.995     0.998      1.041    1.010     0.951      1.026
      Canada            0.989     0.778      1.078    1.031     0.979      1.002    1.014     0.958      1.027    1.009     1.000      1.013
      China             1.033     0.845      1.059    1.064     1.124      1.013    1.074     1.131      1.014    1.020     0.955      1.026
      Czech Republic    0.995     1.125      0.917    0.992     0.937      0.918    1.006     0.984      0.943    1.014     0.943      1.035
      Denmark           0.996     1.003      1.063    0.982     1.061      0.631    0.983     0.892      0.940    1.013     0.963      1.025
      Finland           1.004     0.879      1.121    1.011     1.018      1.002    0.998     1.018      0.976    1.010     0.915      1.019
      France            0.967     0.995      1.018    1.010     0.983      0.989    1.006     1.056      0.989    1.017     0.967      1.025
      Germany           0.997     0.979      1.028    0.995     0.979      1.004    0.985     1.013      0.991    1.008     0.925      1.036
      Greece            1.021     0.983      1.004    1.016     0.999      1.024    1.009     1.031      0.997    1.030     0.969      0.974
36




      India             1.007     0.909      1.059    1.013     1.111      1.042    1.026     1.013      1.044    1.063     1.060      1.056
      Italy             0.995     0.920      0.986    1.000     1.021      0.981    1.000     1.016      0.978    1.002     0.942      1.028
      Japan             1.006     0.917      0.952    0.990     1.031      0.993    0.978     1.040      0.989    1.016     0.924      1.032
      Mexico            1.012     0.970      1.037    1.008     0.932      0.926    1.016     0.945      1.015    1.025     0.969      1.056
      Poland            0.969     1.359      0.963    1.013     1.011      1.019    1.019     1.004      1.012    1.024     0.983      1.035
      Romania           0.951     0.864      1.008    0.971     0.907      0.899    0.981     0.872      0.940    1.114     1.024      1.072
      South Korea       0.989     0.979      1.027    1.000     1.043      0.996    1.040     1.051      0.994    1.008     0.947      1.020
      Spain             0.984     0.967      1.010    1.005     1.057      0.954    1.003     0.996      0.978    1.012     0.998      1.021
      Sweden            0.988     0.885      1.021    1.004     0.948      1.022    0.991     1.008      1.038    1.016     0.965      1.027
      United Kingdom    0.990     0.901      1.071    1.007     0.980      0.927    0.998     0.873      0.978    1.008     0.991      1.007
      United States     0.979     0.995      1.029    1.003     1.039      0.988    0.978     1.205      0.940    1.018     0.955      1.036
      Rest of World     1.002     0.918      1.067    1.024     0.981      1.050    1.025     0.982      1.059    1.003     0.963      0.987


                                                        Table 3: Productivity Shocks

     Notes: Global Recession is 2008:Q3 to 2009:Q2. Prior Period begins in 2000:Q1 with exceptions documented in Appendix Section
     A. Recovery Period is 2009:Q2 to 2011:Q1. Shocks are annualized. Productivity shocks for World are aggregated across countries,
     analogous to trade frictions in Table 2.
                                   χ̂Cn                          χ̂D
                                                                   n                           ψ̂nN                          φ̂n
                        Prior     Global     Recov    Prior     Global     Recov    Prior     Global     Recov    Prior     Global     Recov
                        Period   Recession   Period   Period   Recession   Period   Period   Recession   Period   Period   Recession   Period



      World             1.007     0.984      0.976    0.993     0.772      1.076    0.995     0.772      1.104    1.000     1.000      1.000

      Austria           1.021     0.958      0.963    1.015     0.869      1.005    1.003     0.803      1.236    1.003     0.969      0.963
      Canada            1.040     1.103      1.012    0.949     0.693      1.067    0.957     0.974      0.917    1.027     0.894      1.081
      China             1.077     1.244      1.048    1.043     1.042      1.098    1.012     1.041      1.078    1.132     1.162      1.094
      Czech Republic    1.088     0.697      1.017    1.023     0.563      1.115    0.936     0.779      1.091    1.093     0.876      0.955
      Denmark           1.018     0.863      0.909    1.000     0.646      0.816    0.982     0.636      0.939    1.017     0.902      0.978
      Finland           1.032     0.902      0.908    1.032     0.666      1.070    1.018     0.730      0.961    1.020     0.975      0.949
      France            1.062     0.900      0.926    1.002     0.724      1.017    0.990     0.750      1.071    1.011     0.945      0.960
      Germany           0.984     0.966      0.954    1.013     0.741      1.040    0.998     0.809      1.121    0.995     0.958      0.945
      Greece            1.003     0.962      0.729    1.030     0.742      0.902    0.984     0.793      1.084    1.054     0.944      0.885
37




      India             1.033     1.035      1.045    1.029     0.848      1.105    1.022     1.045      0.954    1.028     0.933      1.177
      Italy             1.031     0.939      0.945    1.007     0.634      1.060    0.985     0.675      1.099    1.013     1.009      0.928
      Japan             0.926     1.228      1.052    0.959     0.884      1.028    1.020     0.726      1.212    0.926     1.255      1.004
      Mexico            1.005     0.747      0.977    0.963     0.581      1.026    1.001     0.954      1.081    1.000     0.742      1.080
      Poland            1.097     0.533      1.120    1.013     0.519      1.052    0.992     0.945      1.164    1.063     0.675      1.034
      Romania           1.202     1.044      0.918    1.088     0.454      1.078    0.965     0.662      1.109    1.138     0.684      0.959
      South Korea       1.009     0.870      0.993    1.038     0.628      1.231    1.035     0.750      1.052    0.994     0.852      1.069
      Spain             1.096     0.983      0.854    0.968     0.414      1.095    0.959     0.690      1.137    1.048     0.915      0.951
      Sweden            1.020     0.814      1.075    0.994     0.533      1.185    1.014     0.955      1.049    1.003     0.821      1.083
      United Kingdom    1.020     0.854      0.874    0.982     0.747      0.997    0.983     0.736      0.927    0.998     0.787      0.980
      United States     0.974     0.970      0.868    0.953     0.787      1.029    0.997     0.709      1.109    0.982     1.061      0.956
      Rest of World     1.031     0.911      0.991    1.030     0.723      1.107    0.990     0.721      1.127    1.036     0.977      1.042


                                               Table 4: Investment Efficiency and Demand Shocks

     Notes: Global Recession is 2008:Q3 to 2009:Q2. Prior Period begins in 2000:Q1 with exceptions documented in Appendix Section A.
     Recovery Period is 2009:Q2 to 2011:Q1. Shocks are annualized. Shocks to investment efficiency for the World are calculated as an
     investment-weighted average of the country shocks (see Footnote 31). Shocks to aggregate and nondurables demand for the World are
     calculated similarly, using overall consumption spending and nondurable consumption spending as weights.
                                                                               
                                                                       2009:Q2
                                                            Change 2008:Q3        in Trade in Various Counterfactuals
                            Trade                        Trade             Inv. Efficy. Inv. Efficy. Nondurables Aggregate Services             Labor
                         / World GDP         All        Friction Prod.    in Structures in Durables   Demand      Demand   Deficits             Supply
                          in 2008:Q3        Shocks      Shocks
                                                               Shocks
                                                                           Shocks        Shocks      Shocks
                                                                                                                Shocks
                                                                                                                         Shocks               Shocks
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                           ˆj        j           C
                                                                                               D
                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                
                            (percent)     (i.e. Data)      d
                                                           ni      Ân         χ̂   n        χ̂  n       ψ̂    n    φ̂n      DS          n          L̂n


      World                   17.5          0.795        0.977    1.001        0.994          0.868         0.964         0.999       0.996     0.996

      Austria                  0.3           0.790       0.901    1.040        0.990          0.870          0.963         0.992      0.991     0.993
      Canada                   0.5           0.752       0.910    0.991        1.016          0.868          0.988         1.029      1.011     1.006
      China                    1.8           0.852       0.915    1.103        0.981          0.926          0.971         0.976      0.992     0.994
      Czech Republic           0.2           0.746       1.020    0.908        0.996          0.809          0.968         1.003      0.989     0.990
      Denmark                  0.2           0.805       1.010    0.960        0.992          0.857          0.948         1.010      1.004     0.991
      Finland                  0.1           0.675       0.863    0.974        0.999          0.846          0.972         1.007      0.999     0.996
      France                   0.9           0.828       1.033    0.979        0.996          0.864          0.955         1.000      0.995     0.996
      Germany                  1.9           0.784       0.990    0.960        0.992          0.858          0.965         0.999      0.991     0.998
38




      Greece                   0.1           0.834       1.020    1.000        1.000          0.895          0.956         0.977      1.002     1.000
      India                    0.3           0.831       0.913    1.063        1.002          0.916          0.981         1.012      0.992     1.004
      Italy                    0.8           0.770       0.986    0.983        0.995          0.850          0.948         0.991      0.996     0.994
      Japan                    0.9           0.773       0.971    0.997        0.971          0.886          0.953         0.954      0.975     0.981
      Mexico                   0.4           0.774       1.014    0.975        0.998          0.811          0.987         1.033      1.000     1.002
      Poland                   0.3           0.758       0.998    0.993        0.982          0.804          0.975         1.027      0.994     0.998
      Romania                  0.1           0.719       1.072    0.955        0.999          0.754          0.953         1.000      0.995     0.991
      South Korea              0.6           0.832       0.997    1.027        0.994          0.867          0.971         1.007      0.980     0.994
      Spain                    0.5           0.756       0.975    1.010        0.995          0.827          0.952         0.993      0.997     0.986
      Sweden                   0.3           0.724       0.946    0.943        0.993          0.824          0.974         1.023      0.994     0.991
      United Kingdom           0.7           0.809       1.029    0.978        0.995          0.861          0.959         1.015      0.996     0.995
      United States            2.2           0.808       0.984    1.013        0.998          0.869          0.963         1.002      0.999     0.995
      Rest of World            4.5           0.788       0.977    0.992        0.999          0.872          0.962         1.002      1.002     1.000


                                                     Table 5: Trade during the Global Recession

     Notes: Each column reports the outcome of counterfactuals that include individual shock paths with all other shocks suppressed. The
     reported effects capture the changes of trade during the three quarter recession for each transition path. All values are relative to global
     GDP.
                                                                                                             08Q309Q2       11Q1




                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                      .8
               Trade and Construction (Relative to Global GDP)




                                                                                                                                                      Production (Relative to Global GDP)
                                                 .175




                                                                                                                                                                                   .7
                                    .15




                                                                                                                                                                       .6
39




                        .125




                                                                                                                                                          .5
               .1




                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                                                 2000                   2005                         2010                      2015

                                                                           Trade                    Construction                      Production


                                                                        Figure 1: Global Trade, Production, and Construction Relative to GDP

     Notes: See Appendix Section A for details on dataset and discussion of how we construct the lines prior to 2006, when our constant
     panel of countries starts. Trade and production are for the manufacturing sector.
                              1.2




                                                                                                                                                .9 1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IND




                              1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KORCHN CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ROU         SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GBR JPNCZE
                Change in Trade




                                                                                                                                                  Change in Trade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CAN     IND KOR
                              1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  USA          POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ESP ROU       DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          POL
                                                                                                                JPN                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                          FIN USAITA
                      .9



                                                                    GBR          DNK
                                                                                 AUT                                                CHN                                                                               CAN SWE
                                                                          ESP FRA    USA                                                                                                                   ITAESPFRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DEU
                                                                                                                      IND                                                                                          FIN   AUT
                                                                           ITA DEUGRC
                                                                                SWE                                                                                                                        FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   DNK GBR DNK
                                                                            KORCAN                                          CHN
                                                                          KOR
                                                                     POL MEX
                                                                 GRCCZE                                                  IND
                .8




                                                                      FRA FIN
                                                           ROU            USA
                                                             MEXDEU GBR
                                                                       AUT
                                                                       DNK
                                                            POL
                                                           CZE           JPN                                                                                                                           GRC




                                                                                                                                                               .8
                                                             ITACAN
                              .7




                                                          ROU ESP
                                                   SWE




                                                                                                                                                               .7
                                                         FIN                                                                                                                                           GRC
                              .6




                                                                                                                                                               .6
                                              .6         .7                    .8            .9          1                  1.1           1.2                                  .6   .7        .8      .9          1     1.1    1.2         1.3     1.4        1.5   1.6
                                                                                    Change in Production                                                                                                        Change in Production

                                                                               Durables           Nondurables                                                                                              Durables         Nondurables


              (a) Changes in Trade and Production during the Global Recession                                                                            (b) Changes in Trade and Production during the Recovery
40




                 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4




                                                                                                                                                               1.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IND
                                                                                                                   CHN




                                                                                                                                                                       1.2
                                                                           ROU                  JPN                      POL      CHN                                                                               JPN                                 CHN




                                                                                                                                                Change in Relative GDP
                                                                                                                                   SWE                                                                                                  CHN
                Change in Construction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                          CAN                IND                      IND




                                                                                                                                                                 1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAN KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ROW
                                                                                     DEU                              JPN
                                                                                                                    CAN                                                                                               USA                   MEX
                                                                                    ESP GRC                                                                                                                                               POL
                                                                                        AUTUSA
                                                                                        KOR                                                                                                                                           IND
                                                                                   ITA FRA                     DEU                  KOR
                                                                                         DNK                                                                                                                             GRC




                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                FIN                     FIN AUT     MEX                                                                                                           JPN
                                                                               SWE                              CZE                                                                                                  ITA FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                   MEX       DNK        ITA
                                                                                                       FRA                                                                                                          DEUESP
                                                                                CZE                                                                                                                                       KOR    GBR              ROU
                                                                                                       GBR                                                                                                           DNKROW        CZE DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                ROU                                                                                             FIN    CAN           FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                    POL


                                                                                                                                                   .9
                                                                                                          USA                                                                                                                     USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GBR        ITA
                                                                                                       ESP                                                                                                          SWE    ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROU
                              .6




                                                                                                                                                               .8                                                  MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                POL
                              .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                           GRC
                                                                                                 GRC
                              .4




                                                                                                                                                               .7




                                              .4   .5          .6         .7          .8     .9     1        1.1         1.2      1.3     1.4                                  .7        .8                .9            1         1.1                  1.2         1.3
                                                                                    Change in Production                                                                                                        Change in Real GDP

                                                                          Global Recession               Recovery                                                                                     Global Recession                 Recovery


              (c) Changes in Construction and Production during both Periods                                                                                                        (d) Changes in Relative and Real GDP

                                                    Figure 2: Trade, Production, Construction, and GDP in the Global Recession and Recovery

     Notes: Observations in Panels (a)-(d) give the ratio of the value at the end of period divided by that at the beginning of the period,
     so a value of 1 implies no change. All values other than for real GDP are relative to global GDP. Trade and production are for the
     manufacturing sector.
                                                          Structures                                                          Durables


                               1.08




                                                                                                      1.2
                                      1.04
                   Change in Capital Stock




                                                                                          Change in Capital Stock
                                                                                                              1.1
                    1




                                                                                           1
41




                               .96




                                                                                                      .9
                                             2010      2020     2030     2040     2050                              2010   2020     2030   2040   2050


                                                         United States                    China                                   Rest of World


                                                    Figure 3: Changes in Capital Stocks During Transition Toward Steady State

     Notes: The figures plot, for the three largest countries, the evolution of annualized changes in structures and durable capital stocks
     implied by our model. The figures include the observed period for which we have data as well as the subsequent imputed transition
     toward steady state.
                                                                                  08Q3 09Q2        11Q1




                         1.1
                  Index (2008Q3=1)
                    .9         1
42




                         .8




                                     2000                  2005                           2010                          2015

                                            Actual Data (i.e. All Shocks)                     Inv. Efficiency in Durables
                                            Nondurables Demand                                Inv. Efficiency in Structures
                                            Aggregate Demand                                  Trade Frictions
                                            Productivities                                    Services Deficits


                                            Figure 4: Actual and Counterfactual Evolution of Global Trade

     Notes: Lines beginning in 2008:Q3 represent counterfactual outcomes with the paths of indicated shocks at their calibrated values and
     all other shocks unchanged. All values are relative to global GDP.
                                                      Trade Friction Shocks                                                Inv. Efficiency in Durables Shocks

                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                               Changes in Counterfactual
                   .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2




                                                                                               .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2
                                                           ROU
                                                            CZEMEX FRA
                                                                  GBR
                                                                   GRC
                                                                 DNK
                                                             POLDEU
                                                              ITA  KOR
                                                                 USA
                                                                ROW
                                                             ESP
                                                              JPN
                                                           SWE                                                                                CHN
                                                             CAN     CHN
                                                                AUTIND                                                                      IND
                                                                                                                                            GRC
                                                     FIN                                                                               JPN
                                                                                                                                      CANROW
                                                                                                                                         AUT
                                                                                                                                          USA
                                                                                                                                            KOR
                                                                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                                                                FIN SWEITA GBR
                                                                                                                                         DEU
                                                                                                                                          DNK
                                                                                                                                      ESP
                                                                                                                                     CZEMEX
                                                                                                                                      POL
                                                                                                                                   ROU




                                                .6   .7      .8      .9     1      1.1   1.2                               .6   .7       .8      .9     1      1.1   1.2
                                                          Changes in Trade in Data                                                    Changes in Trade in Data


                                               Inv. Efficiency in Structures Shocks                                                    Demand Shocks
43




                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                               Changes in Counterfactual
                   .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2




                                                                                               .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2
                                                           CAN
                                                     FIN ROU
                                                          CZE
                                                           ESPROW
                                                             MEX
                                                            ITA  IND
                                                                  GRC
                                                                USA
                                                                 FRA
                                                                GBR                                                                  SWE MEX IND
                                                                                                                                       POL
                                                                                                                                       CAN
                                                         SWE
                                                           POLDEU
                                                            JPN  KOR
                                                               DNK
                                                              AUT  CHN                                                                CZE
                                                                                                                                 FIN ROU     KOR
                                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                                                       ESPDEU
                                                                                                                                          ROW
                                                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                                                           USA
                                                                                                                                           DNK CHN
                                                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                                                        JPN GRC




                                                .6   .7      .8      .9     1      1.1   1.2                               .6    .7      .8      .9     1      1.1   1.2
                                                          Changes in Trade in Data                                                    Changes in Trade in Data



                              Figure 5: Cross-Sectional Explanatory Power of Various Shocks for Trade during the Global Recession

     Notes: The figures plot, against the actual changes in a country’s trade during the three quarter recession, the changes that occur over
     that period in a counterfactual exposed only to the path of the indicated shocks. All values are relative to global GDP.
                                                      Trade Friction Shocks                                                   Inv. Efficiency in Durables Shocks

                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                                  Changes in Counterfactual
                   .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2




                                                                                                  .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2
                                                                    JPN
                                                                 DNK
                                                                   USA          IND
                                                           ITA FRA
                                                             DEUG
                                                              ROW
                                                            ESPKORRC                                                                                                CHN
                                                        CZE                           CHN
                                                      ROU GBRCAN
                                                        FINMEX  AUT                                                                               JPN         IND
                                                       SWE                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                                                            ROW  USA
                                                                                                                                        GBR
                                                                                                                                      FINMEX
                                                                                                                                         ITA  GRC
                                                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                                                                           DEUKOR
                                                                                                                                               DNK
                                                                                                                                       POLESP
                                                                                                                                     SWE      AUT
                                                         POL                                                                          CZE
                                                                                                                                    ROU




                                                .6   .7   .8      .9     1      1.1         1.2                               .6   .7    .8      .9     1      1.1        1.2
                                                     Changes in Production in Data                                                  Changes in Production in Data


                                               Inv. Efficiency in Structures Shocks                                                    Demand Shocks
44




                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                                  Changes in Counterfactual
                   .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2




                                                                                                  .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2
                                                         POL                                                                            POL CAN
                                                                                                                                          MEX
                                                        CZEMEX
                                                          GBR
                                                        FIN   ROW
                                                             CANKOR                                                                   SWEGBR KOR              IND
                                                       SWE
                                                      ROU  ITA
                                                             DEU
                                                            ESP  DNK
                                                               FRA
                                                                AUT
                                                                GRCUSA
                                                                    JPN         IND CHN                                              ROU
                                                                                                                                       CZE   ROW                    CHN
                                                                                                                                       FIN DEU  DNK
                                                                                                                                               AUT
                                                                                                                                           ESPFRA
                                                                                                                                          ITA  GRCUSA
                                                                                                                                                   JPN




                                                .6   .7    .8      .9     1      1.1        1.2                               .6    .7   .8      .9     1      1.1        1.2
                                                      Changes in Production in Data                                                 Changes in Production in Data



                  Figure 6: Cross-Sectional Explanatory Power of Various Shocks for Production during the Global Recession

     Notes: The figures plot, against the actual changes in a country’s production during the three quarter recession, the changes that occur
     over that period in a counterfactual exposed only to the path of the indicated shocks. All values are relative to global GDP.
                                                        Trade Friction Shocks                                           Inv. Efficiency in Durables Shocks

                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                            Changes in Counterfactual
                                  1.1 1.2




                                                                                                           1.1 1.2
                                                      ROU CZE                         JPN                                                                      CHN
                                                               DNK      GRC   USA                                                              GRC  USA         JPN
                                                                KORESP
                                                                  DEU
                                                                    ITA
                                                                     FRA             CHN                                      ROUGBR DNKESP FRA IND
                              1




                                                                                                       1
                                                         GBR FIN     AUT  IND                                            POL MEXSWE
                                                                                                                                  CZE CAN   AUT
                                                                                                                                           ITA
                                                                                                                                          DEU
                                                     MEXSWE    ROW                                                                      KOR
                                                                                                                                      FIN
                                                                                                                                       ROW
                                                 POL          CAN
                        .9




                                                                                                 .9
                   .8




                                                                                            .8
                                                  .8         .9        1       1.1    1.2                                 .8       .9        1       1.1        1.2
                                                           Changes in GDP in Data                                                Changes in GDP in Data


                                               Inv. Efficiency in Structures Shocks                                               Demand Shocks
45




                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                            Changes in Counterfactual
                                  1.1 1.2




                                                                                                           1.1 1.2
                                                                                                                                                                JPN
                                                        ROU                           JPN                                                                USA   CHN
                                                                  KOR          USA   CHN
                                                                     ESP
                                                                    DEUAUT
                                                                      ITA GRC                                                                ITA
                              1




                                                                                                       1
                                                          SWE
                                                           GBR  CAN
                                                                FIN
                                                                 DNK
                                                                 ROW   FRA IND                                                           KOR
                                                                                                                                       FIN DEUAUTGRC
                                                       MEX  CZE                                                                    CZE ROW    FRA
                                                                                                                                            ESP    IND
                                                                                                                                        DNK
                                                 POL                                                                             SWE CAN
                                                                                                                               ROU
                        .9




                                                                                                 .9
                                                                                                                          POL MEX GBR
                   .8




                                                                                            .8
                                                  .8        .9        1       1.1     1.2                                 .8        .9        1       1.1       1.2
                                                          Changes in GDP in Data                                                  Changes in GDP in Data



                                Figure 7: Cross-Sectional Explanatory Power of Various Shocks for GDP during the Global Recession

     Notes: The figures plot, against the actual changes in a country’s GDP during the three quarter recession, the changes that occur over
     that period in a counterfactual exposed only to the path of the indicated shocks. All values are relative to global GDP.
                                               1
                     Changes in Counterfactual


                                                                                                        POL
                                                                                                  MEX

                                                                               IND    SWE       GBR
                                    .9




                                                                                  CAN     KOR
                                                                                      CZE
                                                                               AUT    ROW
                                                                   FIN           DEU    DNK
                                                                                     FRA
                                                                                   GRC
                           .8




                                                                            ITA
                                                                     USA
                                                                   CHN
46




                                                                           ESP
                                                                                      ROU
                  .7




                                                        JPN
                                  .6




                                                   .6         .7        .8            .9                 1
                                                                   Changes in Trade/GDP in Data


            Figure 8: Explanatory Power of Investment Efficiency and Demand Shocks for Trade/GDP during the Global Recession

     Notes: The figure plots, against the actual changes in a country’s Trade/GDP during the three quarter recession, the changes that occur
     over that period in a counterfactual exposed only to the path of shocks to investment efficiencies and to demand.
                                1.1
                                                                                                          CHN
                                         1.05
                                                                                                   IND
                   Changes in Counterfactual


                                                                                       POL




                                                                             KOR
                                                                          ROU
                              1




                                                                         GRC
                                                                        ESP
                                                                      CAN
                                                                       GBR
47




                                                                     AUT FRA
                                                                       ROW
                                                                        USA
                                                           MEX
                  .95




                                                             CZE
                                                             SWE
                                                              DNK
                                                              ITA
                                                            DEUJPN

                                                     FIN
                                .9




                                                .9            .95                 1              1.05                     1.1
                                                                     Changes in Real GDP in Data


                    Figure 9: Explanatory Power of Labor and Productivity Shocks for Real GDP during the Global Recession

     Notes: The figure plots, against the actual changes in a country’s real GDP during the three quarter recession, the changes that occur
     over that period in a counterfactual exposed only to the path of shocks to labor and productivity.
                                                               Imports                                                                      Exports

                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                               Changes in Counterfactual
                   .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1




                                                                                               .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1
                                                                                                                                              USA
                                                    ROU     MEX
                                                          ESP
                                                           POL
                                                             ITA     GRC
                                                                  INDFRA
                                                      FIN SWE DNK
                                                             KOR
                                                            CZE  DEU
                                                               ROW   JPN
                                                                    AUT
                                                                    GBR     CHN                                                              ROW
                                                                                                                                FIN      AUT
                                                                                                                                        CZE
                                                                                                                                       SWE  POL
                                                                                                                                           DEU
                                                                                                                                           ITA FRA
                                                                                                                                                 ROU
                                                                                                                                                  DNKKOR
                                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                                                             ESPGRC
                                                                                                                                              CHN   IND
                                                                CAN                                                                    JPN

                                                                                                                                             MEX
                                                                 USA                                                                  CAN




                                               .6     .7     .8       .9        1     1.1                                  .6   .7     .8       .9        1    1.1
                                                       Changes in Imports in Data                                                Changes in Exports in Data


                                                            Production                                                                       GDP
48




                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                               Changes in Counterfactual
                   .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1




                                                                                               .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2
                                                          FIN   ROW
                                                                  KOR                IND CHN
                                                       ROUPOL
                                                         CZE
                                                        SWE  ITA
                                                            GBRDEU
                                                              ESP GRC
                                                                  FRA
                                                                   DNKJPN
                                                                  AUT
                                                                     USA                                                               ROUCZE KOR GRC USA
                                                             MEX                                                                POL       GBR FIN
                                                                                                                                        SWE    DNK ESP
                                                                                                                                                    AUT
                                                                                                                                                   ITA
                                                                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                                                                                    FRA IND    JPN
                                                                                                                                                              CHN
                                                               CAN                                                                            ROW
                                                                                                                                      MEX    CAN




                                               .6     .7     .8      .9        1      1.1                                  .7   .8     .9      1       1.1     1.2
                                                     Changes in Production in Data                                                Changes in GDP in Data



                                                    Figure 10: Counterfactual Response to U.S. Shocks during the Global Recession

     Notes: The figures plot, against the actual changes in a country’s imports, exports, production, and GDP during the three quarter
     recession, the changes that occur over that period in a counterfactual exposed only to U.S. shocks. That is, we plot the counterfactual
     response when labor, trade frictions, productivity, investment efficiency, demand, and services deficit shocks for the United States occur
     as they did in the data, but where no other shocks occur.
                                                                Imports                                                                      Exports

                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                                 Changes in Counterfactual
                   .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1




                                                                                                 .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1
                                                                 DEU
                                                                            CHN
                                                                                                                                            POL      KOR
                                                                     AUT                                                                            IND
                                                                                                                                                  DNK
                                                                      JPN                                                                AUT FRAGRC
                                                                      GRC
                                                                      FRA
                                                                     GBR                                                                     ROW
                                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                                                           ITA USA
                                                                                                                                             ESP
                                                                                                                                              CHNROU
                                                                   USA
                                                                   IND
                                                                  CAN                                                                        MEX
                                                                                                                                        CZEDEU
                                                               DNK
                                                                ROW                                                                    SWE
                                                              ITA
                                                              KOR
                                                             CZE
                                                             MEX                                                                       JPN
                                                            POL
                                                           SWE
                                                           ESP                                                                    FINCAN
                                                     FIN
                                                    ROU

                                               .6     .7     .8       .9        1     1.1                                    .6   .7     .8       .9        1          1.1
                                                       Changes in Imports in Data                                                  Changes in Exports in Data


                                                              Production                                                                      GDP
49




                   Changes in Counterfactual




                                                                                                 Changes in Counterfactual
                                                                                                 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1 1.2
                   .6 .7 .8 .9 1 1.1




                                                                                           CHN
                                                                                                                                                                       JPN
                                                                                                                                                                      CHN
                                                                                     IND
                                                                                                                                                                USA
                                                                                                                                                          IND
                                                                                                                                                        GRC
                                                                                                                                                      AUT
                                                                                                                                                    DEU
                                                               DEUAUT
                                                                   DNKJPN
                                                                     USA
                                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                                     ITA
                                                                                                                                                     ESP
                                                                  FRA
                                                                  KOR
                                                                  GRC                                                                             KOR
                                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                                                ROW
                                                                                                                                                FIN
                                                          POL ROW                                                                              CAN
                                                               CAN
                                                              ESP
                                                             ITA
                                                            GBR                                                                             CZE
                                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                         CZE
                                                          FINMEX                                                                          SWE
                                                        SWE                                                                              ROU
                                                                                                                                        MEX
                                                       ROU                                                                        POL



                                               .6     .7     .8      .9        1      1.1                                    .7   .8     .9      1       1.1           1.2
                                                     Changes in Production in Data                                                  Changes in GDP in Data



                                           Figure 11: Counterfactual Response to Shocks other than Germany’s during the Global Recession

     Notes: The figures plot, against the actual changes in a country’s imports, exports, production, and GDP during the three quarter
     recession, the changes that occur over that period in a counterfactual exposed only to shocks other than Germany’s. That is, we plot
     the counterfactual response when labor, trade frictions, productivity, investment efficiency, demand, and services deficit shocks occur as
     they did in the data for all countries other than Germany.
