                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               REGULATED PRICE DISCRIMINATION AND
                 QUALITY: THE IMPLICATIONS OF
                 MEDICAID REIMBURSEMENT POLICY
                 FOR THE NURSING HOME INDUSTRY



                        Paul J. Gertler



                     Working Paper No. 1667




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           duly 1985




I am indebted to Ralph Andreano, Ken Hendricks, Henry McMillan,
Robert Porter, Robert Rosenthal, Warren Sanderson, and especially
to Charles Wilson for helpful suggestions. Of course, I am respon-
sible for any remaining errors. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Health Economics and project in
Government Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1667
                                                    July 1985




                     Regulated Price Discrimination and
                        Quality: The Implications of
                        Medicaid Reimbursement Policy
                        for the Nursing Home Industry


                                    ABSTRACT




         Nursing homes participate simultaneously in a regulated and an
    unregulated market, and are required to supply the same quality of service to
    both markets. Specifically, nursing homes compete for patients who finance
    their care privately, and patients whose care is financed by the government's
    Medicaid program. The government reimburses nursing homes a set fee for the
    care of Medicaid patients, whereas nursing homes charge "private pay" patients
    what the market will bear. Quality is determined by competition in the
    "private pay" patient market. The greater the size of the "private pay" market
    relative to the Medicaid market, the higher is quality.
         We find that Medicaid policy makers face a trade—off between the access
    of Medicaid patients to care and quality. Specifically, an increase in the
    Medicaid reimbursement rate causes nursing homes to reduce quality, increase
    "private pay" price, and to admit more Medicaid patients and fewer "private
    pay" patients. Hence, in the nursing home industry, higher prices are
    associated with lower levels of quality. In addition, nursing homes set
    quality higher if the remibursement rate is set via "cost plus" pricing than
•   if it is set via "flat rate" pricing. Moreover, consumers in both markets are
    better off under "cost plus" pricing, nursing homes earn higher profits under
•   "flat rate" pricing, and total governmental Medicaid expenditures are the same
    under both reimbursement methods.




                                                    Paul J. Gertler
                                                    Department of Economics
                                                    SUNY at Stony Brook
                                                    Stony Brook, NY 11794
I. INTRODUCTION
     In the nursing home industry firms participate simultaneously in a
regulated and an unregulated market, and are required to supply the same
quality of service to both markets. Specifically, nursing homes compete for
patients who finance their care privately, and patients whose care is financed
by the government's Medicaid program. The government reimburses nursing homes
a set fee for the care of Medicaid patients, whereas nursing homes charge
"private pay" patients what the market will bear. Quality is determined by
competition in the "private pay" patient market. The greater the size of the
"private pay' market relative to the Medicaid market, the higher is quality.
If the "private pay" market did not exist, then nursing homes would face only
Medicaid demand, which is Insensitive to quality, and consequently, there
would be no incentive to provide more quality than is necessary to obtain
government certification.
     The purpose of this paper Is to analyze current and proposed Medicaid
reimbursement policies. We find that an Increase in the Medicaid reimbursement
rate reduces quality, causes an Increase in the "private pay" price, and
causes homes to admit more Medicaid patients at the expense of "private pay"
patients. Hence, in the nursing home industry, higher prices are associated
with lower levels of quality. This contrasts with the growing "reputation"
literature which shows that, In general, higher prices are associated with
higher levels of quality.1 Furthermore, we find that an increase in the
Medicaid reimbursement rate diminishes the welfare of consumers in the
'private pay" market, increases nursing home profits, but does not necessarily
improve the welfare of consumers in the Medicaid market.
     In addition, holding the Medicaid reimbursement constant, we find that
quality Is higher if the remibursement rate is set via "cost plus" pricing
than If It is set via "flat rate" pricing; whereas the price charged "private
pay" patients, and the mix of Medicaid and "private pay" patients are the same
under both reimbursement methods. Moreover, consumers in both markets are
better off under "cost plus" pricing, nursing homes earn higher profits under
"flat rate" pricing, and total governmental Medicaid expenditures are the same
under both, This result is of particular interest since the government is
currently proposing switching from "cost plus" to "flat rate" pricing. The
policy implications must be tempered since we ignore the obvious moral hazzard
problems inherent in "cost plus" pricing, in order to focus on the role of
                                 2

price discrimination. Therefore, although these results do not necessarily
imply that "cost plus" pricing is superior to "flat rate" pricing, they do
point out the value of making the Medicaid price depend upon the behavior of
the firm.
     Our model of the nursing home market is based on the notion that there
are quantity and quality aspects to production, and both quantity and quality
are endogenous.2 Specifically, nursing homes produce a series of commodities,
such as medical care, room and board, and social activities. The quality of
nursing home care is the utility patients derive from consuming this package.
Nursing home output, then, is characterized by the total number of patients
under care and the average quality of care. Nursing homes are assumed to
maximize profits by choosing quality and "private pay" price (which determines
the mix of "private pay" and Medicaid patients) subject to a governmentally
imposed capacity constraint.3
      The model also takes into account the notion that the nursing home
industry is not perfectly competitive by allowing spatial competition for
"private pay" patients. The spatial representation is a convenient way to
formalize a market where product differentiation is important. The
specification is an extension of the spatial model of monopolistic competition
developed in Salop (1979). Our work extends Salop's model In three ways
(i) by allowing non—price (quality) as well as price competition, (ii) by
allowing nursing homes to participate simultaneously in a second market, the
perfectly competitive Medicaid market, and (iii) by expanding the distribution
of consumers to two dimensions which provides another source of demand
elasticity so that the outcome of non—price competition in non—trivial. The
spatial representation also provides a convenient way to measure welfare in
terms of representative consumers.
     The analysis precedes as follows. In section II, we discuss the relevant
institutional aspects àf the nursing home industry. In section III, we derive
home specific demand functions. In section IV, we derive and compare the
equilibria under "flat rate" and "cost plus" Medicaid reimbursement, and
analyze the effects of Increases in the Medicaid reimbursement rate on the
equilibria. In section IV, we discuss the welfare properties of Medicaid
policy, and finally in section V, we summarize and draw conclusions.
                                  3

II. THE NURSING HOME INDUSTRY
     Over the last thirty years, the nursing home industry has expanded on an
annual average of 17, from approximately $190 million in 1950 to over $18
billion In 198O. The bulk of the expansion took place after 1966, the year in
which the Medicaid program began subsidizing nursing home care. As of 1980,
the public share of nursing home expenditures was over 65. Health care
regulators have the task of trying to control this expansion, while
simultaneously providing the poor with access to nursing home care and
promoting a high standard of quality. The major forms of government
Intervention into the nursing home market are the Medicaid patient subsidy
program and the Certificate of Need (CON) cost containment program.
     Medicaid is an entitlement program established under the Social Security
Act to provide the poor with a minimum floor of health services. Through
direct subsidies, the Medicaid program makes health care available to
individuals who otherwise could not afford it. It is jointly financed by State
and Federal governments, but administered on a State basis. The Medicaid
program reimburses nursing homes a set fee for the care of Medicaid patients.
Typically, States pay nursing homes using a "cost plus" reimbursement
mechanism, although, a few States have opted for a prospectively set "flat
rate" reimbursement mechanism.
     The other major form of government intervention in the nursing home
Industry Is the Certificate of Need (CON) cost containment program. CON was
passed into law in response to the rapid growth of the health care industry
during the late 1960's and early 1970's. It requires that in order to expand
an existing nursing home or build a new one that the government must certify
that the proposed facility is indeed 'needed". Effectively, CON limits the
existing capacity of existing nursing homes and new entry into the market.5 It
was thought that the expansion could be contained by limiting the available
supply of nursing home beds.
     In essence, government regulation has turned nursing homes into price
discriminators. The Medicaid program creates a second market for nursing home
care, and CON restricts supply so that there is excess Medicaid patient
demand. The excess Medicaid demand hypothesis is supported empirically in
Scanlon (1980). Hence, nursing homes compete with each other for "private pay"
patients knowing that they can always admit Medicaid patients at the Medicaid
reimbursement rate If they have excess capacity.
                                  4
III. DEMAND
     Those who seek nursing home care are usually motivated by large discrete
changes in their health. In general, individuals prefer to live Independently
as long as health permits. Other things equal, it is unlikely that smafl
changes in the price and quality of nursing home care would induce anyone to
give up independent living in favor of nursing home care. Therefore, the total
pool of potential nursing home patients is approximately fixed and independent
of nursing home choices of price and quality. Once health dictates that
nursing home care is required, a nursing home must be chosen. Nursing homes
compete for patients based on price and quality. Individuals who can afford
nursing home care choose the home that offers the highest utility. Individuals
who cannot afford nursing home care enter the pool of potential Medicaid
patients.
     A nursing home's quality is comprised of two parts: one of common value
to all, and another of value only to specific individuals. Common quality is
the utility patients derive from consuming the package of goods and services
nursing home's provide their patients. This package includes commodities such
as food, shelter, nursing care, and social and leisure activities. Specific
quality is characterized by factors such as how far the home is located from
family and the religious affiliation of the home.6 In the short run, "common
quality is chosen by homes, whereas "specific quality" is fixed.
     The price of nursing home care depends upon Medicaid eligibility. If
eligible, individuals turn over their Income to the government, which assumes
financial responsibility for their care. Medicaid eligibility depends on an
income test. The maximum allowable income is usually below the price charged
"private pay" patients. To simplify subsequent analysis, we assume that
individuals are eligible for Medicaid subsidization if their income is less
than the lowest price charged "private pay" patients. If they pass this income
test, then they enter a pool of potential Medicaid patients from which nursing
homes can choose.
     In this section we derive home specific demand functions by aggregating
individuals' choices. Aggregation requires specification of a functional form
for individuals' utility functions, and the distribution of individuals by
income, health, and "specific quality" preferences.7 The Individual's decision
is discussed in section A, the distributional assumptions in section B, and
the home specific demand functions in section C.
                                             5

A. THE INDJVIDUAL'S DECISION
           Individuals are assumed to have one of two possible health states: good
health and poor health. Those with good health always choose Independent
living, and those with poor health always choose nursing home care. What
remains to be determined is which nursing home will those with poor health
choose, and whether they are 'private pay" patients or Medicaid patients.
Individuals are "private pay" patients if they can afford nursing home care,
and are eligible for Medicaid subsidization if they cannot. "Private pay"
patients choose the nursing home that offers them the highest utility.
          Individuals derive utility from quality and savings. Quality is comprised
of common and specific parts. If all individuals have the same preferences
over the components of "common quality", the components can be indexed into a
single measure of "common quality" using the preferences to determine weights.
Let Qj be the value of nursing home j's "common quality" index.
          Unlike "common quality", a home's "specific quality" provides different
individuals with different levels of utility. The utility an Individual
derives from a home's "specific quality" depends on how closely that home's
"specific quality" matches the individual's ideal "specific quality". For
example, the closer a home is located to a patient's family, the better the
match. Let           measure the value of individual i's match with home j. The
smaller Djj the better the match. Hence, utility Is decreasing in
           Individuals also derive utility from savings either for their own use
after they leave the home or as a bequest to their heirs. Let            be individual

i's income and P be the price home j charges "private pay" patients. If
individual I enters home j as a "private pay" patient, then her savings are
      —         If she cannot afford any P3, then she is eligible for Medicaid and
           P.
her savings are zero.
           We are now ready to characterize an Individual's decision. Assuming a
linear utility function, Individual i's utility from nursing home j is


                           o   —D       +.-P
                                         1       3
                                                     ifY —P>O
                                                         1
(1)
                  Ujj={        +                     if V1 —        0.
                                   D1                          P3




Suppose there are N nursing homes, each offering a package (Q3,D3,P3). If V1
is greater than any P3, then Individual I chooses the nursing home that offers
her the greatest utility from amongst the homes she can afford. If V1 is less
than all P, then she joins the pool of potential Medicaid patients.
                                   6

B. DISTRIBUTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS
     In order to aggregate individual decisions into home specific demand
functions it is necessary to specify the distribution of individuals over
their 'specific quality" preferences and income. Individuals are assumed to be
distributed uniformly over the shell of a cylinder with density one. An
individual's horizontal position on the cylinder determines her "specific
quality" preferences, and her vertical position determines her income.
     Consider the distribution of individuals with the same level of income
over their "specific quality" preferences. These individuals are distributed
on the circumference of a unit circle. If we locate the nursing homes on the
same circle equidistant from one another, then an individual's "specific
quality" from a particular home is given by the position of the individual
relative to the home. Specifically, D1 is calculated as the distance from
individual i's location to home j's location moving along the circumference of
the circle by the shortest path.
     Now consider the joint distribution of individuals over "specific
quality" preferences and income. We assume that the distribution of
individuals by income is uniform with density one over the interval EO,a), and
that there exists a "specific quality" preference circle for each level of
income. In addition, the distribution of individuals is the same on all
circles. By stacking these circles in order of increasing income and so that
individuals with identical "specific quality" preferences are on top of one
another, we derive a cylindrical distribution where an individual's horizontal
position determines her "specific quality" preferences, and vertical position
determines her income.
     The distributional assumptions are summarized on this cylinder. A
flattened version with 3 homes is presented in figure 1. The homes located
equidistant from one another along the circumference of the top of the
cylinder. Individuals are distributed uniformly with density one along the
shell of the cylinder. As we move down the cylinder indiv4duals' income falls
from a to zero. Individuals' "specific quality" preferences are captured by
their horizontal location. Suppose individual i is located at point e'. By
moving her on a perpendicular line to the top of the cylinder, she is placed
on the same circle as the nursing homes at point d. Then,     Is equal to the
distance between point d and home j.
                                       7

                                           FIGURE   1

      THE DISTRIBUTION OF PATIENTS BY INCOME AND SPECIFIC QUALITY PREFERENCES


                        home j—i            home j                home j+1

               a




                                                                             INCOME
              Pj




               0


                             • SPECIFIC QUALITY PREFERENCES •


C. HOME SPECIFIC DEMAND FUNCTIONS
        The cylindrical distribution can be subdivided into regions whose areas
are "private pay" demand for each home and the pool of potential Medicaid
patients. In order to calculate a home's "private pay" demand, the marginal
individuals who reside on the borders of these regions must be identified. The
horizontal 'ocation of these individuals is


                   =              —             —       + 1/N).
(2)
                       (1/2)(Qj        + P+1

Notice that this location is independent of income.8 Therefore, the marginal
individual on each income circle is located in the same horizontal position.
Let point d in figure 1 be the location of the marginal individual with a
income. Then, a line perpendicular to d represents the locus of individuals
who are indifferent between homes j and j+1. This locus is given by the dd'
flne figure 2. Let the ff$ line represent the analogous locus for homes j and
                                         8

f—i. Suppose home j charges its 'private pay" patients Pj. Then, those
individuals who choose home j, and whose income Is greater than Pj constitute
home f's "private pay" patient demand.
        Home f's 'private pay" demand is calculated as the area of the rectangle
dd'e'e in figure 1. If both of home f's neighbors choose P and 0, then home
f's "private pay" demand is


                        (o.—ö+— +1/N)(a—P) If P <a
(3)
               x3={     0                              If




where       is number of "private pay" patients demanding care from home j.
        In a symmetric equilibrium, where all homes choose the same "private pay"
price and quality, equilibrium "private pay" demand is


(4)            X =   (1/N)(a   —   P).

Notice that equilibrium "private pay" demand Is independent of quality. Since
price determines who is a "private pay" patient and who Is a Medicaid patient,
it also determines the market level of "private pay" demand. If a home raises
its price it looses some "private pay" patients to other homes and some
"private pay" patients to the Medicaid pool. Quality choices only affect the
distribution of market "private pay" demand amongst homes. If a home raises
its quality, it gains "private pay" patients from other homes, but the market
level of "private pay" demand remains unchanged. If all homes choose price P,
then total "private pay" demand is a — P. In addition, if all homes choose the
same level of quality, then they each receive an equal share of market
"private pay" demand.
      Those individuals who cannot afford nursing home care enter a pool of
potential Medicaid patients from which nursing homes can choose. Nursing homes
receive the Medicaid reimbursement rate from the government for each Medicaid
patient. We assume that the income distribution is large enough so that each
nursing home has enough Medicaid demand so as to more than fill every bed In
the home. Therefore, Medicaid demand is perfectly elastic as the Medicaid
reimbursement rate.
                                          9
IV. EQUILIBRIUM
       In this section we consider symmetric Nash equilibria under "flat rate"
and "cost plus" Medicaid reimbursement. We begin by assuming that all nursing
homes face parametrically identical demand functions, have the same cost
function, and are subject to identical government regulation.
       Nursing homes have two sources of demand: "private pay" and Medicaid.
Each home faces a 'private pay" demand whose functional form is given by (3),
and can admit Medicaid patients at the Medicaid reimbursement rate.
      CON regulation imposes a capacity constraint on the total number of
patients each nursing home is able to admit. Since there is excess Medicaid
demand, the capacity constraint Is binding. It is specified as


(5)            X+M =

where X is the number of "private pay" patients, M is the number of Medicaid
patients, and X Is the CON allowed capacity. CON also controls entry and exit.
We assume that CON policy allows N firms, each with capacity X, in the market.
       Nursing homes are required to provide the same quality to all patients,
regardless of method of payment. Thus, a nursing home's costs are a function
of the total number of patients and average quality. Let the cost of providing
quality level 0 to R       patients   be C(O), which is Increasing and convex.
       The government pays nursing homes for Medicaid patient care either by
"flat rate" or "cost plus" reimbursement. Under "flat rate" reimbursement, the
payment per Medicaid patient is fixed at P. Under "cost plus" reimbursement
the payment per Medicaid patient is


(6)           R =   r   + C(Q)/X,


where r Is the "plus" factor. Under "flat rate" reimbursement marginal
Medicaid revenue is constant. In the "cost plus" case, marginal Medicaid
revenue rises with quality.
       Each home is assumed to choose "private pay" price and quality so as to
maximize profits taking its competitors' choices as given. Profits are


              lT(P,Q) =    PX(P,Q)    + RIR —   X(P,0))   —
                                                              C(R,0).

A symmetric Nash equilibrium is exists in both the "flat rate" and "cost plus"
cases, and the rest of the analysis, concerns only these equilibria.
                                                  10
A. NFlat RateTM Reimbursement
1. Equilibrium
       The behavioral conditions that each home must satisfy are the CON
capacity constraint In (5), the "private pay" demand function in (4), and


(7)           PX+ X=RX
(8)           PX0 = C0 + RX0,


where X, =   ax,ap,        etc. The behavioral conditions have straight—forward
interpretations. Price is chosen in (7) to equate marginal "private pay"
revenue to the opportunity cost of Medicaid revenue, and quality is chosen in
(8) to equate marginal "private pay" revenue to the marginal Cost of quality
plus the opportunity cost of Medicaid revenue.
       Condition (7), when evaluated at the symmetric Nash equilibrium, is
independent of quality. Substitution of the "private pay" demand function (3)
and its appropriate derivatives into (7), and evaluation of those expressions
at the symmetric Nash equilibrium yields


(9)           —
                  (P   —
                           R)(a   — p +    1/N)    +    (1/N)(u        —
                                                                           P) = 0
(10)              (P   -   R)(a   —   P) - C0 =        0.


Condition (9) is a quadratic expression in P. The quadratic expression has two
potential solutions, one of which can be ruled out because (a — P) must be
non—negative. Therefore,


(11)        P =   (1/2){a     + P + 2/N —                   — R)2 +
                                                  ((a               4/N2)112             ].



Equation (11) implies that the equilibrium "private pay" price is independent
of quality. Therefore, the first order conditions can be solved recurively.
First, P is determined by (7), and then, 0 by (8), X by (4), and M by (5).


2. An Increases In the Medicaid Reimbursement Rate
       Here we show that an Increase in the Medicaid reimbursement rate causes

nursing homes to lower quality, raise "private pay" price, and adjust patient
mix in favor of more Medicaid patients. Substitution of (11) into (10) yields


(12)          (1/N)((a —       )2     +
                                          4/N2)1"2
                                                            —   2/N2   —
                                                                           C0
                                                                                =   0.
                                             11

By the implicit function theorem,


              dO              — (a — R)
                   =
              dR               — R)2 +
                       2N((a              4/N2)1/2   C00



From (11), it is clear that P is increasing in R. Therefore, it follows from
(4) that X Is increasing in R, and from (5) that M is decreasing in P.
       The intuition behind this result is straightforward. Increasing R raises
marginal Medicaid revenue. As a result, it becomes profitable to substitute
Medicaid patients for "private pay" patients. Homes raise "private pay" price
and lowers quality to reduce "private pay" demand and lower operating costs.
The beds vacated by "private pay" patients are filled with Medicaid patients.


B. Cost PlusN Reimbursement
1. EquilibrilmI
       In this case, proprietary nursing homes are maximizing profits subject to
the Medicaid reimbursement rule specified in (6). The behavioral conditions
that each home must satisfy are


(13)          PXp +     X =
                               RXp
(14)          PX0 = C0(X/R) + RX0,


along with (4) and (5). These conditions are almost identical to the
behavioral conditions in the "flat rate" case. One difference occurs in
condition (13), where the marginal cost of providing additional quality to all
patients is weighted by the proportion of patients who are "private pay".
Since increases in the cost of caring for Medicaid patients are recovered via
Medicaid reimbursements, only the marginal cost of caring for "private pay"
patients is Important in the decision making process. Therefore, the relevant
marginal cost of quality is lower under "cost plus" reimbursement. Also, the
"private pay" price condition (13) is not independent of quality since the
Medicaid reimbursement rate depends on average cost.
       As before, the equilibrium conditions are recursive. Substitution of (3)
and its derivatives into (13) and (14), and evaluation at equilibrium gives


(15)          —    (P — P)(a     — P   + 1/N) +   (1/N)(a   —   P) = 0
(16)               (P —   R)(a   — P) —   (1/N)(a    —
                                                         P)C0
                                                                =   0.
                                                 12

Solving (15) for P yields


              p =              + R    + 2/N —               — R)2 +
(17)                (1/2)[a                           ((a                       4/N2)"21,

and substitution of (17) into (16) gIves


              (1/2)(a —        +2/N) —                       —    R)2 + 4/N2)1I2             —          =   0.
(18)                       R
                                            (1/2)((a                                             C0/N

Hence, 0 is determined by (18), then, P by (17), X by (4), and M by (5).


2. An Increase in the Medicaid Plus Factor
       In this case, the government's policy instrument Is r, the Medicaid
"plus' factor. We show that an Increase in r decreases quality. In addition,
if the the Medicaid reimbursement rate is increasing (decreasing) in r,                                           then
'private pay" price rises (falls), and the home adjusts its patient mix in
favor of more Medicaid ("private pay') patients.
       By application of the implicit function theorem to (18)


                       —                —   (a   —                —       R)2               —1/2
(19)         —=            (1/2)[1                    R)((a                     +
                                                                                    4/N2)
                                                                                      1/2
                                                                                                            — 0
                                     (a —              —    R)2       +                       + C00/NR
                    (1/2)[1                 R)((a                          4/N2)


From (17) it Is clear that P is increasing in P. Differentiation of R with
respect to r yields


             dR  C0dQ
             —=1+——.
             dr    dr




The total change in R is decomposed into two effects. The first Is the direct
effect due to the increase in r, and is positive. The second is an indirect
effect due the change in average cost, and is negative since 0 Is decreasing
in r. If the total effect on R is positive (negative), then P rises (falls),
implying from (4) that X falls (rises), and from (5) that M rises (falls).
                                     13

C. "Flat Rate" Versus "Cost Plus" Reimbursement
        In order to isolate differences in incentive structures, we compare
equilibria when the equilibrium "cost plus" reimbursement equals the "flat
rate". We show that homes provide higher quality under 'cost plus"
reimbursement, whereas they charge "private pay" patients the same price and
care for the same number of "private pay" and Medicaid patients under both
methods. The intuition is as follows. Since equilibrium "private pay" demand
is independent of quality, homes charge the same "private pay" price under
both methods, and therefore, care for the same number of "private pay' and
Medicaid patients. Hence, since homes charge the same "private pay" price and
the marginal cost of quality Is lower under "cost plus" reimbursement, homes
choose a higher level of quality under "cost plus" reimbursement.
        These results are easily seen in figure 2 where the profit maximizing
first order conditions are pictured. The lT = 0 and T1 = 0 curves represent
all the combinations of P and 0 that satisfy (7) and (8), respectively. Since
equilibrium "private pay" demand is Independent of 0, the lTp = 0 curve is
horizontal. On the other hand, the TT =0 is upward sloping.9 The "flat rate"
equilibrium (p*,Q*) occurs at the intersection of the two curves. The cost
plus first order conditions are given by the lT = 0 and lT = 0 curves. They
represent all the combinations of P and U that satisfy (9) and (10),
respectively. Since R depends on 0, the lT = 0 curve Is not horizontal. In
fact, both curves are upwards sloping with lT = 0 being steeper.1° The cost
plus equilibrium (P,Q) occurs at the intersection of the two curves.
        The relative positions of the four curves provides the comparison. Since
the profit function is concave and the marginal cost of quality is lower in
the "cost plus" case, (10) is satisfied at a higher U for each P than is (8).
Therefore, the lT = 0 curve Is located everywhere to the right of the T1 = 0
curve. Since (7) is independent of 0 and (9) depends on 0 only via R,
equilibrium P occurs at the same point under both reimbursement schemes.
Therefore, the T1 = 0 curve intersects the T1 = 0 curve at the same P that the
lip =   0 intersects the lT= 0 curve, Consequently, the "cost plus" equilibrium
occurs at a higher 0 than does the "flat rate" equilibrium.
                                                   14

                                                       FIGURE 2
                          COST PLUS VERSUS FLAT RATE REIMBURSEMENT


                 P                                                   =    0.

                                                                           =


                                                                               =
                P*                                                                 4=



                                      I                I




                                      0*                                            0




IV. WELFARE
       In this section we analyze the impact of Medicaid policy on the welfare
of "private pay" patients, on welfare of Medicaid patients, on total
government Medicaid payments, and on nursing home profits.


A. PRIVATE PAY PATIENT WELFARE
       The total welfare of "private pay" patients is measured as the sum of
their utility. Since each patient pays P to receive Q and there are N
identical homes, equilibrium "private pay" patient welfare is


                = 2N                 (a +          —
                                                           — D)    dY1 dD13

where D Is the equilibrium distance of the individuals who are indifferent
between homes. From (2), that distance is 1/(2N). Hence,


(20)            =    (a   —
                              P)[Q   +    (a   —   P)/2    —
                                                               1/(4N)I.

Hence, "private pay" welfare is the total number of "private pay" patients
times average utility, is decreasing in price, and increasing In quality.
Specifically, a rise in price reduces the number of "private pay" patients and
average savings, and an increase in quality raises average utility.
                                      15

       These observations provide us with three immediate conclusions. First,
"private pay" welfare is higher under 'cost plus" reimbursement than under
"flat rate" reimbursement. This follows from the earlier observation that
nursing homes provide higher quality under "cost plus" reimbursement, and
charge "private pay" patients the same price under both methods of
reimbursement. Second, under "flat rate" reimbursement, an increase In the
Medicaid reimbursement rate reduces "private pay" welfare, since an increase
in R causes nursing homes to raise "private pay" price and lower quality.
Finally, under "cost plus" reimbursement, an increase in the Medicaid plus
factor reduces "private pay" welfare if dR/dr is positive, since an increase
in r causes nursing homes to lower quality, and raise "private pay1 price.


B. MEDICAID PATIENT WELFARE
       Medicaid welfare is also measured as the sum of utility is calculated as
the number of Medicaid patients times average utility. Therefore, if there are
M patients in N homes, Medicaid patient welfare is


              Wm = NM[O —   1/(4N).

Substitution of (5), and then (4) into the above expression gives


(21)          Wm = {NR —    (a —      — 1/(4N).


Hence, Medicaid welfare is increasing. in both "private pay" price and quality.
Specifically, an increase in "private pay" price reduces "private pay" demand,
and therefore, increases the number of Medicaid patients. In addition, an
increase in quality raises average utility.
       These observations provide us with the following results. First, Medicaid
welfare is higher under "cost plus" Medicaid reimbursement than under "flat
rate" reimbursement, Isince that quality is higher under "cost plus", and
"private pay" price is the same as under both. Second, under "flat rate"
reimbursement, an increase in the Medicaid reimbursement rate has an ambiguous
affect on Medicaid welfare, since an increase in R raises the "private pay"
price, but also reduces also reduces quality. Finally, under "cost plus"
reimbursement, an increase in the Medicaid "plus" factor has an indeterminate
effect on Medicaid patient welfare, since an increase in r lowers quality,
and, if dR/dr is positive (negative) lowers (raises) "private pay" price.
                                  16

C. GOVERNMENT MEDICAID PAYMENTS
     Total government Medicaid payments are R times the total number of
Medicaid patients receiving care. Therefore, under "flat rate" reimbursement,
an increase an increase in R raises total Medicaid payments, since the payment
per person rises and nursing homes admit more Medicaid patients. Under "cost
plus" reimbursement, an increase in r has an indeterminate effect on total
Medicaid payments, since an increase in r has an indeterminate effect on R. In
addition, when the equilibrium "cost plus" reimbursement equals the "flat
rate", total Medicaid payments are the same under under both reimbursement
mechanisms. This follows from the earlier observations that nursing homes
admit the same number of Medicaid patients under both reimbursement methods.
Therefore, the payment per Medicaid patient and the total number of Medicaid
patients are the same under both reimbursement schemes.


D. NURSING HOME PROFITS
     Nursing home profits are lower under "cost plus" reimbursement than under
"flat rate" reimbursement. Since the Medicaid reimbursement rate, "private
pay" price, and patient mix are the same under both reimbursement schemes,
revenues must be the same. On the other hand, since quality is higher under
"cost plus" reimbursement costs must be higher. In addition, profits are
increasing in R under "flat rate" reimbursement, and Increasing in r under
"cost plus" reimbursement.


VI. POLICY IMPLICATIONS
     The goals of government intervention in the nursing home industry are to
assure a high standard of quality, provide the poor access to care, with
minimum government expenditure. The Medicaid program was created to provide
"access", and allows nursing homes to be price discriminators. This paper
analyzes the implications of current arid proposed Medicaid policy.
     The first implication is the importance of the unregulated "private pay"
patient market. Quality is regulated without direct government control by
competition in the "private pay" market. The greater "private pay" demand, the
higher Is quality. Consequently, if all care were financed by the government,
there would be a welfare loss to all consumers.
                                  17

     Second, there is a quality—access trade—off in setting the Medicaid
reimbursement rate. Specifically, higher Medicaid reimbursement rates induce
nursing homes to care for more Medicaid patients, but at the expense of lower
quality. Moreover, higher Medicaid reimbursement rates can lead to increases
in the price charged "private pay" patients. Finally, higher Medicaid
reimbursement rates reduce the welfare of "private pay" patients, increase
nursing home profits, but do not necessarily Increase Medicaid patient
welfare. These results are supported by empirical work in Gertler (1985).
     In addition, holding the Medicaid reimbursement constant, we find that
quality Is higher under "cost plus" reimbursement than under "flat rate"
reimbursement, whereas the "private pay" price and the mix of "private pay"
and Medicaid patients are the same under both reimbursement methods. This
result (along with a moral hazzard story) is consistant with the empirical
regularity that, other things equal, nursing homes paid by "cost plus"
reimbursement have higher average costs than nursing homes paid by "flat rate'
reimbursement.'° Moreover, consumers in both markets are better off under
"cost plus" reimbursement, nursing homes earn higher profits under "flat rate"
reimbursement, and total government Medicaid expenditures are the same under
both reimbursement schemes.
     This work does not necessarily advocate "cost plus" over "flat rate"
reimbursement. Indeed, the analysis ignores the important moral hazzard
problems inherent in "cost plus" reimbursement in order to focus on price
discrimination. On the other hand, it does point out the value of making the
Medicaid reimbursement rate depend on the behavior of the firm. Therefore,
before switching to "flat rate" reimbursement, the government should
investigate the practicality of superior reimbursement rules as suggested in
the principle—agent literature.
                                  18

                                  FOOTNOTES


1 For example, see Allen (1984), Klein and Leffler (1981), and Shapiro (1982)
and (1983).


2 This representation of a firm's output is similar to general models analyzed
in Spence (1975), Sheshinski (1976), and Leffler (1982), and to nursing home
models analyzed in Bishop (1980) and Palmer and Vogel (1983).


  In this paper, we only consider proprietary nursing homes which constitute
over 657. of the market. The other major type of firm is the "not for profit"
nursing home. "Not for profit" nursing homes constitute approximately 307. of
the market, and are primarily operated by religiuosly affiliated
organizations. Elsewhere, Gertler (1985), we consider "not for profit" homes,
and show that if they are modeled as altruist utility maximizers subject to a
break even constraint, then all of the results in this paper apply to "not for
profit" homes as well. Further, Gertler (1985) provides empirical evidence
that suggests that proprietary homes and "not for profit" homes do not compete
in the same market.


  The source of statistics referenced in the Introduction is The U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services' publication, Health, United States
1980.



  The CON review boards are not just rubber stamps. Indeed, there is some
casual evidence to support the assumption that CON capacity and entry
constraint are binding, First, most nursing homes operate at above 90 of
capacity. Second, there is a long list of Individuals in hospitals waiting for
openings in nursing homes. Finally, States such New York have Imposed
moratoriums on nursing home expansion.


6 Consider the religious affiliation of a nursing home. It is likely that
Jewish patients receive more utility from the fact that they are receiving
care in a Jewish home than non—Jewish patients. Hence, the fact that the home
Is Jewish improves the quality of care specifically to Jewish patients.
                                                            19

  Our functional form assumptions, linear utility functions and a uniform
distribution of patients, are common choices in the spatial competition
literature. For example, see Salop (1979).


8 Individual I is Indifferent between home j and j+1 if                                          =
                                                                                                     Ujj+1.
Substitution of (1) into this expression and replacing D1 j+1 with
(1/N —
         Djj)     aflows us to solve for (2).


  The profit maximizing first order conditions in the "flat rate" case are

                 lip
                       = (P     —
                                        R)Xp +   X    = 0

            1T = (P — R)X0 — C0 = 0.
Substitution of the "private pay" demand function and Its appropriate
derivatives, evaluated at the symmetric Nash equilibrium, into these
conditions yields
               = — (P —                  R)(a    — P +         1/N)     +   (1/N)(a   — P) = 0

                 110 =     (PP) - C0 = 0.
                                —       R)(a -
By the implicit function theorem, the slope of the price condition is
                 dP/dQ =        — 11/T1
and the slope of the quality condition is
                 dP/dO = — 11001110F'
The second order conditions for a maximum require that the                                           and T1 terms
be negative at the symmetric Nash equilibrium. From the first order conditions
the remaining terms are
                 lipo =    0
                       = (P — R) +               (a   —   P)
Solving 1T, = 0 for (P —                  R), and substitution of that into the above expression
yields
                       =    (a      —    P)2/(a      — P +       1/N)       0.
Therefore, ll = 0 is upwards sloping.


10 The proof that 1T = 0 and lT = 0 are both upwards sloping follows the same
line of arguement as footnote 9 presented for the "flat rate" case. Further,
from the second order condition, 11p1T —                                    T1T1p     0, lT =0 is steeper
than lT =   0.

   For example, see Bishop (1980), Frech and Ginsburg (1980), Ullmann (1983),
and Palmer and Cotterill (1983).
                                    20
                                    REFERENCES


Allen,   F. (1984), 'Reputation and Product Quality," The Rand Journal of
     Econimics, Vol. 15, pp. 311—327.


Bishop, C. E. (1980), "NursIng Home Cost Studies and Reimbursement Issues,"
     Health Care Financing Review, Vol. 2, pp. 47—64.


Frech, H. E., and P. B. Ginsburg (1980), "The Cost of Nursing Home Care in the
     United States: Government Financing, Ownership, and Efficiency," in
     Health, Economics, and Health Economics, edited by J. Van der Gaag and
     M.Perlman, North Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 67—81.


Gertler P. J. (1985), "Subsidies, Quality, and Regulation in the Nursing Home
     Industry,' unpublished Ph.D dissertation, Department of Economics,
     University of Wisconsin at Madison.


Klein, B. and K,. B. Leffler (1981) "The Role of Market Forces in Assuring
     Contractual Performance," The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 89,
     pp. 615—641.


Leffler, K. D. (1982), "Ambiguous Changes in Product Quality," American
     Economic Review, Vol. 72, pp. 956—967.


Meiners, M. R. (1982), "An Econometric Analysis of the Major Determinants of
     Nursing Home Costs in the United States," Social Science and Medicine,
    Vol. 16, pp.887—898.


Palmer, H. C. and P. G. Cotterill (1983), "Studies in Nursing Home Costs," in
     Long—Term Care: Perspectives From Research and Demonstrations, edited by
    R. J. Vogel and H. C. Palmer, Health Care Financing Administration, U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services, pp.665—722.


Palmer, H. C. and R. J. Vogel (1983), "Models of the Nursing Home" in Long—
    Term Care: Perspectives From Research and Demonstrations, edited by R. J.
    Vogel and H. C. Palmer, Health Care Financing Administration, U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services.
                                  21

Salop, S. C. (1979), "Monopolistic Competition with an Outside Good," Bell
     Journal of Economics, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 141—156.


Scanlon, W. J. (1980), "The Market for Nursing Home Care: A Case of an
     Equilibrium with Excess Demand as a Result of Public Policy,"
     unpublished Ph.d dissertation, Department of Economics, University of
     Wisconsin.


Shapiro, C. (1982), "Consumer Information, Product Quality, and Seller
     Information," Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 13, pp. 20—35.


Shapiro, C (1983), "Premiums for High Quality as Returns to Reputations,"
     Quarterly Journal Of Economics, Vol. 98, pp. 659—680.


Sheshinski, E (1976), "Price, Quality and Quantity Regulation In Monopoly
     Situations," Economica, Vol .43, pp. 127—137.


Spence, M. (1975), "Monopoly, Quality, and Regulation," Befl Journal of
     Economics, Vol. 6, pp. 417—429.


Ullmann, S. G. (1983a), "Cost Analysis and Facility Reimbursement in the Long—
     Term Health Care Industry," Department of Economics Working Paper,
     University of Miami.


U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Office
     of Health Research, Statistics, and Technology (1981), Health, United
     States 1980, U. S. Government Printing Office.
