NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBALIZATION, GOVERNANCE, AND THE RETURNS TO CROSS-BORDER
ACQUISITIONS
Jesse Ellis
Sara B. Moeller
Frederik P. Schlingemann
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 16676
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16676

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

The authors gratefully acknowledge funding for this project from the International Business Center
at the University of Pittsburgh. We thank Isil Erel for helpful comments and Rose Lau for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Jesse Ellis, Sara B. Moeller, Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Globalization, Governance, and the Returns to Cross-Border Acquisitions
Jesse Ellis, Sara B. Moeller, Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 16676
January 2011
JEL No. G31,G32,G34
ABSTRACT
Using a sample of control cross-border acquisitions from 61 countries from 1990 to 2007, we find
that acquirers from countries with better governance gain more from such acquisitions and their gains
are higher when targets are from countries with worse governance. Other acquirer country characteristics
are not consistently related to acquisition gains. For instance, the anti-self-dealing index of the acquirer
has opposite associations with acquirer returns depending on whether the acquisition of a public firm
is paid for with cash or equity. Strikingly, global effects in acquisition returns are at least as important
as acquirer country effects. First, the acquirer’s industry and the year of the acquisition explain more
of the stock-price reaction than the country of the acquirer. Second, for acquisitions of private firms
or subsidiaries, acquirers gain more when acquisition returns are high for acquirers from other countries.
We find strong evidence that better alignment of interests between insiders and minority shareholders
is associated with greater acquirer returns and weaker evidence that this effect mitigates the adverse
impact of poor country governance.
Jesse Ellis
Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh
219 Mervis Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
jellis@katz.pitt.edu

Frederik P. Schlingemann
Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh
372 Mervis Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
schlinge@katz.pitt.edu

Sara B. Moeller
Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh
360 Mervis Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
sbmoeller@katz.pitt.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

1. Introduction
There is a vast literature showing that a country’s governance is related to characteristics of its
financial markets as well as of its firms. In particular, countries with better governance are countries with
more developed financial markets, more initial public offerings, less unmet financing requirements,
greater valuation of cash held by investors, and so on.1 We expect corporate investments in countries
with better governance to increase shareholder wealth more. In particular, shareholders in countries with
better governance should be better able to protect themselves against expropriation by insiders, by the
state, as well as by other parties. Further, investments by corporations should face fewer obstacles in
countries where the government works better, regulation is less burdensome, and corruption is weaker.
However, firms can also take actions that offset the weaknesses of their country’s governance. For
instance, greater insider ownership can help align interests between insider and minority shareholders
(Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002) and cross-listing enables firms to rent
institutions from countries with better governance and investor protection (Coffee, 1999; Stulz, 1999). As
a result of these opposing effects, it is an empirical issue whether and how a country’s governance affects
the extent to which investments create wealth for shareholders.
In this paper, we investigate whether a country’s governance explains the shareholder wealth created
by investment decisions by studying the stock-price reaction to cross-border control acquisitions.
Acquisitions are typically the largest discrete operating investments firms make (Jensen and Ruback,
1983). Cross-border acquisitions offer an ideal setting to study this issue. The cross-border acquisitions
firms make are typically acquisitions that are available to firms from many countries, so the price a firm
pays for an acquisition is generally set in a global market. Cross-border acquisitions make it possible,
therefore, to separate the investment decision from the investment opportunity set in a way that is not be
possible for domestic acquisitions. Importantly, this separation enables us to focus more directly on the
country governance of the acquiring firm. In the absence of this separation, it is difficult to separate the
impact of country governance on the acquirer versus its impact on the target. In this paper, we can
1

See Olsen (1996) on the importance and implications of country governance. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,
and Vishny (2002) review some of the literature from the perspective that the key determinant of country
governance is a country’s legal origin. The result on the value of cash is in Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2006).

1

identify separately the impact of acquiring-firm country governance and target-firm country governance.
We find, for the whole sample of acquisitions, the gains to acquiring-firm shareholders are higher in
countries with better governance and firms in such countries make more acquisitions.
We construct a sample of 37,414 control acquisitions by firms in 61 countries from 1990 to 2007. Out
of these acquisitions, 8,090 are cross-border acquisitions. It is not surprising that most acquisitions are
domestic. It is well-known in the acquisitions literature that the returns to acquiring-firm shareholders
from acquisitions differ depending on the type of acquisition (see, for instance, Fuller, Netter, and
Stegemoller, 2002). We therefore consider all types of acquisitions together as well as each type of
acquisition separately. Acquisitions of private firms constitute the most frequent type of acquisitions both
domestically and cross-border. The relative frequency of acquisitions paid for with stock is much lower
for cross-border acquisitions than for domestic acquisitions. Strikingly, we show that, for all acquisitions
except acquisitions of public firms for cash, there is no difference in the average stock-price reaction to
domestic acquisitions and cross-border acquisitions. In the case of acquisitions of public firms for cash,
we find that cross-border acquisitions have an abnormal return that is greater by 0.56%. As in the
literature for U.S. acquisitions, all types of acquisitions but those of public firms paid for with common
stock generate a positive stock-price reaction.
We investigate next how country governance and other country characteristics are related to acquirer
shareholder returns. We expect better country governance to lead to acquisitions that benefit shareholders
for several reasons. First, better governance makes it less likely that proceeds from investments will be
expropriated by the state, insiders, stakeholders, or others. Second, it makes it harder for insiders to make
investments that benefit them at the expense of shareholders. Third, better country governance gives an
advantage to firms in creating synergies through acquisitions. For example, poor respect for the rule of
law and poor control of corruption have an adverse impact on how well a firm conducts its operations. As
a result, a firm from a country with good governance that acquires a firm from a country with poor
governance can make the target more efficient. We use as our main measures of country governance the
World Governance Indicators published by the World Bank (see Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi
[KKM], 2009). These indices are time-varying and are obtained by averaging a large number of surveys.
2

They measure separately how well a country controls corruption, the respect for the rule of law, the
degree of political stability, the effectiveness of government, regulatory quality, and how well a country’s
citizens can participate in selecting the government and the extent to which they enjoy various freedoms.
We investigate the relation between acquirer gains and each one of the individual indices as well as with
the aggregate index for the acquirer’s country. For the whole cross-border sample, the average acquirer
abnormal return is 1.5%. A one standard deviation increase in the average country governance index
increases the stock-price reaction by 23 basis points, or 14.97%. We find that, in general, acquirer gains
increase with better control of corruption, better rule of law, and better government effectiveness in the
acquirer’s country. In addition, the acquirer gain for acquisitions of public firms for cash increase
significantly with these three indices as well, but also increase strongly with the index of government
stability. The effect of a one standard deviation increase in the average governance index on the abnormal
return for acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash is an increase of 60.65%. In multiple regressions,
country governance of the acquirer has a positive significant coefficient for the whole sample, for cash
acquisitions of public and private firms, and for stock acquisitions of private firms.
We investigate other country characteristics expected to be related to the gains shareholders make
from acquisitions. We find that the stock-price reaction to acquisitions of public firms for cash increases
in an economically significant way with the acquiring country’s accounting transparency and its anti-selfdealing index, an index that measures the ability of insiders to engage in self-dealing transactions (see
Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2003), but acquiring-firm returns for acquisitions of
public firms paid for with equity fall with the anti-self-dealing index. Though the literature has devoted
considerable attention to the role of the anti-director index in the frequency of acquisitions and in merger
premiums since Rossi and Volpin (2004), we find no evidence that acquirers from countries with a higher
anti-director index gain more from acquisitions. Characteristics related to a country’s economic or
financial development are typically not significant.
In all our regressions, we include a country characteristic both for the acquirer’s country and for the
target’s country. A striking result is that the coefficient of the characteristic for the target’s country has
often the opposite sign of the coefficient for the acquirer’s country. Most importantly given our focus, the
3

coefficient on the governance index of the target’s country is generally negative, so that the gain from
acquisitions for acquiring-firm shareholders is generally lower if the acquisition is made in a country with
better governance. This result implies that the benefits of good country governance are portable, in that a
firm from a country with good governance carries the benefits of that good governance with it when it
goes abroad.
The results we have discussed generally hold in many different regression specifications. In
particular, we estimate regressions with only one country characteristic at a time as well as with multiple
country characteristics. We would expect firm and deal characteristics to be endogenous to country
characteristics. We therefore estimate regressions without firm and deal characteristics as well as
regressions with these characteristics. Our main results hold in all of these specifications.
We then explore whether two firm-level governance choices, namely insider ownership and the
choice of an ADR program, mitigate the effect of poor country governance. Though there is evidence that
corporate control mechanisms affect acquirer returns in the U.S. (Masulis, Wang, and Xie, 2007), U.S.
evidence on the relation between bidder returns and insider ownership is mixed (for instance, while
Hubbard and Palia (1995) find a nonlinear relation between bidder returns and managerial ownership,
Loderer and Martin (1997) find no relation). In contrast, we find strong evidence that acquirer returns
increase with insider ownership in our cross-country sample. The economic significance of a one standard
deviation increase in insider ownership for the whole sample is an increase of 18% in the acquirer return.
There is some evidence that the benefit from insider ownership decreases as the quality of a country’s
governance increases, but this evidence is significant only for acquisitions of private firms. Surprisingly,
the existence of an ADR program is negatively related to returns of acquisitions of public firms for stock.
A possible explanation is that the information environment is better for ADR firms (see Bailey, Karolyi,
and Salva, 2006), so that stock issuance has more signaling value for such firms.
As Black (2000) observes, merger waves have become global. The frequency of cross-border
acquisitions shows that there is a global market for control. We would therefore expect global factors to
affect the gains from acquisitions and the frequency of acquisitions. To capture global effects, we first use
year and industry indicator variables. For the whole sample, we find that these indicator variables have
4

more explanatory power than country characteristics, suggesting that global determinants of stock-price
reactions to acquisitions are important. We show further that an acquirer’s return for an acquisition is
related to acquirer returns in other countries for the same type of transaction and form of payment. This
effect is strong for the whole sample and for acquisitions of private firms and subsidiaries; it is not for
acquisitions of public firms.
If a country’s governance is a valuable input in the production function of firms, we would expect
firms from countries with poor governance to find it more difficult to compete for acquisitions. As a
result, governance should affect not only the gains of acquisitions but also whether acquisitions take
place. We find that this is indeed the case. We show across all types of acquisitions that the frequency of
acquisitions is strongly positively related to the governance of a country. In other words, if a firm is in a
country with better governance, it makes more cross-border acquisitions. Other country characteristics are
generally insignificant after controlling for industry and year.
We proceed as follows. In Section 2, we review the relevant literature. In Section 3, we explain how
we construct our sample and how we estimate abnormal returns. We show estimates of the stock-price
reaction to cross-border and domestic acquisitions in Section 4. In Section 5, we investigate the relation
between acquiring-firm shareholder gains from cross-border acquisitions and characteristics of the
acquiring firm’s country using several different approaches. In Section 6, we show that country
governance is positively related to the frequency of acquisitions. We conclude in Section 7.

2. Review of the literature
There is a growing literature on cross-border acquisitions. Part of this literature focuses on
understanding the frequency of such acquisitions. Another part of the literature tries to explain
shareholder gains. In this brief review, we discuss only the literature addressing control acquisitions by
publicly traded firms, which is the topic of this paper.
Early papers on cross-border mergers and acquisitions are more concerned about issues related to the
benefits of foreign direct investment (FDI) and the value created by international corporate

5

diversification. An early paper by Harris and Ravenscraft (1991) approaches cross-border acquisitions
from the same perspective as the FDI literature does.2 It shows that cross-border acquisitions are more
frequent in R&D intensive industries. The more recent literature on country determinants of mergers and
acquisitions activity starts with Rossi and Volpin (2004). Like us, they focus on control acquisitions and
include private firm targets in their sample (22% of their acquisitions have a public company as the
target). In their analysis of target countries, they find that countries with weaker shareholder protection
are the targets of fewer cross-border acquisitions. They do not focus on characteristics of acquiring
countries separately. In their analysis of acquirer/target country pairs, they show that acquirers typically
come from countries with better accounting standards and stronger shareholder protection than the targets.
In contrast to Rossi and Volpin (2004), Erel, Liao, and Weisbach (2010) also consider partial acquisitions
and include in their sample acquisitions made by non-public firms (Karolyi and Liao (2010) show that
state-related entities are important acquirers as well). Their study shows that firms from countries whose
currency has appreciated tend to invest in countries whose currency has depreciated. Ferreira, Massa, and
Matos (2009) show that cross-border acquisitions are more likely to occur in countries where foreign
institutional investors hold a higher fraction of the local stock market. Finally, Ahern, Daminelli, and
Fracassi (2010) examine the impact of cultural values on cross-border activity and find that the frequency
of cross-border acquisitions is lower between pairs of countries that are more culturally distant.
Papers that investigate stock-price reactions to cross-border acquisitions tend to have two different
perspectives. Some papers focus on acquirer returns trying to assess whether international corporate
diversification benefits shareholders and do so often from the perspective of the corporate diversification
literature. Other papers study instead whether the gains to acquirers or targets are related to country
characteristics. Many papers focus only on cross-border acquisitions involving a U.S. firm.
Papers focusing on the benefits of international corporate diversification include Doukas and Travlos
(1988), who show that firms that enter a new geographic market earn a higher abnormal return. Eun,

2

The paper references many papers in the FDI literature concerned about investment flows that we do not review
here.

6

Kolodny, and Scheraga (1996) provide evidence that cross-border acquisitions of U.S. targets create
positive synergies. Dos Santos, Errunza, and Miller (2008) look at changes in the diversification discount
around cross-border acquisitions. They conclude that diversifying cross-border acquisitions destroy value.
Moeller and Schlingemann (2005) investigate acquisitions of foreign firms by U.S. firms from 1985 to
1995. They find that acquirer returns for cross-border acquisitions are lower by about 100 basis points
than for domestic acquisitions. They attribute this result to transactions that increase the acquirer’s global
diversification and industry diversification. Harris and Ravenscraft (1991) fail to find evidence that target
premiums can be explained by industry considerations, but they show that premiums are related to
exchange rate movements, so that the higher premiums they document for acquisitions by foreign firms
seem to be partly explained by weakness of the dollar.
Bris and Cabolis (2008) focus on the premium in cross-border acquisitions. Their sample includes
partial acquisitions. They consider only acquisitions of public companies and do not analyze the returns to
acquirers. They show that 100 percent control acquisitions of target firms in weak shareholder protection
countries made by acquiring firms in strong shareholder protection countries result in a higher premium
than comparable domestic acquisitions in the weak shareholder protection countries. Starks and Wei
(2004) conclude that takeover premia received by U.S. firms acquired by foreign firms from 1980 to 1998
are decreasing in the quality of corporate governance in the acquiring country and that acquiring-firm
returns are increasing in the quality of corporate governance in their country when the acquisition is paid
for with stock but not otherwise. Kuipers, Miller, and Patel (2003) examine acquisitions of U.S.
companies by foreign companies. They find that the acquirer’s return increases in the degree of
shareholder protection in the acquirer’s country, but falls in the product of the degree of shareholder
protection and the respect of the rule of law, so that shareholder protection does not seem to be related to
acquirer returns in countries where the respect of the rule of law is high. Martynova and Renneboog
(2008) find that the three-day announcement return is lower for cross-border acquisitions than for
domestic acquisitions for acquisitions from European countries. Using indices of the quality of corporate
governance at the country level, they show that acquisition returns for bidders and targets in cross-border
7

acquisitions are higher when the bidder comes from a country with better corporate governance than the
target. Burns, Francis, and Iftekhar (2007) examine the role of ADR programs in cross-border
acquisitions. They find that foreign firms with ADR programs pay less for U.S. targets, but they also
show that the existence of an ADR program does not offset poor investor protection at home for a foreign
firm.
Several recent papers investigate other determinants of acquisition returns besides investor protection
and corporate governance. Chari, Ouimet, and Tesar (2009) find, using a sample of acquisitions from
1986 to 2006, that developed-market acquirers earn 1.16% on average when an emerging-market firm is
acquired, but do not earn a significant positive abnormal return when acquiring targets in developed
countries. Their total sample of cross-border acquisitions is slightly more than a third of ours despite
including acquisitions of minority stakes. They find that acquirer returns increase as respect for the rule of
law in the acquirer’s country increases relative to the target’s country, but only for control acquisitions.
Ferreira, Massa, and Matos (2010) also obtain estimates of abnormal returns for acquirers. They show a
negative average acquirer return of -0.78% for a sample of 176 acquisitions. They focus on the combined
return to the acquirer and the target. They conclude that this combined return increases in the foreign
institutional ownership of the bidder and the foreign institutional ownership of the target. They use
acquirer insider ownership as a control variable, but do not report the coefficient. Ahearn, Daminelli, and
Fracassi (2010) investigate the value created by cross-border acquisitions. However, they only pursue that
investigation focusing on the combined return to the acquirer and the target and do not evaluate whether
acquirers benefit from cross-border acquisitions. Because of their investigation of combined returns, they
have a sample of 938 cross-border mergers across 38 countries. The size of this sample is comparable to
the size of our sample of cross-border acquisitions with public targets. They conclude that the combined
returns in acquisitions are lower when the countries of the acquirer and the target are more culturally
distant.
In summary, the existing literature has mixed results on whether acquirers gain from cross-border
acquisitions, as the estimated stock-price reaction to cross-border acquisitions is negative in some studies
8

and positive in others. The literature also reaches mixed results on how country and firm characteristics
are related to the stock-price reaction. For instance, some papers find evidence of an impact of countrylevel investor protection for some types of transactions but not for others. Our paper adds to that
literature, among other reasons, by demonstrating that the return from cross-border acquisitions is
affected in an economically important way by country governance, globalization, and corporate
governance.

3. Data
We discuss first how we construct the sample of acquisitions and then how we estimate abnormal
returns. In the final part of the section, we describe the firm and country variables we use.

3.1. The sample of acquisitions.
To obtain our sample of acquisitions, we use the Securities Data Company’s (SDC) Global Mergers
and Acquisition database for the merger and acquisition sample. We begin with collecting data on all
acquirers and targets in completed deals for control from 1990-2007. We consider only deals for control
where the acquirer owns less than 50% of the target before the acquisition and more than 50% afterwards.
We only include deals where the target is public, private, or a subsidiary, and therefore exclude spin-offs,
recaps, buybacks, self-tenders, or exchange offers. We delete deals where SDC classifies the target as
private, yet the stock price information is available. A difficulty with subsidiary targets is that the
subsidiary could be located in a foreign country but the parent could be located in the same country as the
acquirer. Since we are investigating how shareholder gains from acquisitions are related to characteristics
of the country of the target as well as characteristics of the acquirer, we include in our sample only
subsidiary targets where the ultimate parent’s country is the same as the subsidiary’s country. The initial
sample includes 45,875 acquisitions. We then limit the sample to public acquirers, which reduces the
sample to 24,463 acquisitions. As we are only interested in deals that are important investments from the
acquirer’s perspective, we eliminate all deals where the value of the transaction reported by SDC is less
9

than 1% of the acquiring firm’s market value of equity two days before the announcement. The deal
value is only available for 12,393 acquisitions and of these acquisitions only 9,036 have a deal value in
excess of 1% of the acquiring firm’s market value of equity. Finally, we need stock returns to estimate
abnormal returns and eliminate an acquirer (target) from the sample if the acquirer (target) is involved in
multiple acquisitions within a five-day window surrounding the announcement of the deal, which leaves
us with 8,090 acquisitions. Using the same sample selection criteria for domestic acquisitions yields a
sample of 29,324 acquisitions.
Our final sample contains 37,414 deals. Panel A of Table 1 shows how the sample is distributed over
the sample period. The distribution through time of the domestic deals and cross-border deals differs
somewhat. Both domestic and cross-border deals are represented disproportionately during the 1998-2000
merger wave. However, relatively more of the cross-border deals occur after the merger wave and
relatively fewer occur before the merger wave compared to domestic deals. In particular, 47.34% of the
cross-border deals occur after 2000, compared to only 41.47% for domestic deals. The correlation
between the number of deals per year during the sample period for cross-border and domestic deals is
86%.
Panel B of Table 1 shows some interesting differences between the industry representation of crossborder and domestic deals using the ten SIC-based main industry classifications (e.g., Kahle and
Walkling, 1996). For example, while manufacturing represents the industry with the most domestic and
cross-border deals, the representation of more than 46.2% for cross-border deals is substantially larger
than the 27.8% for domestic deals. In contrast, cross-border deals (10.3%), compared to domestic deals
(23.0%), are much less likely to involve financials, which is likely due to regulatory issues. After
manufacturing, services represent the largest industry for both domestic and cross-border deals.
Finally, Panel C shows the distribution of the sample across acquirer nations. While the U.S. accounts
for more than half of the domestic transactions (55.7%), only 23.3% of the cross-border transactions have
a U.S. firm as the acquirer. In fact, the U.K. has a slightly higher representation (24.2%) in the crossborder sample than the U.S. In contrast to the U.S., the U.K. represents a larger fraction of the cross10

border transactions than of the domestic transactions (17.9 percent). In terms of cross-border transactions,
the top ten countries in terms of sample representation are respectively U.K., U.S., Canada, Australia,
France, Sweden, Ireland, Germany, the Netherlands, and Singapore. These ten countries, out of a total of
56 countries in the sample with at least one firm making a cross-border acquisition, represent nearly 80%
of the cross-border deals in our sample.

3.2. Abnormal returns
Stock returns are obtained from Datastream. All our analysis uses dollar returns. We use SEDOL
from SDC to merge with Datastream to obtain event returns for the acquirer. SDC reports a Primary
SEDOL and an Ultimate Parent SEDOL as firm identifiers.

If the primary SEDOL matches to

Datastream we use the Primary SEDOL, otherwise we use the Ultimate Parent SEDOL.
Estimating acquirer stock-price reactions across 61 countries presents several challenges. A possible
approach is to follow the traditional approach carried on for U.S. acquisitions and estimate the market
model at the country level to estimate abnormal returns over a three-day window. Some of the studies
discussed in Section 2 do exactly that (e.g., Ahearn, Daminelli, and Fracassi, 2010; Chari, Ouimet, and
Tesar, 2010). There are two potential problems with such an approach. First, the number of firms differs
sharply across countries, so that in some countries the acquirer might be an extremely large fraction of the
market portfolio. For instance, Statoil ASA of Norway acquires North American Oils Sands Corp. Statoil
ASA’s market capitalization represents 27.80% of the market portfolio of Norway. In such a case, the
acquirer abnormal return would be pulled to zero because of the weight of the firm in the country market
portfolio. To account for this issue and to make abnormal returns comparable across countries, we use a
market model where the proxy for the market return is a proxy for the world market portfolio. Second, an
acquisition announcement may take place first in the country of the target when the market is closed in
the country of the acquirer or may take place in the country of the acquirer when the country of the target
is closed for business. Further, stock market liquidity differs across countries and so do regulations for
disclosure and stock trading. Differences in microstructure and disclosure could lead to a lag in the extent
11

to which the market reacts to an acquisition in some countries. For instance, during our sample period,
some countries stop trading in a stock for the day after it has moved by some percentage (i.e., South
Korea). Consequently, the announcement effect may be spread over several days. To allow for enough
time to incorporate the announcement information, we use a five-day announcement window instead of a
more standard three-day window to estimate the cumulative abnormal return (CAR).
The parameters for the estimation of the market model are estimated over the period starting 205 days
to 6 days prior to the announcement. We use the world index from Datastream as the regressor in the
market model. All event returns are winsorized at the 0.5% level and the 99.5% level.3 We examine the
robustness of our average CAR estimates to alternative specifications of the market model. In particular,
we use the country index for event returns and also implement a method where we use the country index
only if the country index is available and the market cap of the firm is less than 5% of the total market cap
of the country index and the world index otherwise. Our estimates of average CARs are not affected by
these choices.

3.3. Country and firm-level data
The first group of country-level governance variables includes the anti-self-dealing index (ANTI_SD)
from Djankov et al. (2008), the anti-directors index (ANTI_DIR) from La Porta et al. (1998) as revised in
Djankov

et

al.

(2008),

and

private

and

public enforcement

indices

of

securities

laws

(SECLAW_PRIVATE; SECLAW_PUBLIC) from La Porta et al. (2006). The literature, including Rossi
and Volpin (2004), often uses the product of the anti-director rights index and the rule of law index
(RULE_LAW), which measures the extent to which laws are enforced, from La Porta et al. (1998). This
product is interpreted in the literature as a measure of shareholder protection (SHARE_PROTECT), and
we do the same. We use an index from La Porta et al. (1998) measuring the quality of fiscal-year 1990
annual reports on their disclosure of accounting information (ACCOUNT) and an index of the quality of
disclosure (JM_DISC) developed by Jin and Myers (2006). We also use the measure of creditor rights
3

We correct for Datastream return errors based on the recommendations in Ince and Porter (2006).

12

(CREDITOR_RIGHTS) from Djankov et al. (2007). While the existing literature on cross-border
acquisitions has focused on shareholder rights indices, the FDI literature has shown that FDI flows are
higher towards countries with poorer creditor rights (see Razin and Sadka, 2007). The argument in that
literature is that foreign investors have more of an advantage over local firms in countries with poor
creditor rights because they have better access to funding. We would therefore expect acquirer returns to
be positively related to the creditor rights of the country of the acquired firm and negatively related to the
creditor rights of the target’s country. We expect that higher values for these indices in the acquirer’s
country are associated with higher stock-price reactions as better investor protection makes it harder for
insiders to expropriate investors through the use of acquisitions or from the gains created by acquisitions.
We would expect the opposite result for the target country’s index if a firm from a country that protects
investor rights can better export the advantages resulting from better investor protection, for instance by
having a lower cost of capital.
For the second group of country-level governance proxies, we use the country-level indicators of
KKM. These indicators are obtained from combining several hundred individual variables measuring
political stability, government effectiveness, regulatory quality, enforcement of the rule of law,
corruption, and the extent to which a country’s citizens are able to participate in selecting their
government. They vary annually since 1997. We use the index for the year of the acquisition
announcement or 1997 if the acquisition takes place earlier. We follow Kaufman et al. (2008) and
consider the mean of the six variables for each country (WDI_GOV_AVG). We also use the scores for
the control of corruption (CONTROL_CORR), government effectiveness (GOVT_EFFECT), political
stability (POL_STAB), regulatory quality (REG_QUALITY), rule of law (RULELAW_WGI), and voice
and accountability (VOICE_ACCT).4 Again, we would expect acquirer returns to increase with the
governance indices of the acquirer’s country and decrease with the governance indices of the target’s
country.

4

Note that RULE_LAW used to create the variable SHARE_PROTECT is different from the RULELAW_WGI
variable. See the Appendix for a detailed description of these variables.

13

We follow Bhattacharya and Daouk (2003) and define indicator variables equal to one if,
respectively, insider trading laws (IT_LAW) and enforcement actions of insider trading laws (IT_ENF)
are in place at least one year prior to the acquisition announcement year and zero otherwise. We would
expect less insider trading to be associated with higher stock-price reactions in absolute value since the
element of surprise in acquisition announcements would be higher.
Other country-level variables measure economic and financial development as well as the
performance of markets in a country. Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2006) show that firm-level governance
measures are more effective with greater financial and economic development. We include the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP_PCAP) per capita based on the World Development Indicators (WDI) dataset
from the World Bank. GDP per capita is measured in 2007 dollars. Also, we construct a ratio of the
aggregate market capitalization of the equity of publicly listed companies to the GDP of that country
(MKTCAP_GDP) and a turnover ratio equal to the ratio of the annual dollar volume to the total market
capitalization (CRTY_STK_TURNOVER). We would expect firms to be more valuable and to have more
resources when the domestic market has done well in dollars. Trailing one-year stock returns per country
(CTRY_RET_1YR) are collected from Datastream. Note that since we are considering dollar returns, a
country’s stock index could perform well because the country’s stock market increased in value in local
currency or because the local currency appreciated. Consequently, our stock returns measure subsumes
the foreign exchange effect that some papers discussed earlier have shown to affect target returns and the
frequency of cross-border acquisitions. One of the best-known theoretical papers on cross-border
acquisitions, Adler and Dumas (1975), focuses on the role of such acquisitions in arbitraging barriers to
portfolio investment. Consequently, we use a measure of such barriers. We would expect acquirers to gain
more from acquisitions in countries with barriers to international investment and we would expect
acquirers to have an advantage if they come from a country that has no such barriers. Bekaert (1995) and
Edison and Warnock (2003) consider a measure based on the ratio of the market capitalization of the
constituent firms comprising the International Finance Corporate (IFC) Investable Index to those that

14

comprise the IFC Global index for each country (LIB_INTENSITY_AVG). We update this index
annually, but it does not vary over the sample period for developed countries.
We use Compustat Global for firm-level characteristics (except for insider ownership for which we
use Worldscope) and SDC for deal-level characteristics. Firm-level characteristics as well as deal size are
measured in dollars. Requiring firm-level characteristics reduces our sample by 23%. We are especially
interested in the issue of whether firm-level governance characteristics reduce the importance of countrylevel governance. This is an issue that has been studied extensively in the literature. Doidge, Karolyi and
Stulz (2007) find an extremely large country-level fixed-effect in firm-level governance for lessdeveloped countries. We use two firm-level governance measures. First, we use insider ownership from
Worldscope measured as the percentage of closely held shares relative to the total shares outstanding
(INSIDEPCT). The theoretical literature shows that one would expect insider ownership to be higher in
countries with worse investor protection, so that insider ownership would mitigate the adverse impact of
poor investor protection. La Porta et al. (2002) provide evidence in support of this prediction. The
limitations of the Worldscope insider ownership data are well-known (see Dahlquist et al., 2003).
However, there is no substitute for this data that has close to the same coverage. We also include
indicator variables for whether non-U.S. acquirers have an ADR program (ADR). The literature shows
both theoretically and empirically that ADR programs are a way for foreign corporations to rent U.S. laws
and institutions (see Karolyi (2010) for a review of the literature).
The Appendix of the paper provides a detailed description of the country-level and firm-level
variables we use.

4. Gains to shareholders from acquisitions: Domestic versus cross-border acquisitions
In this section, we assess whether cross-border acquisitions create wealth for acquiring-firm
shareholders and whether the wealth they create differs from domestic acquisitions. Such an inquiry is
important both generally and for the investigation of our paper. As discussed in Section 3, there is a large
literature that assesses the benefits from international diversification at the firm level. One way to assess
15

whether international diversification is valuable is to compare the gains to acquiring-firm shareholders
from domestic acquisitions to those from cross-border acquisitions. In the context of our study, it is
important to assess whether shareholders make gains from cross-border acquisitions to better evaluate our
later results. If stock-price reactions were insignificant across cross-border acquisitions, abnormal returns
might be too noisy to assess their relation to country characteristics with precision.
Table 2 shows the estimates for stock-price reactions to domestic and cross-border reactions. Average
abnormal returns are statistically significant at the one-percent level for all types of acquisitions, except
for the cross-border acquisitions of public targets paid for with stock, which is significant at the fivepercent level. In our analysis we focus on the results for the full sample and for the following subsamples:
Public targets paid for with cash, public targets paid for with stock, subsidiary targets paid for with cash,
private targets paid for with cash, and private targets paid for with stock. We do not provide a separate
analysis for acquisitions for which the means-of-payment is mixed or unknown, but these acquisitions are
included in the whole sample analysis.
For the whole sample, the average stock-price reactions for domestic and cross-border acquisitions
are astoundingly similar, 1.42% versus 1.50%. Obviously, the difference in the stock-price reaction
between these two types of acquisitions is not significant. We consider next the stock-price reaction to
different types of acquisitions. We find that acquisitions of public firms for cash represent 5.20% of the
domestic acquisitions and 9.30% of the cross-border acquisitions. Perhaps not surprisingly, acquisitions
of public firms for cash benefit the acquiring-firm shareholders. However, they benefit acquiring-firm
shareholders significantly more with cross-border acquisitions than with domestic acquisitions. The
difference in the stock-price reaction between domestic and cross-border acquisitions is 0.56% and is
significant at the ten-percent level. In contrast, acquisitions of public firms for stock are over three times
more likely for domestic acquisitions than cross-border acquisitions (7.47% versus 2.30%). This finding
is not surprising as it is also observed in several of the papers discussed in Section 2. Acquisitions of
public firms paid for with stock have negative stock-price reactions, whether they are domestic or crossborder. The average abnormal return for cross-border acquisitions is -2.02% in contrast to the average
16

abnormal return for domestic acquisitions of -1.18%. The difference between the two average abnormal
returns is not significant.
All types of acquisitions involving subsidiaries or private firms have significant positive abnormal
returns. Such a finding is not surprising in light of the existing literature for acquisitions in the U.S. (see
e.g., Fuller et al., 2002; Moeller et al., 2004, 2005). The frequency of subsidiary acquisitions is similar for
cross-border acquisitions (19.90%) and domestic acquisitions (21.20%). The average abnormal returns for
these two types of acquisitions are almost the same at respectively 1.71% and 1.66%. The frequency of
cross-border acquisitions of private firms for cash is about one third higher than the frequency of
domestic acquisitions of private firms for cash (32.89% compared to 24.91%). Again, there is no
meaningful difference in abnormal returns. Finally, as for acquisitions of public firms with stock,
acquisitions of private firms with stock in cross-border acquisitions are infrequent. Only 4.68% of the
cross-border acquisitions are acquisitions of private firms paid for with stock, which is roughly half the
frequency of domestic acquisitions of private firms paid for with stock. The average abnormal return of
such domestic acquisitions, 2.80%, is insignificantly higher than the average abnormal return for
comparable cross-border acquisitions, 2.59%. With the large number of observations, all differences in
relative frequencies between domestic and cross-border deals for the various sub-samples are significant
at the one-percent level.

5. Gains to acquiring-firm shareholders and country characteristics
In this section, we investigate the relation between acquirer shareholder returns and the acquirer’s
country governance and investor protection characteristics as well as its economic and financial
development. As Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2007) show, there are important reasons why firm-level
governance is more effective when economic development and financial development are higher.
However, in addition and perhaps more importantly, greater economic development and financial
development could offer advantages to firms in making cross-border investments as they can draw on

17

better resources if globalization is limited because of cross-country differences as discussed in Stulz
(2005). For instance, it might be easier for firms from more financially developed countries to raise funds.
Two important issues need to be addressed before we can proceed to our regression analysis. First, it
is known that firm and deal characteristics are related to stock-price reactions to acquisitions. For
instance, we know that acquirer returns fall with acquirer size (see Moeller et al., 2004) and increase with
acquirer leverage (see, e.g., Maloney, McCormick, and Mitchell, 1993). An important issue is therefore
whether we should control for such characteristics. Second, the literature shows that stock-price reactions
differ across types of acquisitions. This raises the question of whether we should consider the stock-price
reactions to all acquisitions in a country or only consider stock-price reactions for each type of
acquisitions. We explain how we resolve these issues next before turning to regressions.
The problem with controlling for firm and deal characteristics in regressions that attempt to explain
the stock-price reaction to acquisitions across countries is that both firm and deal characteristics are
endogenous to country characteristics. In a U.S. study, all firms have an equal opportunity to choose to
proceed with a hostile offer or to proceed with a tender offer. However, in a cross-country study, firms in
some countries will be limited in their ability to choose some deal characteristics. Similarly, firms are
larger in some countries than others and differences in firm size across countries are often attributed to
differences in institutions (see Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales, 2002). Yet, we know within the U.S. that
large firms generally make acquisitions that have lower stock-price reactions. Hence, controlling for size,
we might reach a different conclusion about the impact of institutions on the gains from acquisitions, but
we would then ignore that part of the effect of institutions might work through size. We therefore choose
to focus on regressions that have purely exogenous variables. In these regressions, the variables are
country characteristics and indicator variables for a firm’s industry and its calendar year. We then discuss
which results are affected when we control for firm and deal characteristics. Specifically, at the deal level
we control for relative size, whether the deal is classified as hostile, whether the deal is classified as a
tender offer, and the worldwide liquidity of the market of the assets of the target (see e.g., Schlingemann
et al., 2002). Our firm-level control variables include the natural logarithm of the market value of the
18

acquirers’ equity two days prior to the announcement, Tobin’s Q (defined as the market value of assets
divided by the book value of assets, where the market value of assets is the book value of assets minus the
book value of equity plus the market value of equity), the operating cash flow divided by the book value
of assets, and the market value measure of leverage (debt divided by the market value of assets).
As already discussed, acquisition returns are positive and significant for acquisitions of private
companies and negative and significant for acquisitions of public companies paid for with equity.
Consequently, if a country’s firms make relatively more cross-border acquisitions of public firms paid for
with equity, the stock-price reaction to acquisitions, everything else equal, will be worse in that country.
This outcome raises a concern. There is a substantial literature that shows that firms that pay for
acquisitions with equity signal to the market that their equity is overvalued (see e.g., Moeller et al., 2007).
As a result, conditional on the market assessing the equity’s value correctly, an acquisition might increase
shareholder wealth even though the stock-price reaction is negative. This issue would suggest looking at
acquisition types separately. However, this approach also suffers from a problem, which is that
acquisition types are most likely endogenous to country characteristics since there is evidence (discussed
in Section 2) that investors are reluctant to accept shares in payment for an acquisition when the shares
trade in a country with poor governance.
A constant issue with research using country characteristics is that many of these country
characteristics tend to be highly correlated, so that multicollinearity may make it difficult to assess the
effect of independent variables in multiple regressions. We therefore start in Section 5.1. with estimating
regressions with one country characteristic at a time, while controlling for calendar year and the industry
of the acquirer. Next, in Section 5.2, we turn to regression analysis where we use multiple country
characteristics for the bidder and the target in the same specification to assess whether a country
characteristic is significant in Section 5.1. because it proxies for other country characteristics. In all
regressions, we use the country characteristic for the acquiring firm as well as the same characteristic for
the target. This approach allows us to assess how target country characteristics affect acquirer returns, but
it also makes sure that if there is strong correlation among target and acquirer country characteristics, our
19

assessment of the relation between acquirer returns and acquirer country characteristics is not biased.
Finally, we cluster the residuals by country.

5.1. Regressions using one country characteristic at a time
The regression estimates are presented in Table 3. For each country characteristic, we show the
coefficient on the country characteristic for the acquirer’s country and for the target’s country, as well as
the number of observations and the adjusted R-squared of the regression. The first three country
characteristics we consider are, respectively, the anti-self-dealing index (ANTI_SD), the anti-director
index (ANTI_DIR), and the product of the anti-director index and the rule of law index
(SHARE_PROTECT). We find no evidence that these indices are associated with acquirer returns for the
whole sample. However, acquirer returns for cash acquisitions of public firms increase as the anti-selfdealing index of the acquirer country increases and as the anti-self-dealing index of the target country
decreases. This pattern that a country characteristic has opposite effects depending on whether it is a
characteristic of the acquirer’s country or of the target’s country is observed a number of times in the
table. The coefficients are economically significant as a one standard deviation increase in the anti-selfdealing index is associated with an increase in the abnormal return of almost half a percentage point. The
negative relation between abnormal returns and the anti-self-dealing index for acquisitions of public firms
paid for with equity raises the possibility that a higher governance country has a higher quality
information environment, so announcements of equity offers have greater signaling value. The anti-selfdealing index of the acquirer’s country is not significant for other acquisition types. Acquirers gain more
from acquisitions in countries where the anti-director index is lower for acquisitions of public firms paid
for with equity and is insignificant for the whole sample and all other types of acquisitions. Acquirer
returns fall with the anti-director index of the target’s country for the whole sample. Finally, we find that
the product (SHARE_PROTECT) of the anti-director index and the rule of law index is never significant.
There is no evidence that the creditor rights index (CREDITOR_RIGHTS) is correlated with acquirer
returns. Interestingly, strong creditor rights in the target country are associated with lower gains for the
20

acquiring firm, a finding that is consistent with the predictions of Razin and Sadka (2007). They argue
that acquirers have an advantage if they have cheaper access to funds than firms in the target country
because of better creditor rights in their home country. The securities law indices (SECLAW_PRIVATE;
SECLAW_PUBLIC) are not related to the acquirer gains at all. The final index we consider in this group
of indices typically associated with investor protection is an index of accounting transparency
(ACCOUNT). We find that the index of the acquirer country is positively associated with acquirer gains
and the index of the target is negatively associated with these gains for acquisitions of public firms for
cash. We also use the quality of disclosure index (JM_DISC) of Jin and Myers (2006). The coefficient on
that index is never significant for acquirer returns (not reproduced in the table).
After considering indices that are related to investor protection, we turn to the World Bank
governance indicators. The first index we consider is related to the control of corruption
(CONTROL_CORR). We find that acquirers from countries that control corruption better gain more
from acquisitions for the whole sample and for cash acquisitions of public firms; further, acquirers gain
more for the whole sample and for cash acquisitions of public firms when the target country controls
corruption less. We obtain similar results using World Bank governance indicators for government
effectiveness (GOVT_EFFECT), political stability (POL_STAB), regulatory quality (REG_QUALITY),
rule of law (RULELAW_WGI), and voice (VOICE_ACCT). Not surprisingly, therefore, we also find
these results when using the average governance index (WDI_GOV_AVG). The standard deviation of the
average governance index across the whole sample is 0.369. As a result, an increase of one standard
deviation in the average governance index increases the stock-price reaction to cash acquisitions of public
firms by 66 basis points and increases the stock-price reaction for the whole sample by 23 basis points.
Another way to evaluate the economic significance of a change in the average governance index for the
acquirer’s country is that an increase of one standard deviation increases the acquirer’s gain by 14.97%
for the whole sample and by 60.65% for acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash.
We then consider two variables that measure, respectively, whether a country has a law limiting
insider trading (IT_LAW) and whether that law is enforced (IT_ENF). Acquirer country enforcement has
21

a positive significant coefficient for the whole sample while target country enforcement has a negative
significant coefficient for the whole sample. The only significant coefficient for the existence of a law is a
negative significant coefficient for the indicator for the acquirer’s country for stock acquisitions of public
firms. A possible explanation for this result is that the signaling effect of an offer to acquire a public firm
for stock might be stronger in countries with less leakage due to insider trading.
The next four variables are related to the economic and financial situation of the country of the
acquirer and target. We find no evidence that GDP per capita (GDP_PCAP) is related to acquirer gains in
acquisitions, which might appear surprising in light of the findings of Chari et al. (2010). However,
emerging countries have a number of common characteristics, so that acquirer returns from acquisitions
in such countries might be higher because they have lower country governance rather than because they
have lower GDP per capita. Greater stock market capitalization of the acquiring country
(MKTCAP_GDP) is unrelated to acquisition gains except for a negative coefficient for acquisitions of
private firms paid for with equity. The stock market capitalization of the target country has a negative
coefficient

for

the

whole

sample.

Stock

market

turnover

of

the

acquirer’s

country

(CTRY_STK_TURNOVER) has a positive coefficient for acquisitions of public firms paid for with
equity and a negative coefficient for acquisitions of subsidiaries. The target’s country stock market
turnover is never significant. We then use a country’s stock return in the year preceding the acquisition
(CTRY_RET_1YR). This variable is never significant for the country of the acquirer; the stock return of
the country of the target has a positive significant coefficient for stock acquisitions of public firms. Lastly,
we consider the impact of the liberalization intensity index (LIB_INT_AVG). In interpreting the results
for this variable, it is important to be aware that relatively few countries in the sample have acquisitions
made when their liberalization intensity index is below one (only four acquisitions of public firms paid for
with equity and only 40 acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash). The index has a positive
significant coefficient for acquisitions of public firms, but a negative significant coefficient for
acquisitions of subsidiaries. The coefficient is not significant for other types of acquisitions. This
evidence would suggest that acquirers of countries with no barriers to international portfolio investment
22

have higher returns when they acquire public firms. The index for the target country is not significant
except for acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity. The Adler and Dumas (1975) theory would
imply that acquirers would gain more from acquisitions in countries that have barriers to international
investment. None of our results are consistent with that prediction.
Finally, we consider regressions with firm governance characteristics. We find that acquirer abnormal
returns increase significantly with insider ownership (INSIDE_PCT) for the whole sample and all
acquisition types but acquisitions of private firms. The standard deviation of insider ownership across our
sample is 23.16%. As a result, a one standard deviation increase in insider ownership increases the stockprice reaction by 27 basis points for the whole sample and by 59 basis points for the sample of
acquisitions of public firms for cash. Roughly, therefore, the impact on the stock-price reaction of a one
standard deviation increase in insider ownership is approximately the same as the impact of a one
standard deviation increase in the average country governance index. Restricting the sample to foreign
firms only, we use an indicator variable for whether a firm has an ADR program (ADR). For the whole
sample, the existence of an ADR program is negatively associated with the acquirer return and positively
associated with the existence of an ADR program for the target firm. Acquirers of public firms with ADR
programs have marginally lower returns (p-value of 0.10) when they make acquisitions financed with
equity using the sample of non-U.S. acquirers and targets. This result may simply reflect the better
information environment of ADR firms (e.g., Bailey, Karolyi, and Salva, 2006), so that issuance of equity
has more signaling value.

5.2. Regressions using multiple country characteristics
We now turn to multiple regressions. The concern with the regressions of Table 3 is that country
governance could derive its significance from its correlation with other variables. Further, we know from
our earlier discussion that there are good reasons for financial development and economic development,
which are correlated with country governance, to affect abnormal returns. For instance, even though GDP
per capita is not significant in Table 3, it could be that country governance is significant only because it
23

partly proxies for GDP per capita. We therefore estimate regressions with country governance where we
control for economic and financial development. Our proxy for economic development is GDP per capita;
the proxy for economic development is the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP. We see in Panel A
of Table 4 that, when controlling for economic and financial development, country governance remains
significant for the whole sample and for cash acquisitions of public firms, but also becomes significant for
private firm acquisitions paid for with cash.
The regression estimates of model (1) are for the whole sample and show that country governance
remains significant when we control for financial and economic development. It is interesting to note that
while GDP per capita is not significant in Table 3, GDP per capita of the target country is positive and
significant for the whole sample in Table 4. This is further evidence that acquisitions in emerging markets
may have higher acquirer returns not because these countries are poorer, but because they have poorer
governance.
We estimate the same regression for each type of acquisition in models (2) to (6) of Panel A of Table
4. The coefficient on country governance of the acquiring firm is significantly positive for acquisitions of
public and private firms paid for with cash. The country governance of the target firm is significantly
negative for acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash and of private firms paid for with equity. GDP
per capita of the target has a positive significant coefficient for acquisitions of subsidiaries and
acquisitions of private firms. There is no evidence that acquirers gain more from acquisitions in countries
with lower GDP per capita.
Though we do not reproduce the results in a table, we also investigate regressions where we use
accounting transparency (ACCOUNT), the securities law index (SEC_LAW), and the anti-self-dealing
index (ANTI_SD). In these regressions, accounting transparency of the acquirer has a positive significant
coefficient and accounting transparency of the target country has a negative significant coefficient for the
whole sample. Further, the anti-self-dealing index of the acquirer’s country has a significant negative
coefficient and the coefficient on securities laws of the target is significantly positive. The negative
coefficient on the anti-self-dealing index is solely due to acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity.
24

In another set of regressions, we use as country characteristics the country stock market return, the index
of political stability, and the level of GDP as a proxy for country size. We find that the country return of
the target is positively significant and the political stability of the target is negatively significant. The
coefficient on the country return of the target is driven by acquisitions of public firms paid for with stock.
We re-estimate the regressions of Table 4 with the product of the anti-director index and the rule of
law index (SHARE_PROTECT) for both the target and acquirer added as explanatory variables, but do
not report these regressions in a table. For the whole sample, the coefficient on SHARE_PROTECT is
insignificant for the acquirer’s country and for the target’s country. The acquirer’s country coefficient is
negative and significant in acquisitions of public firms for equity. The target’s country coefficient is
positive and significant in acquisitions of private firms for cash.
Table 3 shows that bidder insider ownership is positively related to bidder returns. We re-estimate the
regressions of Panel A of Table 4 with insider ownership of the acquirer (INSIDE_PCT) as an
explanatory variable. Doing so reduces the size of the whole sample by a quarter. Yet, as shown in Panel
B of Table 4, the coefficients on the country governance indices are significant and the ownership
variable has a coefficient of 0.0149 that is significant at the one-percent level for the whole sample. The
coefficient on insider ownership is positive and significant for all types of acquisitions except acquisitions
of private firms. The coefficient on acquirer-country governance is positive and significant in all cases
except for acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity and of subsidiaries.
Since La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2002), the literature has examined whether
insider ownership mitigates the adverse impact of poor laws or poor country governance. We find some
evidence (but do not tabulate it) that greater insider ownership reduces the adverse impact of worse
country governance. We estimate regressions with acquirer country governance, acquirer insider
ownership, and an interaction between insider ownership and country governance. If insider ownership
mitigates the adverse impact of poor country governance, we expect that interaction to have a negative
coefficient. For acquisitions of private firms, we find that all three coefficients – i.e., the signs on
ownership, governance, and the interaction – have the predicted sign. For the whole sample and the
25

acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash, all three variables have the predicted sign, but the
interaction is never significant. We repeat the exercise with the anti-director index. The interaction is
negative and significant only for acquisitions of public firms with equity. In all other cases, the interaction
is insignificant.
We next estimate all the regressions discussed so far controlling for the firm and deal characteristics
described earlier. We do not report these regressions in a table. We lose about one quarter of observations
in the regressions that use these characteristics. For the whole sample, we find that the acquisition return
increases in the relative size of the acquisition, falls in the size of the acquirer, and falls if the acquisition
is a tender offer. The results are consistent with results for U.S. domestic acquisitions and therefore firm
and deal characteristics do not appear to play a significantly different role for cross-border acquisitions.
For the various types of acquisitions, the signs of these coefficients are generally consistent, but not
always significant. No other deal or firm characteristic is consistently significant. The estimates for the
country characteristics are generally consistent with the estimates discussed earlier, but they sometimes
lose significance as firm characteristics are correlated with country characteristics for reasons discussed
earlier.

6. How important are countries in acquirer returns?
We turn to assessing the economic importance of global versus country effects. We have seen that the
country governance of the acquiring (target) firm is positively (negatively) related to the acquirer return
and these results are economically significant. In these regressions, we use as regressors year and industry
indicator variables as well as country characteristics. We therefore investigate the relative explanatory
power of year and industry indicator variables compared to country characteristics. Because the
coefficients on year and industry indicator variables are determined globally, we consider them to
represent global factors in the determination of acquirer returns.
In Table 5, we present regressions using year, industry, and country indicator variables for the whole
sample and for each acquisition type. By definition, the coefficient of the acquirer country indicator
26

variable measures the impact of the acquirer’s country on the acquisition return. We are interested in the
explanatory power of the indicator variables. This is best measured by the R-squared of regressions that
have different subsets of these explanatory variables. We estimate five regressions for each sample:
calendar year dummies only, country dummies only, industry dummies only, target country dummies
only, and all indicator variables in one regression. We only include countries and industries with five
acquisitions at least. We only show the R-squared of each regression, the p-value for an F-test of the joint
significance of the indicator variables, and the number of observations. The first set of regressions in
Table 5 is for the sample as a whole. It is immediately apparent that together the year of an acquisition
and the industry of the acquirer explain more than the country of the acquirer. However, the country of
the target explains about the same as all these variables together. It follows that the global effects
dominate the acquirer country effects.
We estimate the same regressions for each type of acquisition as well. In all cases except for
acquisitions of private firms paid for with cash, year and industry indicator variables explain more than
acquirer country indicator variables. Further, it is always the case that the country of the target is more
informative than the country of the acquirer. Strikingly, for acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash
none of the sets of indicator variables are significant. For acquisitions of public firms paid for with stock,
the industry indicator variables are jointly significant. The year, industry, and target country indicator
variables are each jointly significant for acquisitions of subsidiaries, but the acquirer country indicator
variables are not jointly significant. Similar results hold for acquisitions of private firms for cash. Finally,
with acquisitions of private firms for equity, the indicator variables for the acquirer’s country are jointly
significant, but the year and industry indicator variables are not significant.
Another way to identify the existence of a global effect on acquirer returns is as follows. For each
sample, we measure the average acquirer return for acquisitions made in other countries in the same year.
We then estimate a regression of acquirer returns on the acquirer returns for the same type of acquisitions
in other countries during the same year, which we refer to as GLOBAL_EFFECT. The results for this
analysis are reported in Table 6. The coefficient on GLOBAL_EFFECT is positive and significant for the
27

whole sample and for the sub-samples of acquisitions of private firms and subsidiaries. For the whole
sample, a one standard deviation increase in the average acquirer CAR outside a country leads to an
increase in the average CAR in the country of 24 basis points. The coefficient is insignificant for
acquisitions of public firms. These results show that the acquirer gains in a given year are higher when the
gains made on similar acquisitions by acquirers in other countries are higher, so that there is a global
factor in the gains from acquisitions. The regression models in Table 6 include industry indicator
variables (not reported), but the results are robust to excluding these.

7. How important are countries in cross-border acquisition intensity?
We have shown that country governance has an economically significant effect on the returns from
cross-border acquisitions. We have also shown that global effects play an important role in acquirer
returns. In this section, we examine whether country governance affects the frequency of acquisitions in
our sample. The sample we have used so far requires the deal value to be known. As we saw, this sample
reduces the sample size considerably. To evaluate the determinants of the frequency of acquisitions, this
sample suffers from a selection bias. Therefore, we consider in this section a sample of acquisitions that
does not require deal value to be reported in SDC as well as the restricted sample we have considered so
far. The less restrictive sample includes acquisitions by private firms as well, but it only includes control
acquisitions, so our results are not directly comparable with those of studies that include partial
acquisitions. This sample is much larger as it includes 45,875 acquisitions. Slightly more than 21,412 of
these acquisitions are by private firms.
We estimate regressions of the frequency of acquisitions relative to the number of listed firms in a
country (effectively, the number of firms with returns on Datastream). Since these regressions are
estimated using country-level data, we cannot use the industry indicator variable and therefore we only
use calendar year indicator variables as our global variables. We use as our country variables the country
governance index, GDP per capita, the index for liberalization intensity, the index for securities laws, the

28

anti-self-dealing index, the country’s market capitalization to GDP ratio, and the country’s stock return in
the previous year. We report the results in Table 7.
The first regression uses the sample without restrictions. We find a very strong effect of the country
governance index (WDI_GOV_AVG) on the frequency of cross-border acquisitions. In contrast, none of
the other variables are significant. Though we do not reproduce the results in the table, we also estimate
model (1) without GDP per capita and without the country governance index. The country governance
index has roughly the same coefficient when GDP per capita is not included in the regression. When the
country governance index is not included, GDP per capita is significant at the 5% level with a coefficient
of 0.0035. These results suggest that when the country governance index is not included in the regression,
GDP per capita proxies for that index. Strikingly, when we omit the country governance index the
adjusted R-squared drops from 0.43 to 0.30. In contrast, it essentially does not change when we omit GDP
per capita. We also estimate the model without year indicator variables. When we do so, the coefficient
on the country governance index is not affected. None of the other variables are significant. Model (2) is
for the acquisitions that meet the sample requirements of the earlier section. We see again that the country
governance index is the only significant variable. However, the coefficient on that index is much lower.
Again, GDP per capita has no explanatory power. We then estimate the regressions for the different
acquisition types omitting the GDP per capita. The governance index is significant with a positive
coefficient in each of the regression specifications. The stock market capitalization variable is significant
and positive for acquisitions of public firms for cash. Finally, the country return is not significant for
acquisitions of private firms and subsidiaries when we omit the year indicator variables (not reported in
the table). The year indicator variables explain much less for acquisitions of subsidiaries and private firms
paid for with cash. The adjusted R-squared falls by more than half when these variables are omitted for
acquisitions of public and private firms paid for with stock. Furthermore, the adjusted R-squared falls by
almost 40% for acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash.

29

These regressions show that the country governance is an important determinant of controlacquisition frequency. It affects all types of acquisitions and no other widely used country characteristic is
significant in our sample.

8. Conclusion
In this paper, we examine how the gains to shareholders from investments are related to country and
firm-level governance using a sample of cross-border acquisitions from 61 countries from 1990 to 2007.
We find that the gains to acquirers increase with the acquirer’s country governance and fall with the
target’s country governance. Further, firms in countries with better country governance make more
acquisitions. In addition, the stock-price reaction to acquisition announcements increases with the
acquirer’s insider ownership but, to some extent, more so in countries with weaker governance. Whereas
our governance variables have an economically significant relation with acquirer returns showing that
firms benefit from better country governance, we find no evidence that other country characteristics have
a reliable systematic relation with acquirer returns across acquisition types.

However, both the

accounting transparency and the anti-self-dealing indices are positively related to the stock-price reaction
to cash acquisitions of public firms and the coefficient estimates are highly significant.
Though country governance is an important determinant of stock-price reactions to acquisition
announcements, we find that the importance of country characteristics is surprisingly limited. In
particular, the year of an acquisition and the industry of an acquirer typically explain more of the
abnormal return than the country of the acquirer. Since the coefficients on year and industry indicator
variables are estimated across the whole sample, they reflect global factors. We find further evidence that
global factors influence stock-price reactions in that acquirers in a country earn less through acquisitions
of private firms and subsidiaries when acquirers in other countries earn less as well. All this evidence
points to the fact that the market for cross-border acquisitions is a global market, but acquirers from
countries with better governance have an intrinsic advantage in that market.

30

References
Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas, 1975, Optimal international acquisitions, Journal of Finance 30, 119.
Ahern, Kenneth, Daniele Daminelli, and Cesare Fracassi, 2010, Lost in translation? The effect of cultural
values on mergers around the world, Working Paper, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
Bailey Warren., G. Andrew Karolyi, and Carolina Salva, 2006, The economic consequences of increased
disclosure: Evidence from international cross-listings, Journal of Financial Economics 81, 175-213.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell Harvey, 1995, Time-varying world market integration, Journal of Finance,
50, 403-44.
Bhattacharya, Utpal and Hazem Daouk, 2002, The world price of insider trading, Journal of Finance 57,
pp. 75–108.
Black, Bernard S., 2000, The first international merger wave (and the fifth and last U.S. wave), University
of Miami Law Review, 799-818.
Bris, Arturo and Christos Cabolis, 2008, The value of investor protection: Firm evidence from crossborder mergers, Review of Financial Studies 21, 605-648.
Burns, Natasha, Bill B. Francis, and Hasan Iftekhar, 2007, Cross-listing and legal bonding: Evidence
from mergers and acquisitions, Journal of Banking and Finance, 1003-1031.
Chari, Anusha., Paige P. Ouimet, and Linda L. Tesar, 2010, The value of control in emerging markets,
Review of Financial Studies 23, 1741-1770.
Coffee, John C., 1999, The future as history: The prospects for global convergence in corporate
governance and its implications, Northwestern University Law Review 93, 641-708.
Dahlquist, Magnus, Lee F. Pinkowitz René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2003, Corporate
Governance and the Home Bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-110.
Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer, 2007, Private credit in 129 countries, Journal of
Financial Economics. 84, 299–329.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2008, The law and
economics of self-dealing, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 430-465.
Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2004, Why do countries matter so much for
corporate governance?, Journal of Financial Economics 86, 2007, 1-39.
Dos Santos, Marcelo B., Vihang Errunza and Darius Miller, 2008, Does corporate international
diversification destroy value? Evidence from cross-border mergers and acquisitions, Journal of Banking
and Finance 32, 2716-2724.
Doukas, John and Nickolaos Travlos, 1988, The effect of corporate multi-nationalism on shareholders’
wealth: Evidence from international acquisitions, Journal of Finance 43, 1161-1175.
31

Edison, Hali J. and Frank Warnock, 2003, A simple measure of the intensity of capital controls. Journal
of Empirical Finance 10, 81-103.
Erel, Isil, Rose C. Liao, and Michael S. Weisbach. 2010, World markets for mergers and acquisitions,
working paper, Dice Center for Financial Economics, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
Eun, Cheol, Richard Kolodny, and Carl Scheraga, 1996, Cross-border acquisitions and shareholder
wealth: Tests of the synergy and internationalization hypotheses, Journal of Banking and Finance 20,
1559-1582.
Ferreira, Miguel A., Massimo Massa, and Pedro P. Matos, 2010, Shareholders at the gate? Institutional
investors and cross-border mergers and acquisitions, Review of Financial Studies 23, 2010, 601-644.
Fuller, Kathleen, Jeffrey Netter, and Mike Stegemoller, 2002, What do returns to acquiring firms tell us?
Evidence from firms that make many acquisitions, Journal of Finance 57, 1763-1794.
Harris, Robert S., and David Ravenscraft, 1991, The role of acquisitions in foreign direct investment:
Evidence from the U.S. stock market, Journal of Finance, 825-844.
Jensen, Michael C., and William Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs,
and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Jensen, Michael C. and Richard S. Ruback, 1983, The market for corporate control: The scientific
evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 11, 5-50.
Jin, Li, and Stewart C. Myers, 2006, R2 around the world: New theory and new tests, Journal of Financial
Economics 79, 257-292.
Kahle, Kathleen, and Ralph Walkling, 1996, The impact of industry classification on financial research,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 31, 309–335.
Karolyi, G. Andrew and Rose C. Liao, 2010, What is different about government-controlled acquirers in
cross-border acquisitions?, unpublished working paper, Cornell University, NY.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi, 2009. Governance matters VIII: Aggregate and
individual governance indicators 1996-2008, Policy Research Working Paper Series 4978, The World
Bank.
Kuipers, David K., Darius Miller, and Ajay Patel, 2009, The legal environment and corporate valuation:
Evidence from cross-border takeovers, International Review of Economics and Finance 18, 552-567.
Kumar, K., Raghuram Rajan, and Luigi Zingales, 2002, What determines firm size?, unpublished working
paper, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2006, What works in securities laws?,
Journal of Finance 61, 1-32.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, Legal
Determinants of External Finance, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

32

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998, Law And
Finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2002, Investor
protection and corporate valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.
Maloney, Michael T., Robert E. McCormick, and Mark L. Mitchell, 1993, Managerial decision making
and capital structure, Journal of Business 66, 189-217.
Martynova, Marina and Luc Renneboog, 2008, Spillover of corporate governance standards in crossborder mergers and acquisitions, Journal of Corporate Finance 14, 200–223.
Masulis, Ronald W., Cong Wang, and Fei Xie, 2007, Corporate governance and acquirer returns, Journal
of Finance 62, 1852-1889.
Moeller Sara B., and Frederik P. Schlingemann, 2005, Global diversification and bidder gains: A
comparison between cross-border and domestic acquisitions, Journal of Banking and Finance 29, 533564.
Moeller Sara B., and Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz, 2007, How do diversity of opinion
and information asymmetry affect acquire returns?, Review of Financial Studies 20, 2047-2078.
Moeller, Sara B., Frederik P. Schlingemann, René M. Stulz, 2004. Firm size and the gains from
acquisitions. Journal of Financial Economics 73, 201-228.
Olson, Mancur Jr., 1996, Big bills left on the sidewalk; Why some nations are rich and others poor,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 10, 3-24.
Pinkowitz, Lee, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2006, Does the contribution of corporate cash
holdings and dividends to firm value depend on governance? A cross-country analysis, Journal of Finance
61, 2725-2751.
Razin, Assaf, and Efraim Sadka, 2007, The role of information in driving FDI flows: Host-country
transparency and source country specialization, European Economic Review.
Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., Walkling, R.A., 2002, Divestitures and the liquidity of the market for
corporate assets. Journal of Financial Economics 64, 117-144.
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales, 2003, The great reversals: The politics of financial development
in the 20th century, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.
Rossi, Stefano and Paolo Volpin, 2004 Cross-country determinants of mergers and acquisitions, Journal
of Financial Economics 74, 277-304.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor protection and equity markets, Journal of
Financial Economics 66, 3-27.
Stulz, René M., 1999, Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 12, 8-25.
Stulz, René M., 2005, The limits of financial globalization, Journal of Finance 60, 1595-1638.
33

Appendix – Variable definitions and sources
Acquirer,
Target,
or Deal

Timevarying

Country
or Firm

Data
Year

Variable name

Definition and Source

ACCOUNT

Index created by the Center for International Financial Analysis and
Research to rate the quality of 1990 annual reports on their disclosure
of accounting information. Source: La Porta et al. (1998).

Both

No

Country

1990

ADR

Indicator variable equal to one if the firm has a “dscode” listed in
Datastream and has an ADR and equal to zero if firm has dscode, but
does not have an ADR. Value is set to missing if firm does not have a
“dscode” (i.e. private). Source: Datastream.

Both

Annual

Firm

19902007

ANTI_DIR

Revised version of the Anti-Directors Index from La Porta et al.
(1998) with values from 0-6. The index is formed by adding one
when (i) the country allows shareholders to mail their proxy vote to
the firm, (ii) shareholders are not required to deposit their shares prior
to the general shareholders’ meeting, (iii) cumulative voting or
proportional representation of minorities in the board of directors is
allowed, (iv) an oppressed minorities mechanism is in place, (v) the
minimum percentage of share capital that entitles a shareholder to call
for an extraordinary shareholders’ meeting is less than or equal to
10% (the sample median), or (vi) shareholders have preemptive rights
that can be waived only by a shareholders’ vote. Source: Djankov et
al. (2008).

Both

No

Country

2003

ANTI_SD

Anti-self dealing index. Source: La Porta et al. (2006).

Both

No

Country

2003

CREDITOR_RIGHTS

Creditor rights aggregate score based on 129 countries' private credit.
Source: Djankov et al. (2007).

Both

No

Country

2003

CTRY_RET_1YR

Trailing one-year country stock returns. Source: Datastream.

Both

Annual

Country

19902007

CTRY_STK_TURNOVER

Ratio of annual dollar volume to total market capitalization. Source:
World Bank.

Both

Annual

Country

19902007

34

Appendix – Continued
Acquirer,
Target,
or Deal

Timevarying

Country
or Firm

Data
Year

Variable name

Definition and Source

GDP_PCAP

Gross domestic product per capita measured in 2007 US dollars.
Source: World Development Indicators (World Bank).

Both

Annual

Country

19902007

GOVT_EFFECT

Government Effectiveness measures the quality of public services, the
quality of the civil service and the degree of its independence from
political pressures, the quality of policy formulation and
implementation, and the credibility of the government’s commitment
to such policies. Source: Kauffman et al. (2009) and World
Governance Indicators Data (World Bank).

Both

Annual

Country

19972007

IT_LAW

Indicator variable equal to one if the acquisition announcement year is
after the first year that insider trading laws were put into place in the
country. Source: Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002).

Both

Annual

Country

2002

JM_DISC

The disclosure index as defined in Jin and Meyers (2006). The index
is defined at the country level and updated for missing sample
countries based on the same methodology as in Jin and Myers (2006)
using the Global Competitiveness Reports for 1999 and 2000. Higher
values for the index measure more transparency. The index is based
on the average scoring on two survey questions regarding the level
and effectiveness of financial disclosure across the sample years 1999
and 2000. Source: Jin and Myers (2006).

Both

No

Country

19992000

LIB_INT_AVG

The intensity measure is based on the ratio of the market
capitalization of the constituent firms comprising the IFC Investable
index to those that comprise the IFC Global index for each country.
The IFC Global index, subject to some exclusion restrictions, is
designed to represent the overall market portfolio for each country,
whereas the IFC Investable index is designed to represent a portfolio
of domestic equities that are available to foreign investors. A ratio of
one means that all of the stocks are available to foreign investors (see
e.g., Bekaert (1995); Edison and Warnock (2003)).

Both

Average

Country

19902003

35

Appendix – Continued
Acquirer,
Target,
or Deal

Timevarying

Country
or Firm

Data
Year

Variable name

Definition and Source

MKTCAP_GDP

Ratio of market capitalization of listed domestic stocks in a country
and the gross domestic product of that country. Source: Datastream.

Both

Annual

Country

19902007

REG_QUALITY

Regulatory Quality measures the ability of the government to
formulate and implement sound policies and regulations that permit
and promote private sector development. Source: Kauffman et al.
(2009) and World Governance Indicators Data (World Bank).

Both

Annual

Country

19972007

RULE_LAW

Assessment of the law and order tradition in the country produced by
the risk-rating agency International Country Risk (ICR). The index is
based on the average of the months of April and October of the
monthly index and averaged for the years 1982 to 1995. The index
ranges between zero and ten. Source: La Porta et al. (1998).

Both

No

Country

19821995

RULELAW_WGI

Rule of Law measures the extent to which agents have confidence in
and abide by the rules of society, in particular the quality of contract
enforcement, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of
crime and violence. Source: Kauffman et al. (2009) and World
Governance Indicators Data (World Bank).

Both

Annual

Country

19972007

SHARE_PROTECT

Measure of the effective rights of minority shareholders. This variable
is the product of ANTI_DIR and RULE_LAW divided by ten so that
values range between zero and six.

Both

No

Country

n.a.

SECLAW_PRIVATE

The private enforcement index is the arithmetic mean of their
disclosure index and burden of proof index. Following LaPorta et al.
(2004), measures of private enforcement are the most associated with
the development of markets. Source: LaPorta et al. (2004).

Both

No

Country

2000

36

Appendix – Continued
Acquirer,
Target,
or Deal

Timevarying

Country
or Firm

Data
Year

Both

No

Country

2000

Variable name

Definition and Source

SECLAW_PUBLIC

The public enforcement index is the mean of supervisor
characteristics index, investigative powers index, orders index and
criminal index. Following La Porta (2004), measures of public
enforcement are at best modestly associated with market
development. Source: LaPorta et al. (2004).

SECLAW

Sum of SECLAW_PUBLIC and SECLAW_PRIVATE

VOICE_ACCT

Voice and Accountability measures the extent to which country’s
citizens are able to participate in selecting their government, as well
as freedom of expression, freedom of association, and a free media.
Source: Kauffman et al. (2009) and World Governance Indicators
Data (World Bank).

Both

Annual

Country

19972007

WDI_GOV_AVG

Country average of the 6 governance variables CONTROL_CORR,
GOVT_EFFECT, RULE_LAW_WGI, POLITICAL_STAB,
REG_QUALITY, and VOICE_ACCT. Source: Kauffman et al.
(2009) and World Governance Indicators Data (World Bank

Both

Annual

Country

19972007

37

Table I
Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the full sample of 37,414 takeover deals, collected from the
Securities Data Company’s (SDC) Global Mergers and Acquisition database by announcement year
[Panel A], main industry classification based on Kahle and Walking (1996) [Panel B], and acquirer
nation [Panel C].
Panel A: Sample Distribution by Year
Domestic

Announcment Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Total

N
554
603
796
1058
1367
1420
1825
2397
2542
2309
2292
1690
1570
1542
1850
1993
2000
1516
29324

Cross Border
% of Subsample
1.89%
2.06%
2.71%
3.61%
4.66%
4.84%
6.22%
8.17%
8.67%
7.87%
7.82%
5.76%
5.35%
5.26%
6.31%
6.80%
6.82%
5.17%
100.00%

N
221
153
156
174
266
299
401
503
632
657
798
585
433
397
536
626
655
598
8090

% of Subsample
2.73%
1.89%
1.93%
2.15%
3.29%
3.70%
4.96%
6.22%
7.81%
8.12%
9.86%
7.23%
5.35%
4.91%
6.63%
7.74%
8.10%
7.39%
100.00%

Combined

N
775
756
952
1232
1633
1719
2226
2900
3174
2966
3090
2275
2003
1939
2386
2619
2655
2114
37414

% of Subsample
2.07%
2.02%
2.54%
3.29%
4.36%
4.59%
5.95%
7.75%
8.48%
7.93%
8.26%
6.08%
5.35%
5.18%
6.38%
7.00%
7.10%
5.65%
100.00%

Panel B: Sample Distribution per Industry
Domestic
Industry
AGRICULTURE
MINING
CONSTRUCTION
MANUFACTURING
TRANSPORTATION, ETC
WHOLESALE TRADE
RETAIL TRADE
FINANCIALS
SERVICES
GOVERNMENT, REGULATED
Total

N
166
1837
520
8161
2438
1174
1326
6739
6929
31
29321

Cross Border
Combined
% of Sub% of Sub% of Subsample
N
sample
N
sample
0.57%
32
0.40%
198
0.53%
6.27%
431
5.33%
2268
6.06%
1.77%
86
1.06%
606
1.62%
27.83%
3739
46.23%
11900
31.81%
8.31%
528
6.53%
2966
7.93%
4.00%
300
3.71%
1474
3.94%
4.52%
159
1.97%
1485
3.97%
22.98%
829
10.25%
7568
20.23%
23.63%
1979
24.47%
8908
23.81%
0.11%
4
0.05%
35
0.09%
100.00%
8087
100.00%
37408 100.00%

38

Table I – Continued
Panel C: Sample Distribution per Acquirer Nation
Domestic
Acquiror nation
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Belgium
Belize
Bermuda
Brazil
British Virgin
Canada
Cayman Islands
Chile
China
Colombia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Gibraltar
Greece
Guernsey
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland-Rep
Isle of Man
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jersey
Liechtenstein
Luxembourg
Malaysia
Malta
Mexico
Neth Antilles
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Russian Fed
Singapore
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela
Total

N
28
1,537
7
0
32
0
3
82
1
1,522
0
28
194
4
3
56
130
258
113
0
32
0
223
3
1
83
3
67
0
34
224
1,111
1
0
0
429
1
39
0
73
76
123
6
52
21
30
3
1
205
265
105
150
3
238
35
49
51
9
0
5,241
16,333
6
29,324

% of Subsample
0.10%
5.24%
0.02%
0.00%
0.11%
0.00%
0.01%
0.28%
0.00%
5.19%
0.00%
0.10%
0.66%
0.01%
0.01%
0.19%
0.44%
0.88%
0.39%
0.00%
0.11%
0.00%
0.76%
0.01%
0.00%
0.28%
0.01%
0.23%
0.00%
0.12%
0.76%
3.79%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
1.46%
0.00%
0.13%
0.00%
0.25%
0.26%
0.42%
0.02%
0.18%
0.07%
0.10%
0.01%
0.00%
0.70%
0.90%
0.36%
0.51%
0.01%
0.81%
0.12%
0.17%
0.17%
0.03%
0.00%
17.87%
55.70%
0.02%
100.00%

39

Cross Border
Combined
% of Sub% of SubN
sample
N
sample
1
0.01%
29
0.08%
393
4.86%
1,930
5.16%
43
0.53%
50
0.13%
5
0.06%
5
0.01%
65
0.80%
97
0.26%
4
0.05%
4
0.01%
29
0.36%
32
0.09%
10
0.12%
92
0.25%
0
0.00%
1
0.00%
863
10.67%
2,385
6.37%
3
0.04%
3
0.01%
13
0.16%
41
0.11%
15
0.19%
209
0.56%
2
0.02%
6
0.02%
2
0.02%
5
0.01%
103
1.27%
159
0.42%
116
1.43%
246
0.66%
263
3.25%
521
1.39%
215
2.66%
328
0.88%
1
0.01%
1
0.00%
15
0.19%
47
0.13%
1
0.01%
1
0.00%
113
1.40%
336
0.90%
9
0.11%
12
0.03%
1
0.01%
2
0.01%
84
1.04%
167
0.45%
1
0.01%
4
0.01%
222
2.74%
289
0.77%
7
0.09%
7
0.02%
102
1.26%
136
0.36%
112
1.38%
336
0.90%
140
1.73%
1,251
3.34%
5
0.06%
6
0.02%
1
0.01%
1
0.00%
8
0.10%
8
0.02%
82
1.01%
511
1.37%
0
0.00%
1
0.00%
23
0.28%
62
0.17%
3
0.04%
3
0.01%
198
2.45%
271
0.72%
36
0.44%
112
0.30%
114
1.41%
237
0.63%
0
0.00%
6
0.02%
9
0.11%
61
0.16%
2
0.02%
23
0.06%
19
0.23%
49
0.13%
7
0.09%
10
0.03%
0
0.00%
1
0.00%
167
2.06%
372
0.99%
71
0.88%
336
0.90%
34
0.42%
139
0.37%
99
1.22%
249
0.67%
0
0.00%
3
0.01%
257
3.18%
495
1.32%
115
1.42%
150
0.40%
29
0.36%
78
0.21%
10
0.12%
61
0.16%
1
0.01%
10
0.03%
8
0.10%
8
0.02%
1,955
24.17%
7,196
19.23%
1,884
23.29%
18,217 48.69%
0
0.00%
6
0.02%
8,090
100.00%
37,414 100.00%

Table II
Cumulative Abnormal Announcement Returns
This table provides mean cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) measured from two days
prior to two days after the acquisition announcement for the sample of domestic [A] and
cross-border [B] deals. CAR is calculated using the market model, where the parameters
are estimated over the period starting 205 days to 6 days prior to the announcement using
the world index from Datastream as the regressor in the market model. All event returns
are winsorized at the .5% and 99.5% level. The number of observations [N] and CAR are
reported for the full sample and the following subsamples: Public targets paid for with cash,
public targets paid for with stock, subsidiary targets paid for with cash, private targets paid
for with cash, and private targets paid for with stock. The mean difference in CAR between
domestic and cross-border deals is reported with its p-value, where * indicates significance
at the ten-percent level.

All

Domestic [A]
Cross Border [B]
Total
[A] - [B]
p -value

Domestic [A]
Cross Border [B]
Total
[A] - [B]
p -value

N
29,324
8,090
37,414

Public | Cash
Mean
Acquirer
N
CAR
1,524
0.53%
752
1.08%
2,276
0.71%

Mean
Acquirer
CAR
1.42%
1.50%
1.44%
-0.08%
0.480

-0.56%*
0.085

Subsidiary | Cash
Mean
Acquirer
N
CAR
5,834
1.66%
1,715
1.71%
7,549
1.67%

Private | Cash
Mean
Acquirer
N
CAR
7,306
1.24%
2,661
1.39%
9,967
1.28%

-0.06%
0.783

-0.14%
0.435

40

Public | Stock
Mean
Acquirer
N
CAR
2,190
-1.18%
186
-2.02%
2,376
-1.24%
0.85%
0.261
Private | Stock
Mean
Acquirer
N
CAR
2,831
2.80%
379
2.59%
3,210
2.77%
0.21%
0.781

Table III
Single Country-Characteristic Regression Analysis
This table reports for each country characteristic listed and defined in the Appendix, the regression
coefficient on the country characteristic for the acquirer’s country and for the target’s country, the p-value
for the coefficient [in brackets], the number of observations [N], and the adjusted R-squared [AR2] of an
ordinary least squares regression. Each regression includes besides one country characteristic at a time,
controls for calendar year and the main industry classifications from Kahle and Walkling (1996) of the
acquirer. Regression residuals are clustered by country. Statistical significance of the country
characteristic regression coefficient is denoted with ***, **, or * for p-values less than one percent, five
percent, and ten-percent respectively.

41

Table III - Continued
All Deals

ANTI_SD

Acquirer

Target

1

Public
Target &
Cash
2

Public Subsidiary Private
Target & Target & Target &
Stock
Cash
Cash
3
4
5

-0.0027

0.0209*

-0.0621*

-0.0072

Private
Target &
Stock
6

-0.0030

-0.0050

[0.609]

[0.889]

[0.571]

[0.073]

[0.075]

[0.290]

-0.0044

-0.0240**

0.0636

-0.0091

[0.155]

[0.031]

[0.113]

[0.143]

[0.024]

[0.006]

N=7796

N=714

N=177

N=1668

N=2561

N=357

0.0110** -0.0451***

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.004 AR2=-0.047 AR2=0.004 AR2=0.006 AR2=0.033

ANTI_DIR

Acquirer

Target

-0.0013

0.0037

-0.0120*

-0.0001

0.0002

-0.0017

[0.258]

[0.220]

[0.099]

[0.977]

[0.930]

[0.780]

-0.0027**

-0.0044

0.0077

-0.0026

0.0015

-0.0269**

[0.029]

[0.111]

[0.453]

[0.103]

[0.134]

[0.023]

N=7796

N=714

N=177

N=1668

N=2561

N=357

AR2=0.006 AR2=0.007 AR2=0.028 AR2=0.007 AR2=0.006 AR2=0.046

SHARE_PROTECT

Acquirer

Target

0.0005

0.0031

-0.0104

-0.0008

0.0008

0.0035

[0.733]

[0.224]

[0.182]

[0.648]

[0.648]

[0.714]

-0.0001

-0.0022

0.0041

-0.0003

0.0014

0.0044

[0.865]

[0.332]

[0.382]

[0.755]

[0.189]

[0.429]

N=7508

N=695

N=174

N=1628

N=2432

N=345

AR2=0.006 AR2=0.011 AR2=0.027 AR2=0.008 AR2=0.009 AR2=0.008

CREDITOR_RIGHTS Acquirer

Target

-0.0015

0.0016

-0.0049

-0.0013

-0.0011

-0.0085

[0.172]

[0.567]

[0.199]

[0.456]

[0.438]

[0.210]

-0.0022**

-0.0026

-0.0006

-0.0019*

-0.0021

-0.0161**

[0.016]

[0.242]

[0.938]

[0.054]

[0.195]

[0.044]

N=7838

N=715

N=176

N=1674

N=2583

N=363

AR2=0.005 AR2=-0.003 AR2=-0.062 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.006 AR2=0.043

SECLAW_PRIVATE Acquirer

Target

0.0050

0.0034

-0.0432

0.0039

0.0056

0.0288

[0.599]

[0.708]

[0.224]

[0.687]

[0.669]

[0.560]

0.0018

0.0001

0.0051

0.0038

0.0108

0.0574**

[0.692]

[0.990]

[0.842]

[0.383]

[0.182]

[0.029]

N=7508

N=695

N=174

N=1628

N=2432

N=345

AR2=0.003 AR2=-0.004 AR2=-0.060 AR2=0.003 AR2=0.007 AR2=0.021

SECLAW_PUBLIC

Acquirer

Target

0.0065

0.0088

-0.0485

0.0002

0.0100

-0.0025

[0.331]

[0.324]

[0.201]

[0.972]

[0.314]

[0.945]

0.0042

-0.0002

0.0344

0.0038

0.0073

0.0597

[0.255]

[0.982]

[0.190]

[0.405]

[0.163]

[0.122]

N=7508

N=695

N=174

N=1628

N=2432

N=345

AR2=0.003 AR2=-0.003 AR2=-0.056 AR2=0.003 AR2=0.007 AR2=0.020

42

Table III - Continued
All Deals

ACCOUNT

Acquirer

1

Public
Target &
Cash
2

Public Subsidiary Private
Target & Target & Target &
Stock
Cash
Cash
3
4
5

0.0002

0.0015***

0.0001

[0.342]

[0.000]

-0.0002** -0.0007***
Target

Private
Target &
Stock
6

-0.0001

0.0002

-0.0011

[0.944]

[0.664]

[0.460]

[0.533]

0.0020

-0.0004

0.0001

-0.0017*

[0.023]

[0.007]

[0.185]

[0.112]

[0.634]

[0.057]

N=7176

N=675

N=166

N=1567

N=2322

N=336

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.020 AR2=-0.062 AR2=0.006 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.015

CONTROL_CORR

Acquirer

0.0048*

0.0118***

[0.053]

[0.003]

-0.0011

-0.0035*** -0.0063**
Target

0.0012

0.0032

0.0175

[0.960]

[0.776]

[0.291]

[0.372]

-0.0164

-0.0040

0.0002

-0.0154

[0.002]

[0.034]

[0.496]

[0.175]

[0.894]

[0.184]

N=7991

N=742

N=182

N=1699

N=2629

N=372

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.007 AR2=-0.056 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.021

GOVT_EFF

Acquirer

0.0064**

0.0193***

[0.025]

[0.001]

-0.0213

-0.0037*** -0.0074**
Target

-0.0018

0.0061

0.0261

[0.426]

[0.718]

[0.142]

[0.339]

-0.0126

-0.0031

-0.0001

-0.0099

[0.005]

[0.024]

[0.604]

[0.418]

[0.977]

[0.530]

N=7991

N=742

N=182

N=1699

N=2629

N=372

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.013 AR2=-0.055 AR2=0.004 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.018

POL_STAB

Acquirer

Target

0.0036

0.0096**

0.0031

0.0013

0.0044

0.0038

[0.216]

[0.025]

[0.879]

[0.825]

[0.208]

[0.857]

-0.0048**

-0.0040

0.0443**

-0.0055

-0.0007

-0.0320*

[0.041]

[0.275]

[0.042]

[0.351]

[0.682]

[0.064]

N=7992

N=742

N=182

N=1700

N=2629

N=372

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.001 AR2=-0.039 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.026

REG_QUALITY

Acquirer

0.0011

0.0169***

[0.597]

[0.008]

-0.0567*

-0.0044*** -0.0089**
Target

-0.0053

-0.0000

0.0088

[0.051]

[0.314]

[0.993]

[0.709]

-0.0192

-0.0019

0.0014

-0.0165

[0.010]

[0.044]

[0.618]

[0.650]

[0.592]

[0.444]

N=7992

N=742

N=182

N=1700

N=2629

N=372

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.007 AR2=-0.044 AR2=0.004 AR2=0.004 AR2=0.017

RULELAW_WGI

Acquirer

Target

0.0050*

0.0150***

-0.0055

-0.0009

0.0028

0.0257

[0.085]

[0.001]

[0.773]

[0.878]

[0.482]

[0.328]

-0.0037**

-0.0058

-0.0206

-0.0019

0.0000

-0.0179

[0.011]

[0.102]

[0.589]

[0.576]

[0.988]

[0.272]

N=7992

N=742

N=182

N=1700

N=2629

N=372

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.006 AR2=-0.056 AR2=0.004 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.021

43

Table III - Continued
All Deals

VOICE_ACCT

Acquirer

Target

1

Public
Target &
Cash
2

Public Subsidiary Private
Target & Target & Target &
Stock
Cash
Cash
3
4
5

Private
Target &
Stock
6

0.0064*

0.0117*

0.0154

-0.0006

0.0024

0.0408*

[0.088]

[0.086]

[0.694]

[0.907]

[0.590]

[0.064]

-0.0046**

-0.0080

-0.0146

0.0010

-0.0004

-0.0162

[0.019]

[0.165]

[0.588]

[0.773]

[0.839]

[0.220]

N=7986

N=742

N=182

N=1699

N=2625

N=372

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.002 AR2=-0.056 AR2=0.003 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.027

WDI_GOV_AVG

Acquirer

0.0061*

0.0178***

[0.077]

[0.001]

-0.0108

-0.0047*** -0.0083**
Target

-0.0007

0.0043

0.0295

[0.695]

[0.908]

[0.326]

[0.360]

-0.0043

-0.0029

-0.0000

-0.0205

[0.006]

[0.044]

[0.899]

[0.489]

[0.998]

[0.233]

N=7992

N=742

N=182

N=1700

N=2629

N=372

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.008 AR2=-0.058 AR2=0.004 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.022

IT_LAW

Acquirer

Target

0.0044

-0.0045

-0.0640***

0.0128

-0.0356*** 0.0681**

[0.469]

[0.690]

[0.001]

[0.286]

[0.000]

[0.012]

-0.0063

-0.0258

0.0081

-0.0028

-0.0110

0.0393

[0.282]

[0.139]

[0.469]

[0.692]

[0.105]

[0.314]

N=7866

N=727

N=180

N=1680

N=2582

N=364

AR2=0.003 AR2=-0.000 AR2=-0.062 AR2=0.004 AR2=0.008 AR2=0.026

IT_ENF

Acquirer

Target

0.0059**

0.0030

0.0100

0.0066

0.0020

0.0159

[0.040]

[0.617]

[0.558]

[0.194]

[0.684]

[0.543]

-0.0056***

-0.0112

-0.0323

-0.0034

-0.0002

-0.0357

[0.003]

[0.163]

[0.216]

[0.531]

[0.958]

[0.166]

N=7866

N=727

N=180

N=1680

N=2582

N=364

AR2=0.004 AR2=-0.000 AR2=-0.057 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.006 AR2=0.030

GDP_PCAP

Acquirer

Target

-0.0000

0.0002

0.0006

-0.0003

-0.0001

-0.0006

[0.673]
0.0000

[0.282]

[0.303]

[0.153]

[0.374]

[0.590]

0.0001

-0.0003

0.0001

0.0002

0.0002

[0.914]

[0.824]

[0.682]

[0.735]

[0.117]

[0.857]

N=7939

N=729

N=182

N=1688

N=2610

N=373

AR2=0.003 AR2=-0.001 AR2=-0.063 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.007 AR2=0.014

MKTCAP_GDP

Acquirer

Target

0.0005

0.0076

-0.0081

0.0027

0.0008

-0.0341**

[0.787]

[0.228]

[0.659]

[0.273]

[0.778]

[0.027]

-0.0032**

-0.0079*

0.0343*

-0.0030

-0.0001

-0.0077

[0.019]

[0.054]

[0.085]

[0.252]

[0.964]

[0.534]

N=7793

N=721

N=176

N=1657

N=2564

N=362

AR2=0.004 AR2=0.003 AR2=-0.048 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.035

44

Table III - Continued
All Deals

CTRY_TURNOVER

Acquirer

Target

1

Public
Target &
Cash
2

Public Subsidiary Private
Target & Target & Target &
Stock
Cash
Cash
3
4
5

Private
Target &
Stock
6

-0.0025

0.0006

0.0279*

-0.0107***

-0.0052

0.0015

[0.308]

[0.901]

[0.059]

[0.001]

[0.164]

[0.936]

0.0011

0.0005

0.0061

0.0026

0.0008

0.0157

[0.616]

[0.917]

[0.641]

[0.509]

[0.837]

[0.435]

N=7827

N=727

N=179

N=1659

N=2575

N=365

AR2=0.004 AR2=-0.001 AR2=-0.051 AR2=0.009 AR2=0.006 AR2=0.019

CTRY_RET_1YR

Acquirer

Target

0.0001

-0.0108

0.0426

0.0050

-0.0013

-0.0025

[0.982]

[0.572]

[0.224]

[0.619]

[0.911]

[0.922]

0.0070

0.0076

0.0818**

0.0001

0.0067

0.0307

[0.140]

[0.591]

[0.034]

[0.995]

[0.464]

[0.538]

N=7422

N=668

N=173

N=1597

N=2410

N=339

AR2=0.004 AR2=-0.006 AR2=-0.048 AR2=0.003 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.026

LIB_INT_AVG

Acquirer

Target

-0.0234

0.1462***

0.0752**

-0.0797*

-0.0058

-0.1341

[0.348]

[0.000]

[0.043]

[0.076]

[0.678]

[0.268]

-0.0150

-0.0405

6.4232

-0.0193

0.0008

0.1339***

[0.339]

[0.324]

[0.482]

[0.575]

[0.948]

[0.000]

N=7275

N=660

N=174

N=1586

N=2343

N=330

AR2=0.006 AR2=0.014 AR2=0.019 AR2=0.014 AR2=0.011 AR2=0.024

INSIDE_PCT

Acquirer

0.0116***

0.0256**

0.1012**

0.0133*

0.0056

-0.0196

[0.001]

[0.022]

[0.017]

[0.066]

[0.322]

[0.647]

N=6398

N=628

N=138

N=1380

N=2078

N=260

AR2=0.005 AR2=0.001 AR2=-0.024 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.002 AR2=0.041

ADR

Acquirer -0.0079*** -0.0106**

-0.0359

0.0017

-0.0056

0.0298**

[0.000]

[0.044]

[0.122]

[0.708]

[0.125]

[0.015]

0.0084**

0.0122

-0.0269*

0.0089**

0.0000

0.0000

[0.013]

[0.226]

[0.065]

[0.045]

[.]

[.]

N=8060

N=747

N=184

N=1709

N=2654

N=379

Target

AR2=0.005 AR2=0.003 AR2=-0.038 AR2=0.006 AR2=0.005 AR2=0.022

45

Table IV
Multivariate Regression Analysis
This table presents the regression coefficients for OLS regression models where the
dependent variable is the acquirer return and the independent variables are measures for
governance, financial development, and economic development (see Appendix for
definitions) in Panel A and the same regressions with insider ownership in Panel B. Each
regression includes industry indicator variables based on the main industry classifications
from Kahle and Walking (1996). Regression residuals are clustered by country. Statistical
significance of the regression coefficients is denoted with ***, **, or * for p-values less
than one percent, five percent, and ten-percent respectively.

46

Table IV – Continued

Panel A

VARIABLES
WDI_GOV_AVG acquirer
WDI_GOV_AVG target
GDP_PCAP acquirer
GDP_PCAP target
MKTCAP_GDP acquirer
MKTCAP_GDP target
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

All
(1)

Public
Target &
Cash
(2)

0.0076** 0.0196**
[0.038]
[0.029]
-0.0096*** -0.0141**
[0.000]
[0.047]
-0.0002
-0.0003
[0.128]
[0.281]
0.0004*** 0.0005
[0.007]
[0.323]
0.0005
0.0069
[0.797]
[0.153]
-0.0038** -0.0066
[0.012]
[0.179]
7787
0.008

718
0.016

All
(1)

Public
Target &
Cash
(2)

Public Subsidiary Private
Target & Target & Target &
Stock
Cash
Cash
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.0088
[0.802]
0.0057
[0.854]
0.0012
[0.343]
-0.0011
[0.409]
-0.0118
[0.636]
0.0421*
[0.092]
176
0.019

Private
Target &
Stock
(6)

0.0022
0.0128**
0.0296
[0.724]
[0.018]
[0.319]
-0.0059
-0.0016 -0.0700***
[0.126]
[0.587]
[0.001]
-0.0003 -0.0006*** 0.0002
[0.202]
[0.004]
[0.810]
0.0004*
0.0002*
0.0023*
[0.086]
[0.051]
[0.062]
0.0040
0.0022 -0.0369**
[0.167]
[0.401]
[0.023]
-0.0045
-0.0026
-0.0057
[0.159]
[0.176]
[0.640]
1656
0.009

2562
0.008

362
0.044

Panel B

VARIABLES
WDI_GOV_AVG acquirer
WDI_GOV_AVG target
GDP_PCAP acquirer
GDP_PCAP target
MKTCAP_GDP acquirer
MKTCAP_GDP target
INSIDE_PCT
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

Public Subsidiary Private
Target & Target & Target &
Stock
Cash
Cash
(3)
(4)
(5)

Private
Target &
Stock
(6)

0.0088** 0.0198** -0.0211
0.0011 0.0155*** 0.1107**
[0.011]
[0.039]
[0.516]
[0.885]
[0.002]
[0.042]
-0.0090*** -0.0214** 0.0301 -0.0079** -0.0033 -0.0610**
[0.000]
[0.020]
[0.428]
[0.032]
[0.280]
[0.019]
-0.0001
-0.0003
0.0023
-0.0001 -0.0005*** 0.0001
[0.276]
[0.402]
[0.106]
[0.836]
[0.001]
[0.946]
0.0004*** 0.0008
-0.0002 0.0005** 0.0004*
0.0023
[0.003]
[0.100]
[0.920]
[0.022]
[0.055]
[0.136]
0.0028*
0.0077
0.0032
0.0049* 0.0057** -0.0279
[0.089]
[0.191]
[0.908]
[0.071]
[0.036]
[0.153]
-0.0051** -0.0054
0.0305
-0.0051 -0.0053** -0.0042
[0.010]
[0.177]
[0.324]
[0.190]
[0.025]
[0.757]
0.0149*** 0.0277** 0.1230*** 0.0157**
0.0083
-0.0182
[0.000]
[0.048]
[0.000]
[0.014]
[0.253]
[0.701]
6199
0.010

609
0.019
47

134
-0.032

1337
0.019

2009
0.006

251
0.065

Table V
Explanatory Power of Indicator Variable Regressions
This table reports the R-squared, p-value for an F-test of the joint significance of the
indicator variables, and the number of observations (N) in regressions for the whole
sample (All) and each sub-sample. Models (1) through (5) exclusively include
respectively calendar year, acquirer country, industry, target country, and all
indicator variables in one regression. We only include countries and industries with
five acquisitions at least.

All
Indicators
R-squared
Prob > F
Observations

(1)
Year
0.0050
0.0003
8060

Public | Cash
Indicators
R-squared
Prob > F
Observations

(1)

Public | Stock
Indicators
R-squared
Prob > F
Observations
Subsidiary | Cash
Indicators
R-squared
Prob > F
Observations
Private | Cash
Indicators
R-squared
Prob > F
Observations
Private | Stock
Indicators
R-squared
Prob > F
Observations

Year
0.024
0.4510
721
(1)

Year
0.065
0.8420
153
(1)

Year
0.016
0.0716
1685
(1)

Year
0.011
0.0253
2641
(1)

Year
0.063
0.1750
350

(2)
(3)
(4)
Country (A) Industry Country (T)
0.0060
0.0040
0.0190
0.2130
0.0003
0.0219
8060
8060
8060
(2)

(3)

(4)

Country (A) Industry Country (T)
0.023
0.012
0.095
0.9120
0.2570
0.2720
721
721
721
(2)

(3)

(4)

Country (A) Industry Country (T)
0.012
0.097
0.143
0.9740
0.0097
0.5530
153
153
153
(2)

(3)

(4)

Country (A) Industry Country (T)
0.020
0.009
0.081
0.218
0.0540
<0.0001
1685
1685
1685
(2)

(3)

(4)

Country (A) Industry Country (T)
0.017
0.005
0.041
0.1310
0.0948
0.0771
2641
2641
2641
(2)

(3)

(4)

Country (A) Industry Country (T)
0.075
0.006
0.203
0.0087
0.8220
0.0143
350
350
350

48

(5)
All
0.0330
0.0001
8060
(5)

All
0.154
0.5000
721
(5)

All
0.336
0.4400
153
(5)

All
0.119
<0.0001
1685
(5)

All
0.071
0.0177
2641
(5)

All
0.296
0.0398
350

Table VI
Global Effect Regressions
This table presents the regression coefficients for OLS regression models where the
dependent variable is the acquirer return and the independent variable is the average
acquirer return for acquisitions of the same type made in other countries in the same year
(GLOBAL_EFFECT). Each regression includes industry indicator variables based on the
main industry classifications from Kahle and Walking (1996). Regression residuals are
clustered by country. Statistical significance of the regression coefficients is denoted with
***, **, or * for p-values less than one percent, five percent, and ten-percent respectively.

VARIABLES
GLOBAL_EFFECT

Constant

Observations
R-squared

All
(1)
0.4878**
[0.028]

Private
Private
Subsidiary
Public
Public
Targets & Targets & Targets & Targets & Targets &
Stock
Cash
Cash
Stock
Cash
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.4900
0.4529
0.4452* 0.5471*** 0.7130***
[0.333]
[0.349]
[0.086]
[0.008]
[0.000]

0.0101
[0.181]

0.0203
[0.276]

-0.0018
[0.572]

-0.0104
[0.269]

0.0010
[0.942]

0.1489***
[0.000]

8041
0.004

747
0.014

183
0.080

1705
0.009

2648
0.006

378
0.022

49

Table VII
Frequency Regressions
This table presents the coefficients and p-values for OLS regression models where the dependent variable
is the frequency of acquisitions relative to the number of listed firms in a country (based on the number of
firms with return data on Datastream). Variable definitions are in the Appendix. Model (1) is for the
unrestricted sample from SDC including cases with missing deal values and private acquirers. Models (2)
through (7) use the sample of deals by public acquirers for which deal value is available. Each regression
includes calendar year indicator variables (not reported). N is the number of observations based on
country-year observations. Statistical significance of the regression coefficients is denoted with ***, **,
or * for p-values less than one percent, five percent, and ten-percent respectively.
All
Unrestricted
Sample

VARIABLES
WDI_GOV_AVG
GDP_PCAP
LIB_INT_AVG
SECLAW
ANTI_SD
MKTCAP_GDP
CTRY_RET_1YR
N
Adjusted R-squared

Public
Targets &
Cash
(3)

Public
Targets &
Stock
(4)

Subsidiary
Targets &
Cash
(5)

Private
Targets &
Cash
(6)

Private
Targets &
Stock
(7)

(1)

All
(2)

0.1138***
[0.005]
-0.0009
[0.690]
-0.0150
[0.632]
-0.0367
[0.376]
-0.1114
[0.281]
0.0179
[0.355]
0.0096
[0.498]

0.0122*
[0.100]
0.0001
[0.741]
0.0015
[0.836]
-0.0022
[0.833]
0.0155
[0.544]
-0.0003
[0.954]
0.0024
[0.410]

0.0015***
[0.000]

0.0004***
[0.009]

0.0037***
[0.000]

0.0041***
[0.000]

0.0007***
[0.000]

0.0005
[0.504]
-0.0003
[0.702]
-0.0031*
[0.075]
0.0010***
[0.007]
0.0008
[0.311]

-0.0006
[0.501]
-0.0002
[0.636]
0.0004
[0.601]
0.0001
[0.668]
-0.0001
[0.725]

-0.0012
[0.509]
-0.0005
[0.787]
-0.0003
[0.951]
0.0001
[0.886]
0.0004
[0.594]

0.0018
[0.490]
-0.0008
[0.809]
0.0054
[0.458]
-0.0002
[0.899]
-0.0002
[0.904]

-0.0005
[0.366]
0.0005
[0.226]
0.0003
[0.654]
0.0000
[0.925]
0.0004
[0.621]

502
0.43

502
0.217

502
0.191

502
0.068

502
0.163

502
0.145

502
0.131

50

