                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PARTNERSHIP FRAGILITY AND CREDIT COSTS

                                        Howard Bodenhorn

                                       Working Paper 16689
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16689


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




This paper previously circulated under the title "Partnership Law and Credit Availability." I thank
the Jefferson County Historical Society for making the records of the Black River Bank available.
I also thank Naomi Lamoreaux, Henry Hansmann, Eric Hilt and seminar participants at the All New
York Economic History Workshop, the NBER-DAE Spring program meeting, Wesleyan University
and Williams College for valuable comments on earlier versions. Pam Bodenhorn provided exceptional
assistance in transcribing and coding the data. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Partnership fragility and credit costs
Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 16689
January 2011, Revised January 2013
JEL No. K20,N21,N41

                                              ABSTRACT

Economic teams, including the business partnership, are created to exploit gains from cooperation,
but teams also fall prey to shirking and other opportunistic behaviors, which lead to their dissolution.
If team production is partly financed with debt, the untimely dissolution of partnerships exposes creditors
to default risks that they will price into debt contracts. This paper explores these two features of the
nineteenth-century business partnership and finds: (1) partnerships were short-lived teams (two years
or less, on average) and larger partnerships were shorter-lived yet; and (2) compared to proprietorship,
partnerships paid higher interest rates on short-term debt, after controlling for loan size, maturity, and
other observable features. Although there were potential gains from team production, potential opportunism
raised the costs of partnerships.


Howard Bodenhorn
John E. Walker Department of Economics
College of Business and Behavioral Science
201-B Sirrine Hall
Clemson University
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
bodenhorn@gmail.com
1. Introduction

        One of the central features of economic life is that people create teams to exploit gains from

cooperation (Farrell and Scotchmer 1988). Professional partnerships, industrial corporations, university

departments, and sporting clubs are examples of teams assembled to take advantage of unique skills

brought by each member and the synergies created through individual contributions toward a common

goal, which is typically to produce more or better marketable output jointly than could be produced

individually. Individuals participate in team production because they share the gains from cooperation.

        A second central feature of economic life is that team production is prone to shirking, free riding

and other types of opportunism (Alchian and Demsetz 1972; Holmstrom 1982). The consequence is that

teams are more fragile than durable. The annual divorce rate (3.4 per 1,000) in the United States is one-half

the annual marriage rate (6.8 per 1,000) (www.cdc.gov). Employee turnover is common despite returns

to seniority: the average job tenure is 5.4 years for British workers and less for French workers (Mumford

and Smith 2004; Dostie 2005). In the 1970s between one-third and one-half of junior associates at elite

US law firms left within four years and one-tenth percent of senior partners annually resigned or retired

(Nelson 1983).1 Senior partner turnover increased in the 1980s as the competition for so-called rain makers

intensified (Galanter and Palay 1990). Teams, even apparently productive teams, do not persist.

        If unanticipated or untimely dissolution of a team forces the sale of a specialized or illiquid asset,

opportunistic behavior may generate greater costs than those resulting from lost output alone. Some teams

finance their activities with a combination of equity and debt with the consequence that unanticipated or

untimely dissolution of the team exposes creditors to some risk if the team’s liquidation value is less than


        1
          Gilson and Mnookin (1989) argue that the “up-or-out” system within law firms protects associates from
partner opportunism when the partnership decision is made.

                                                      -2-
its outstanding debts. Smart creditors will understand their potential exposure to loss and protect

themselves through a combination of credit rationing and price discrimination. Observably more fragile

teams will pay higher interest rates on debt, ceteris paribus.

        Using two unique data sources, this paper investigates two features of mid-nineteenth century

business partnerships. First, an analysis of published partnership announcements (formations and

dissolutions) shows that business partnerships were not long-lived firms. The average partnership lasted

for less than two years and teams with more partners were shorter lived yet. It was not uncommon,

however, for one or more members of a dissolved partnership to quickly form another. This result is

consistent with matching models in which impermanent relationships are maintained only until a more

preferred match is found (Burdett and Coles 1999). Second, evidence from contemporary bank loan

records reveals that partners paid more for credit. Borrower fixed-effects models are estimated where the

borrower sometimes borrows as a proprietor and sometimes as a member of a business partnership. The

within-borrower estimates imply a meaningful partnership interest rate premium.

        Although business partnerships, like any productive team, offered the potential for team members

to profit from complementarities and synergies, the internal dynamic of team production also created costs.

Bad matches and bad behaviors strained team relations, which resulted in short-lived teams. The

combination of specialized assets, unanticipated and untimely dissolution, protracted litigation, and costly

liquidation led creditors to charge partnerships higher interest rates than proprietors on a loan of given size

and maturity.



2. Partnership in nineteenth-century America

        Many accounts of the firm in the nineteenth century United States focus on the rise of the limited

liability corporation and emphasize its centrality to modern capitalist economies (Berle and Means 1932;

                                                     -3-
Rosenberg and Birdzell 1986; Wright 2011). The corporation provided for the lock-in of capital necessary

to finance large, long-horizon investments in bridges, canals, railroads and other infrastructure, as well as

large financial institutions and the modern industrial enterprise (Chandler 1977; Blair 2003). Limited

liability encouraged broad participation and created large pools of capital contributed in often modest

amounts (Rothenberg 1985). Strong entity shielding protected the assets of the enterprise from the

creditors of the corporation’s individual owners (Hansmann and Kraakman 2000a, 2000b; Hansmann,

Kraakman and Squire 2006). Although the combination of lock-in, limited liability and entity shielding

was essential for canals, railroads and other massive infrastructure investments, most nineteenth-century

businesses did not adopt the corporate form even when it was an option (Guinnane et al 2007).

Proprietorships remained the predominant small enterprise form and partnership in its various guises was

the most common choice for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with multiple owners.

        The advantages of partnerships over proprietorships are obvious when, through team production,

partners can jointly produce at a lower marginal cost than they might working separately. Partnerships are

economic when joint production yields enough output to cover the nontrivial costs of organizing and

operating the partnership (Alchian and Demsetz 1972). Modern formulations of partnership reveal that

successful formation is an inexact and costly process (Burdett and Coles 1999). Prospective partners

sample among potential matches in which matching opportunities arrive at uncertain intervals. At each

encounter with a prospective match potential partners must decide to pair off or continue searching.2

Prospective partners pair off when the expected incremental benefits of continued search no longer exceed

its expected marginal costs. But an important element of the modern literature is that search does not cease


        2
          The advice offered in a nineteenth-century practical business was simply to “be cautious in the
selection of a partner” (Freedley 1853, 326). “It is imprudent,” the author noted, “to enter into a
partnership with a covetous man, or a very passionate man, or an obstinate man, or a revengeful man, or
a familiar crony, or a man [otherwise] involved” (Freedley 1853, 51 emphasis in original).

                                                    -4-
once a partnership is formed. At equilibrium, business partnerships, like other relationships, may be

purposely temporary relationships that will be dissolved when a preferred match presents itself.

        The apparent profits generated by well-matched partners may in fact be nothing more than the

returns paid to the unobservable asset – the successful assembly of a productive team (Alchian 1984). Still,

well-matched partners create quasi-rents within the firm if the excess value of partnership production over

individual production of at least one of the partners depends on the actions of the other partner(s).3 The

presence of quasi-rents within the firm creates conflicting incentives among the partners. Partners

cooperate to maximize firm value and they compete to increase their individual shares of the joint profits

and the quasi-rents.4 Because quasi-rents are appropriable, partners will include protective covenants in

their contracts and partners earning quasi-rents have an abiding interest in the continuation of the firm so

long as the other partners do not engage in excessive post-contractual opportunism.

        Protective covenants and careful matching notwithstanding, one of the fundamental internal

problems within the partnership is that some members are dependent on the firm, in the sense that

separation from the firm means a decrease in wealth. If the dependence derives from a partnership-specific

(sunk) investment, other partners have incentives to hold up the partner having made the investment

(Alchian and Woodward 1987 ). Cottrell (1967, 104-106), in fact, contends that dispute, hold-up and



        3
          Nineteenth-century writers had two criteria for a good match. First, each party must bring
something of value to the firm – capital, skill, talent, or business connections, among others – but each
should bring complementary skills. A partnership was uncalled for when the firm would carry on a modest
business with men of similar experience and abilities, especially if every transaction supervised by both.
Second, a good business match had many of the same elements as a good marriage match: moral character
and good temper being paramount (Freedley 1853, 51). Lazear (1999) argues that the successful
multinational corporation must also tap complementary skills if it is to succeed in the face of competing
national cultures within the firm.
        4
         Actions to increase a team member’s share of the profits and/or quasi-rents are variously labeled
“shirking” (Alchian and Demsetz 1972), “opportunism” (Williamson 1985), “moral hazard” (Holmström
1982), and “agency problems” (Jensen and Meckling 1976).

                                                    -5-
intransigence are inherent to the internal dynamic of the partnership relationship. If the non-dependent

partners’ hold up efforts generate costs in excess of the dependent partner’s share of the quasi-rent, the

partnership will be dissolved. Intractable internal disputes are not the only source of untimely dissolution.

Death, illness or the personal bankruptcy of any partner can force the firm into liquidation. If the modern

analysis of the partnership is indicative of anything, it is that partnerships are prone to shirking, fragile, and

costly to unwind.5

        The implications of partnership fragility for credit are profound. It is well known that the equity

holders of any firm that (partially) debt finances do not bear the full expected costs of their own bad

decisions or bad luck, including the untimely dissolution of the partnership itself. The partnership’s

creditors bear some of the costs of bad outcomes. Untimely dissolution is one such bad outcome if

dissolution forces the partnership to sell assets or unwind positions at unpropitious moments. Losses

arising from forced sale of assets may push the partnership into default and debt financing pushes some

of these losses on to creditors if the firm’s net worth is insufficient to cover the reduced asset values.

Clever creditors are, of course, aware of the equity holder’s incentives and at equilibrium will charge

higher interest rates for the risks they assume. But higher rates alone are an imperfect solution because

higher rates generally encourage greater default rates. Creditors further protect themselves by rationing

credit which, for a given project size, requires greater equity investment from the partners.

        Proprietorships and partnerships both operate under rules of unlimited (owner) liability. And




        5
          Cottrell (1967, 104) argues that partnerships are fragile because there is not legal mechanism to
resolve intractable internal disputes other than dissolving the relationship. On the economics of partnerships
see Farrell and Scotchmer (1988), Gilson and Mnookin (1985), Burdett and Coles (1999), Levin and
Tadelis (2005), Doornik (2006), and Goldlücke and Kranz (2012). On the problems of efficiently and
equitably unwinding partnerships see Cramton, Gibbons and Klemperer (1987), Morrison and Wilhelm
(2004), Morgan (2004), Charness and Dufwenberg (2006), Jehiel and Pauzner (2006), Frutos and
Kittsteiner (2008), and Kittsteiner, Ockenfels and Trhal (2012).

                                                       -6-
although the common law afforded the partnership weak entity shielding, in the sense that business

creditors had prior lien on business assets and personal creditors had prior lien on personal assets, weak

entity shielding does not provide liquidation protection (Hansmann and Kraakman 2000b, 387). That is,

at any moment any partner or any of the individual partner’s personal creditors might force liquidation of

the firm to meet the partner’s personal debts. The possibility that any creditor of the partners or the

partnership might force liquidation upon default means that personal and partnership creditors monitor both

the fortunes of the partner and the fortunes of the partnership. Having both types of creditors monitor both

types of creditworthiness duplicates activities and is inefficient in that it raises the cost (and the price) of

credit. Although creditors of proprietorships also engage in duplicate and costly monitoring, the notable

difference is that the creditors of proprietorships need not concern themselves with the risks and costs of

untimely dissolution due to opportunistic activities inside the firm.

        Hansmann and Kraakman (2000b, 435), in fact, argue that the fundamental difference between

weak form (partnership) and strong form (corporate) entity shielding is “liquidation protection from the

individual owners themselves.” Corporation are dissolved only when the owners of a majority of the shares

agree to the dissolution. A partnership is agreement at will, meaning that the firm can be dissolved any time

any individual owner chooses to dissolve the firm. From a creditor’s perspective, proprietorships and

partnerships are subject to unanticipated dissolution, but it is not unreasonable to think that the probability

of unanticipated and costly dissolution increases, perhaps non-linearly, in the number of owners. More

owners create more opportunities for shirking, opportunism, internal dissent and, ultimately, fracture and

dissolution.6 Knowing that partnerships are, all else constant, more prone to untimely dissolution and


        6
          Economic theory holds that the advantages of delegated monitoring over partnership increases in
team size (Goldlüke and Kranz 2012). Experiments involving the minimum-effort game suggest that teams
are subject to shirking and that shirking increases in team size (Van Huyck et al 1990). Deck and
Nikiforakis (2012) show that more effective monitoring can mitigate shirking, but situations in which team

                                                      -7-
default, creditors are likely to protect themselves through a combination of credit rationing and higher

interest rates. Before turning to an analysis of partnerships and credit costs in Sections 4 and 5, Section 3

establishes that partnerships were fragile and that fragility increased in the number of partners.



3. Partnership size and firm tenure

        Given that partnerships are prone to opportunistic behavior in its various manifestations, questions

naturally arise concerning the longevity of partnerships, as well as the connection between longevity and

team size (Goldlücke and Kranz 2012). To answer these questions, information on the formations and

dissolutions of partnerships were collected from the Baltimore American and Commercial Advertiser

between 1 January 1850 and 3 March 1857. The law of partnerships held that a partnership existed

whenever two or more people held themselves out to the world as partners and acted in a manner

consistent with a joint, profit-seeking venture (Selwyn 1831, 307). Except in the case of limited

partnerships, it was not necessary to announce or advertise the creation of a partnership (Dorsey 1840, Ch.

97 §7). Nevertheless, many partners announced the formation of their partnerships in local newspapers and

gazettes. The act of advertising the creation of business partnerships was so common in fact that on most

days as many as three columns of the Baltimore American were devoted solely to partnership

announcements.7



members can monitor some but not all other members converge on the low-level equilibrium as team sizes
increase.
        7
          A typical advertisement announcing the formation of a partnership appeared as (Baltimore American, 1
July 1858, 2):
                                             CO-PARTNERSHIP --
                      The undersigned have this day FORMED A COPARTNERSHIP, under
                            the firm of DARE, SPROSTON & CO., and will continue
                            the FLOUR AND GENERAL COMMISSION BUSINESS
                              at No. 95 CHARLES STREET, corner Camden Street.
                                                G. GEO. DARE

                                                     -8-
        Upon the dissolution of a partnership, however, it was incumbent on the partners to directly notify

all persons with whom the partnership had prior or current dealings (Freedley 1853, 328). Advertisement

of the dissolution in a newspaper was not sufficient to protect partners from the obligations and liabilities

of future contracts entered into with existing clients by a former member of the now-dissolved partnership

if the clients were unaware of the partnership’s dissolution. A newspaper advertisement announcing the

dissolution of the partnership generally protected partners from liabilities contracted in the name of the

partnership by a former partner if those obligations were contracted after publication of the dissolution

notice (Selwyn 1831, 319). Thus, contemporary newspapers, like the Baltimore American, often carried

more dissolution than formation announcements on a given day and dissolution notices were generally

published for more consecutive days.8

        Every surviving issue of the Baltimore American between 1850 and 1861 was read and the

information contained in the partnership formation and dissolution announcements was collected and

coded. Most formation announcements included the names of the partners, the date the partnership was

formed, and the business to be pursued by the partnership. Dissolution announcements typically included

the names of the partners, the date the partnership was dissolved, and which partners were responsible for

winding up the partnership’s affairs. Approximately 90 percent of dissolution notices also announced why



                                                GEO. S. SPROSTON
                                               Baltimore, July 1, 1858


        8
            A typical dissolution notice appeared as the following (Baltimore American, 1 January 1857, p. 3):
                                       DISSOLUTION OF CO-PARTNERSHIP
                                    The co-partnership heretofore existing between
                             the subscribers under the firm of JNO & CHAS McCOLGIN
                                 & BRO, is this day DISSOLVED by mutual consent.
                                                    John McColgin
                                                    Chas. McColgin
                                                   Patrick McColgin
                                              Baltimore, January 1, 1857

                                                         -9-
the partnership was dissolved. “Mutual consent,” a relatively uninformative catch-all phrase, was the most

common reason given for dissolution, but other reasons included one partner’s death or illness, as well as

the expiration of the original partnership agreement (“limitation”).

        Figure 1 provides a graphic representation of the timing of information on firm formations and

dissolutions, which illustrates which types of data are useful for statistical analysis. Firms can be grouped

into one of six types. Firms of types A or B are those for which no start date is observed within the

observation window but a dissolution date is. The figure makes clear the problems with these observations.

The firm’s true lifetime is unknowable from the historical record. Moreover, even if it is clear that the firm

was organized prior to the observation window, standard statistical packages are not designed to

accommodate left censoring like that for firms of type A.

        The second group is comprised of firms like type C or D, or those formed and dissolved within the

observation window. What differentiated Firm C-types from Firm D-types is that Firm C-types are not

observed. That is, the surviving historical record contains no evidence of these firms’ existence; neither

their organization nor dissolution is observed. The start and end dates of Firm D-types, on the other hand,

appear in the records. So long as there is no systematic selection of type D firms into the sample, in that

some feature related to firm lifetime influenced the likelihood of appearing in this particular historical

source, the inclusion of type D firms and the exclusion of type C firms is equivalent to drawing a random

sample from a population of unknown size.

        The last two firm types are useful if problematic. Standard survival analysis is designed to cope

with right censoring if it is known that the firm has not dissolved at the conclusion of the observation

period. Some firms survive for a very long time and survival analysis can generate unbiased hazard ratios

with the inclusion of type F firms. But it is possible that some firms formed in the observation window may

have dissolved in the window without the dissolution being observed. If we include type-E firms with type-

                                                    -10-
F firms, firm lifetime will be overestimated. Thus, two sets of results are reported below. One set includes

only type-D firms (those with observed formation and dissolution dates). A second set includes type-D

firms, as well as undissolved partnerships assuming they are right-censored type F firms.

        Table 1 presents summary statistics for partnerships that appear in the Baltimore American

between 1 January 1850 and 3 March 1857. Panel A reports statistics on firms for which both start and

end dates are observed (complete spells). Panel B reports statistics on complete spells (type D firms), as

well as firms for which a start date is observed but an end date is not. Statistics reported in Panel B are

based on the assumption that firms are either type D (complete spells) or type F firms (dissolution dates

occur beyond the observation window). The mean life span for all completed spell firms is just under two

years. When firms are divided by the number of partners, two- and three-partner firms lived for between

1.97 and 2.04 years. At 1.70 years, the mean life for firms with four or more partners was notably shorter.

By way of comparison, Kahn (1985) estimated the life span of incorporated nineteenth-century New York

banks at 21 years. Partnerships were short-lived.

        Two other features of historical partnerships are noteworthy. First, unlike twentieth-century

partnerships, a relatively small proportion of nineteenth-century partnership were engaged in professions

or finance. The majority of mid-nineteenth-century partnerships were engaged in wholesale commerce.

Second, most partnerships were dissolved by “mutual consent.” Poor health or death of a partner was

responsible for less than 10 percent of all dissolutions. Firms with three or more partners were also more

likely than two-partner firms to include a term limit in the partnership agreement. Including firms with

observed start dates but no observed end date (Panel B) does not fundamentally alter the interpretations

drawn from completed-spell firms.

        The nature of the data – days to dissolution – makes it possible to use survival analysis to

investigate the effects of covariates on firm longevity. The covariates of principal interest are those on the

                                                    -11-
number of partners (two nonfamilial partners is the excluded category), but the regressions control for

economic sector as well. Table 2 reports results of alternative accelerated failure time models.9 Columns

(1) and (2) report results only for 419 partnerships for which date of formation and date of dissolution are

observed; columns (3) and (4) report results for all 1,057 observed formations, assuming that unobserved

dissolutions are censored rather than unobserved. Several features of the results are consistent with

conceptual treatment of partnerships discussed in Section 2 above.

        First, partnerships that included two or more family members were longer lived than partnerships

lacking a familial connection. The persistence of family partnerships may result from interdependent utility,

from familial dispute resolution mechanisms unavailable to unrelated partners, from familial sanctions that

mitigate shirking, or simply from better pre-formation information about the work ethic and ability of

partners. Second, larger partnerships were shorter lived than smaller partnerships. Farrell and Scotchmer

(1988) observe that two-thirds of law firms consist of two or three partners, a fact they attribute to high-

ability partners not wanting their earnings diluted by sharing with lower-ability partners. It may have been

that the probability of an imperfectly informed high-ability partner forming a match with a less-able partner

increased in the number of partners and the poor matches more quickly dissolved. On the other hand,

experimental results from minimum-effort games show that shirking increases in the number of players,

and nineteenth-century partnerships with more members may have more rapidly devolved to low-effort

equilibria and dissolved earlier (Van Huyck et al 1990). The relatively small number of partnerships with




        9
           Proportional hazard models assume a model of the form: ha = Rhp(t) in which the key assumption
is proportional hazards, or that the effect of all covariates is the same at all times (Keene 2002). The
natural alternative is to assume an accelerated failure time (AFT) model of the form: ha = Nhp(Nt) in which
N is an acceleration factor. AFT specifications assume that the effects of covariates are multiplicative on
time and, unlike proportional hazards, imposes a particular parameterization based on the residual
distribution. Preliminary analyses suggest the appropriateness of the AFT model over the proportional
hazards model and either the Weibull (complete spells) or lognormal (censored spells) parameterization.

                                                    -12-
four or more members precludes precise estimation, but the negative parameter estimates in every

specification are suggestive of incentive problems inside larger partnerships.

        Third, compared to firms engaged in wholesale trade, partnerships engaged in construction or

finance were shorter lived, while professional, retail and manufacturing partnerships were longer lived.

Levin and Tadelis (2005) argue that the partnership form persists in the professions – law, medicine,

accounting and consulting – because it is costly for customers to assess product quality and existing

partners have incentives to admit new partners only when they are as productive as the least productive

current partner. The fact that other informed professionals are willing to partner with an individual provides

a signal about that individual’s productivity. The most common professional partnership in the nineteenth

century was the law firm and their relative persistence may have followed from attorneys’ better abilities

to observe each other’s productivity prior to pairing off. Better matches from the outset meant fewer

internal disagreements and later dissolutions. Any results concerning professional partnerships remain

tentative, however, because few of them appear in the data.

        The relative longevity of retail and manufacturing firms may reflect greater care taken in forming

partnerships when the costs of untimely dissolution are higher. Among the completed spells, the average

two-partner wholesale firm survived for 722 days, compared to 762 days for two-partner manufacturers

and 908 days for two-partner retailers. Although liquidation did not necessarily follow dissolution, the

possibility of having to sell illiquid assets was much greater for, say, a dry goods retails carrying a sizeable

inventory or a brass foundry or iron mill with specialized facilities than for a tobacco factor.10 Knowing that




        10
           One measure of liquidation risk is whether the dissolution notice announced that the business
would be continued by one or more members of the dissolving firms. Of the announced dissolutions among
two-partner firms, approximately two-thirds of retail, wholesale and manufacturing firms announced that
the business would continue in a different form; only 40 percent of financial firms included a similar
notation.

                                                     -13-
a poor match was costly, potential partners in retail and manufacturing enterprise were likely to invest more

in pre-partnership screening. The result was more propitious matches and longer-lived firms.

        One contribution of this study is that it documents the life span of partnerships of different sizes

engaged in different pursuits. The evidence suggests that partnerships were fragile, short-lived teams.

Absent testimonial evidence concerning the reasons for their dissolution, we are left to speculate about the

causes, but the evidence is consistent with concerns with opportunistic behavior in teams. Large teams

were shorter lived while family teams and teams that were more costly to unwind were longer lived.

Subsequent sections investigate the extent to which partnerships paid a price for their observed fragility.



4. Partnerships and credit costs: Data and empirical approach

        The data on interest rates paid by proprietors and partners consist of a subset of the 29,600 loans

extended by the Black River Bank of Watertown, New York between November 1845 and April 1859.

Loveland Paddock opened the bank in late 1844 under the terms and conditions of New York’s 1838 Free

Banking Act. By 1844, Paddock, a dry goods merchant by trade, had considerable banking experience. He

was elected to the board of directors of the Jefferson County Bank, also of Watertown, in 1828. When the

nearby Sacket’s Harbor Bank opened in 1834, he purchased shares and was elected to that bank’s board

of directors. He joined with several other men in 1840 to organize the Bank of Watertown and served as

its president until 1842, when he sold his shares and resigned (Albany Argus, 17 June 1840). He continued

in his dry goods business until 1844, when he liquidated his inventory, deposited $40,000 in mortgages

and New York State bonds with the state comptroller, and established the Black River Bank (hereafter

BRB) (Albany Argus, 19 February 1845; Emerson 1898). The BRB converted to a national charter in 1864




                                                    -14-
and operated into the 1880s when it was voluntarily liquidated by two of Loveland Paddock’s sons.11

        It is difficult to know how representative the BRB was of contemporary banks and banking

practice. By several measures, the bank was typical. There were dozens of similar closely held banks and

there were dozens of free banks established along the Erie Canal and Lake Ontario to finance the shipment

of local staples to eastern urban markets and to finance the region’s incipient industrialization (Bodenhorn

1999). Located just a few miles from the convergence of the St. Lawrence River with Lake Ontario, the

BRB resembled these banks. By other measures, the BRB was atypical. It was longer lived and larger than

most.12 One important difference between the BRB’s operation and that of some other contemporary banks

was its owners’ willingness to violate New York’s usury law. New York imposed a 7 percent interest rate

limit, but the BRB regularly charged rates in excess of the 7 percent ceiling (Bodenhorn 2007). At least

some other banks did not (Wang 2008). The banker’s willingness to risk a usury conviction reflects the

perceived riskiness of some loans, a feature of the bank’s lending that will be exploited in the empirical

analysis.

        Among the bank’s extant records are two discount (loan) ledgers that provide detailed information

on more than 29,000 loans granted by the bank between 1845 and 1859. Both ledgers were double-sided

with pre-printed column and row dividers. On each row, a clerk recorded the borrower’s name(s); the date

the loan was made and the date it matured; the loan amount; and the total interest charge, or discount.



        11
            In the period studied here (1845-1859), Loveland Paddock owned 90 percent of the bank’s
shares. Two of his three sons owned the remaining 10 percent, but extant records do not reveal the exact
allocation. Shares of the BRB never traded. The eldest son served as the bank’s vice president; the second
son as its cashier or chief operating officer. Local legend holds that Loveland’s third son was something of
a spendthrift and did not participate in the management of the bank.
        12
           Kahn (1985) estimates an average life of 21 years for New York’s free banks; the BRB was in
business for 36. Measured by assets, the BRB was also about 50 percent larger than the average free bank
in 1850. By 1860 it was about 60 percent larger (Albany Argus, 25 November 1850; New York State
1862).

                                                    -15-
Ledger #3 (1854-1859) also recorded the names of all endorsers or cosigners, and indicated whether the

loan was paid, renewed or protested for nonpayment at maturity.13 Partnerships were identified by the

names of the borrowers. If the name was recorded in the style of Jones & Smith or Jones, Smith & Co.,

the borrowing entity is treated as a partnership and not one of the individual partners. When the borrower

was recorded as an individual, as in E.S. Smith, the borrower is treated as the individual borrowing on his

or her own account even if he or she was involved in a partnership at the time.

        One shortcoming of the BRB data is that the number of partners involved in the partnerships is not

specified. All that was recorded was the name of the firm, so the data records firms with a name like Jones

& Smith without noting whether Jones and Smith were the only partners. While the BRB data is silent on

the issue, information from the Baltimore partner sample sheds light on firm naming practices and firm

size. Table 3 reports the incidence of firms by naming style and number of partners. Not surprisingly, 94.5

percent of Jones & Smith-style companies had two partners and 95.1 percent of Jones, Smith & Brown-

style firms had three partners. Associations between the number of partners and firm names in the style

of Jones & Co or Jones, Smith & Co are less consistent, however. Only 63.5 percent of firms in the style

of Jones & Co have two partners; another 29.3 percent had three partners. Given the nature of the data and

the association between the partnerships’ names and the number of partners, the empirical analysis

separates firms by naming style rather than assuming a number of partners from the firms’ names.

        Despite efforts to link borrowers to Watertown’s contemporary city directories, the New York state

censuses of 1845 and 1855, and the manuscript records of the 1850 and 1860 federal censuses, relatively




        13
            Evidence collected from the local county court records suggests that the clerk’s recording of
protested notes in the discount ledger was not comprehensive. It is impossible to determine the quality of
the “renewed” notations. Recorded renewals were less common than typical at other banks, but it is
difficult to determine whether this followed from differences in lending practice or from inconsistent
recording.

                                                    -16-
little could be learned about the ages, occupations and other characteristics of the bank’s borrowers. To

control for these unobservable characteristics, the empirical analysis employs fixed effects estimation on

individuals of the following form:

        yit = "i + 8t + DPit + $Xit + ,it

where "i = " + (Ai and Ai is vector of time-invariant, unobserved individual confounders; 8t is year and

month dummies, Xit is a vector of observable loan characteristics, namely the loan’s size, maturity, the

place of payment if the loan was based on a bill of exchange, whether the loan was a renewal, and the

length of the borrower’s relationship. D is the coefficient of interest and estimates the effect of partnership

status on the borrower’s credit terms, yit. Although fixed effects estimators deal effectively with

unobserved confounders, the estimated D coefficients are             susceptible to attenuation bias from

mismeasurement of Pit (Angrist and Pischke 2009, 225) or sampling error (Aydemir and Borjas 2011). The

attenuation bias will be larger the more the mismeasurement follows from misreporting or miscoding the

data such that observed changes from proprietorship to partnership (or vice versa) are mostly noise.

        The noise component in the BRB data should be low. When the borrower was a partnership, the

ledgers identified the borrowers by the firm owner’s last names and, typically, their given name or initial(s).

The loan ledgers, for example, report seven loans to George Babbitt between 1846 and 1853. They also

report 11 loans to F. B. Hallett & G. Babbitt between 1848 and 1853. Because there are no other

borrowers in the BRB records with the Babbitt family name, we can be reasonably confident that G.

Babbitt and George Babbitt are one and the same. Similarly, because the only Hallett in the loan records

is F. B. Hallett, we can be confident that the partner and the proprietor are one and the same. If there was

any uncertainty about a borrower’s identity as individual or partner, they were not matched. Thus, despite

several borrowers with the Smith surname, the only ones to appear in the sample are John B. Smith who

also appears as part of John B. Smith & Co., and Timothy A. Smith who appears as part of the firm T.A.

                                                     -17-
& A.P. Smith. Because I could not positively differentiate A.P. Smith from an A. Smith, A. P. Smith is not

matched in the sample.14 Of the nearly 29,600 original loans, the matching process leaves 7,353 usable

observations. Some individuals never borrowed as part of a partnership and are excluded. Similarly, some

partners never borrowed on their own account and some who may have borrowed as both proprietor and

partner could not be unambiguously matched and are excluded.

        One concern with the estimation procedure is whether the borrower, alternatively observed as an

individual and a partner, was engaged in the same or a closely related business. Partnership law, and

almost assuredly partnerships agreements, prohibited partners from transacting on their own account in

the same business as the partnership while participating in the partnership.15 Opportunistic partners may

not have strictly followed the letter of the law, but the loan records are consistent with: (1) general

observance of the law; and (2) individuals as proprietors and individuals as partners engaged in the same

or similar lines of business.

        Consider, for example, the two randomly chosen cases of C. P. Adams and Frederick J. Whitney.

Adams borrowed on his own account 28 times between 1848 and 1851 (with two additional loans in 1852

and one in 1854); 29 of these 31 loans were bills of exchange payable in Boston, Massachusetts; the

average loan was $521 and matured in 31 days. Between 1852 and 1856, Adams received 70 loans as part

of Adams & Co.; all were bills of exchange payable in Boston; and the average loan was for $562 and

        14
           In a few instances, I used information reported in the Watertown city directories to match
individuals to partnerships. The directories sometimes identified the members of the partnership by given
names or initials when the loan records did not. If one or more of the family names were sufficiently
unusual that the individuals named in the directory could be matched to the partnership in the loan records,
the individual and his partnership are included in the sample. One directory, for example, identified L.
Ingalls and Lorenzo M. Stowell as the individuals constituting Ingalls & Stowell, printers. Thus, L. Ingalls
and L. M. Stowell are each matched with Ingalls & Stowell.
        15
           “No partner has a right to engage in any business or speculation which must necessarily deprive
the partnership of his time, skill, and labour, because it is the duty of each to devote himself to the interest
of the firm” (Penny Cyclopaedia 1840, 294).

                                                      -18-
matured in 35 days. Adams was listed in the Watertown directory as a commission merchant and every

loan, whether borrowed by him individually or by him as part of a firm, was consistent with wholesale

trade between northern New York and Boston.

        Frederick Whitney was listed as a grocer in the city directory, most likely a retail grocer. Between

December 1845 and June 1846, Whitney borrowed three times on his own account; he borrowed three

additional times between January 1850 and September 1851. Those six loans averaged $101. In the interim

(November 1846 to July 1849), the partnership of E. D. & F. J. Whitney borrowed 18 times for an average

of $80. Between December 1845 and July 1849, Whitney either as individual or as partner borrowed

between $80 and $100 approximately every two months. This is consistent with a retail grocer using bank

credit to finance inventory – a practice the banker Paddock would have been familiar with and willing to

finance having been a dry goods retailer himself before turning to banking. The Adams and Whitney

examples are typical in that individuals only rarely borrowed when they were borrowing as partners, but

the basic features of the individual and partnership loans were not wildly dissimilar, though partnerships

tended to borrow larger amounts at longer terms.

        Table 4 reports summary statistics for all borrowers, as well as separately for proprietors and

partners. Evident differences appear in the summary statistics. Partners secured loans about 25 percent

larger (p<0.001) than proprietors for shorter maturities (p<0.001) on which they paid higher interest rates

(p<0.003). They also had significantly shorter (p<0.0001) relationships with the BRB, which is consistent

with their short life spans. Partners were also more likely than proprietors to borrow on bills of exchange

payable in New York City, Boston or Albany. Partners borrowing with bills drawn on distant cities is

consistent with the large fraction of partnerships engaged in wholesale trade. The wholesale firm – rather

than the professional or financial partnership – was the predominant partnership in the mid-nineteenth

century.

                                                   -19-
5. Partnerships and credit costs: Evidence

        To control for the potential endogeneity of partnership choice, the empirical analysis takes

advantage of the longitudinal nature of the data in that individuals are observed on several occasions,

sometimes as proprietors and sometimes as partners. The effect of the choice to partner on credit costs is

identified through variation in loan rates across time. Individual borrower specific fixed effects difference

out time-invariant person characteristics over time that may have influenced the choice to form a

partnership. It is important to note that individual-specific fixed effects cannot control for characteristics

that change over time. If the individual as proprietor and as partner engaged in different businesses, for

example, individual fixed effects will not control for this. But the previous discussion suggests that this is

not a serious concern. On the other hand, if the principal difference between proprietors and partners is the

scale of the business (i.e., partners may have pooled resources and talents to pursue larger transactions)

the data can capture these effects because loan sizes and maturities are observed.



5.1 Partnerships and premia

        Table 5 reports the full specifications of the fixed effects regressions, as well as OLS results for

comparative purposes. The first two columns report the results of specifications in which all partnerships

are treated for as a single type. Controlling for other observable loan features – amount, maturity, place

of payment, as well as the month and year in which the loan was made – the fixed effects “within” estimate

implies that individuals paid 10 basis points more for credit when they borrowed as partners than they paid

when they borrowed as proprietors. Do 10 basis points represent a meaningful cost? Ten basis points

represent about one-sixth of a standard deviation of the loan rate, which suggests a modest premium. But

10 basis points are more than twice the unconditional mean difference in interest rates paid by proprietors

and partners. More importantly, perhaps, with an mean loan term of 75 days, a 10 basis point premium per

                                                    -20-
loan period implies an annualized 49 basis point annualized premium. Columns 3 and 4 separate

partnership by naming style. When individuals borrowed as a part of a two-name, non-familial firm (Jones

& Smith types) they paid about 10 basis points more than they paid when they borrowed as proprietors.

Individuals borrowing as part of a non-familial partnership with three or more named partners paid more

than twice the two-partner premium – 22 basis points – than when borrowing as an individual. The

difference between two- and three-partner firm loans is striking, but the coefficients are not statistically

different from one another (p=0.34).

         Firms organized in the style of Jones & Jones, Jones & Son, or Jones & Brother are assumed to

be familial two-partner firms and are included separately. Firms organized as Jones & Sons or Jones &

Brothers are treated separately because the plural likely implies three or more familial members. Members

of familial firms likely to have two partners paid approximately 4 basis points more than they paid as

proprietors, while members of three-partner familial firms paid a much larger 52 basis point premium. The

modest interest rate premium paid by two-member family firms is consistent with the survival results:

family firms tended to be longer lived and thus exposed creditors to lower default risks. The half-point

premium paid by three-member firms is seemingly anomalous, and should be treated cautiously because

there are only 11 three-member family firm loans in the data set compared to 816 two-member family firm

loans.

         Firms in the style of Jones & Co represent a curious case in that they are likely partnerships, but

with a single named partner. The naming convention suggests a named senior (or general) partner and one

or more unnamed junior (or limited liability) partners The estimated fixed-effect coefficient on firms

organized in the style of Jones & Co imply that individuals as members of firms organized under this

naming convention paid a 12.6 basis point premium relative to the rate they paid as proprietors. The

interest rate premium paid by these firms is consistent with the premium paid by two-named partner firms,

                                                    -21-
which suggests that a majority of firms organized under the Jones & Co rubric were two-member firms.

        The conclusion to be drawn from loan records is that partnerships were unable to protect creditors

from untimely dissolution risks and costs. There is tentative evidence, as well, that the risks and costs

increased in the number of partners and creditors demanded compensation for the risks in the form of

higher interest rates.



5.2 Partnerships and usurious and high interest rates

        Although about one-third of loans in the sample paid the 7% legal ceiling rate, more than one-fifth

of the loans were at rates exceeding 7.1%, which violated New York’s usury law.16 More than two percent

of loans paid 8.5% or more. In this section I estimate individual fixed effects linear probability

specifications with a binary dependent variable equal to 1 if the rate exceeds the legal limit (labeled usury)

or 8.5% (labeled high rate), otherwise the regressions are the same as those discussed in the previous

section. The coefficients of interest are those on the partner variables and are interpreted as “within” effects

in that they capture the interest rate premium paid by individuals depending on the organizational form in

which they are participating. Table 6 reports the results.

        Columns 1 and 3 combine all partnerships into a single type. This simple categorization implies

that compared to rates charged proprietors, individuals borrowing as members of a partnership were 7.1

percent more likely to pay a usurious rate and 2.5 percent more likely to pay a high rate. The results in

columns (2) and (4), however, illuminate the association between firm liquidation risks increasing in firm


        16
            The 7.1% rate is used to identify usurious rates due to rounding effects or small miscalculations
in the discount. In 1853 A.F. Barker $57 note maturing in 92 days was discounted by $1.02, which implies
an effective annualized rate of 7.1%. A $1.00 discount would have resulted in an effective annualized
interest rate of 6.96%. New York law did not exempt even small violations of the usury limit, but given the
absence of inexpensive computing it seems likely that this violation was miscalculation or rounding error
than a deliberate violation of the legal interest ceiling.

                                                     -22-
size (as discussed in Section 2) and the compensation paid to creditors for accepting some of that risk. The

parameter estimates in column 2 (usurious loans) suggest that three-partner firms were between 3 and 6

times more likely to pay a rate in excess of the legal limit. As members of firms organized in the style of

Jones, Smith & Brown, for example, individuals were 28.7 percent more likely to pay a usurious rate; they

were just 10.3 percent more likely to pay a usurious rate as a member of a Jones & Smith-style firm. And

the coefficients are statistically different (p=0.0009). Individuals as members of Jones & Brothers-style

firms were nearly 6 times more likely to pay a usurious rate than individuals as member of Jones & Jones-

style firms. Again, the coefficients are different (p<0.0001).

        When we repeat the exercise for high rate loans (rate>8.5%), the results are comparable. The

three-partner coefficients are approximately 3 times the two-partner coefficients, though the limited

number of observations in some cells means that the null hypothesis of coefficient equality cannot be

rejected (p>0.19 in both cases). With only one Jones, Smith & Co-style firm in the analysis, we should not

make any generalizations based on the coefficient on this variable. Whether interest rates enter as a

continuous variable or a binary variable, the evidence is consistent with creditors insuring themselves

against partnership-specific dissolution costs through higher interest rates. Team production can increase

worker productivity and generate profits, but team production is also prone to opportunistic behaviors and

subject to costs not borne by individual proprietors.



6. Concluding comments

        Were nineteenth-century creditors concerned about liquidation risk at partnerships? Did they

believe that liquidation risk increased in the number of partners and the style of the partnership? Evidence

from the loan records of the Black River Bank – a not atypical nineteenth-century bank – suggest that they

were. Individual fixed effects estimates imply that individuals as partners paid higher interest rates for a

                                                   -23-
given type, size and maturity of a loan than did individuals as proprietors. Partners were more likely to pay

usurious or high interest rates, as well.

        It is well known that creditors do not insure against default costs solely through higher rates: higher

rates alone would, in fact, only serve to increase default risk. Creditors would also have credit rationed

firms observably likely to breakup at an unexpected or unpropitious moment. The available data do not

afford an opportunity to test for credit rationing, but a notable feature of the Black River Bank’s loans is

that loan (project) size did not increase in proportion with the number of partners. The unconditional

partner loan amount was just 25% larger than the unconditional proprietor loan amount. Future studies

should explore additional features of the partner-creditor relationship.

        So little is currently known about the nineteenth-century business partnership as an organizational

form that the current study barely scratches the surface, not least how partnership as an organizational form

contributed to long-run economic development. Guinnane et al (2007) show that American firms faced a

suboptimal menu of organizational forms – joint-stock companies, limited liability partnerships and

incorporation were unavailable or unattractive – yet the United States economy was “extraordinarily

successful.” The absence of alternative forms and the risk of untimely dissolution may have precluded the

formation of some firms that would have been profitable and long-lived under a different regime. Those

entrepreneurs who took on the risks bore additional costs, but the mid-nineteenth century small business

sector was vibrant and dynamic. Part of that dynamism – firm formation, dissolution, and reformation –

was an artificial product of the limited menu of choices and part was due to uncertainties involved in the

matching of potential partners. Although speculative, it may be that a vibrant financial sector was a critical

component in the economy’s nineteenth-century dynamism. Creditors priced the risk of firm dissolution

and default. That, perhaps, is one lesson. Although financial risk taking has fallen into disrepute recently,

New York’s competitive banking system facilitated the collection and allocation of risk capital for business

                                                    -24-
purposes.



7. References

Alchian, Armen A. 1984. “Specificity, Specialization, and Coalitions.” Zeitschrift für die gesamte

       Staatswissenschaft / Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 140.1, 34-49.

Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz. 1972. “Production, Information Costs, and Economic

       Organization.” American Economic Review 62.5, 777-795.

Alchian, Armen A., and Susan Woodward. 1987. “Reflections on the Theory of the Firm.” Zeitschrift für

       die gesamte Staatswissenschaft / Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 143.1, 110-

       136.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas. 2011. “Attenuation Bias in Measuring the Wage Impact

       of Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 29.1, 69-112.

Berle, Adolph and Gardiner Means. 1932 (1967). The Modern Corporation and Private Property. 2d ed.

       New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.

Black River Bank. 1845-1859. Discount Book #2; Discount Book #3. Jefferson County (New York)

       Historical Society. Watertown, New York.

Blair, Margaret M. 2003. “Locking in Capital: What Corporation Law Achieved for Business

       Organizations in the Nineteenth Century.” UCLA Law Review 51, 387-455.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 1999. “An Engine of Growth: Real Bills and Schumpetarian Banking in Antebellum

       New York.” Explorations in Economic History 36.3, 278-302.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2007. “Usury Ceilings and Bank Lending Behavior: Evidence from Nineteenth

       Century New York.” Explorations in Economic History 44.2, 179-202.

Burdett, Kenneth and Melvyn G. Coles. 1999. “Long-Term Partnership Formation: Marriage and

                                                -25-
        Employment.” Economic Journal 109.456, F307-F334.

Chandler, Alfred D. Jr. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business.

        Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Charness, Gary and Martin Dufwenberg. 2006. “Promises and Partnership.” Econometrica 74.6, 1579-

        1601.

Comyn, Samuel. 1835. The Law of Contracts and Promises. New York: Gould, Banks & Co.

Cottrell, H. C. 1967. “Partnership.” Journal of the Institute of Actuaries 93.1, 91-111.

Cramton, Peter, Robert Gibbons, and Paul Klemperer. 1987. “Dissolving an Partnership Efficiently.”

        Econometrica 55.3, 615-632.

Deck, Cary and Nikos Nikiforakis. 2012. “Perfect and Imperfect Real-Time Monitoring in a Minimum-

        Effort Game.” Experimental Economics 15.1, 71-88.

Doornik, Katherine. 2006. “Relational Contracting in Partnerships.” Journal of Economic & Management

        Strategy 15.2, 517-548.

Dorsey, Clement. 1840. The General Public Statutory Law and Public Local Law of the State of

        Maryland: From the Year 1692 to 1839 Inclusive. Baltimore: J. D. Toy.

Dostie, Benoit. 2005. “Job Turnover and the Returns to Seniority.” Journal of Business & Economic

        Statistics 23.2, 192-199.

Emerson, E. C., editor. 1898. Our Country and Its People: A Descriptive Work on Jefferson County, New

        York from 1793 to 1894. Boston: Boston History Company.

Farrell, Joseph and Suzanne Scotchmer. 1988. “Partnerships.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103.2,

        279-297.

Freedley, Edwin T. 1853. A Practical Treatise on Business: Or How to Get, Save, Spend, Give, Lend, and

        Bequeath Money. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Grambo & Co.

                                                  -26-
Frutos, Maria-Angeles de and Thomas Kittsteiner. 2008. “Efficient Partnership Dissolution under Buy-Sell

       Clauses.” Rand Journal of Economics 39.1, 184-198.

Galanter, Marc and Thomas M. Palay. 1990. “Why the Big Get Bigger: The Promotion-to-Partner

       Tournament and the Growth of the Large Law Firm.” Virginia Law Review 76.4, 747-811.

Gilson, Ronald J., and Robert H. Mnookin. 1985. “Sharing among Human Capitalists: An Economic

       Inquiry into the Corporate Law Firm and How Partners Split Profits.” Stanford Law Review 37.1,

       313-392.

Gilson, Ronald J., and Robert H. Mnookin. 1989. “Coming of Age in a Corporate Law Firm: The

       Economics of Associate Career Patterns.” Stanford Law Review 41.3, 567-595.

Goldlücke, Susanne and Sebastian Kranz. 2012. “Delegation, Monitoring, and Relational Contracts.”

       Economics Letters 117.x, 405-407.

Guinnane, Timothy, Ron Harris, Naomi R. Lamoreaux, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2007. “Putting the

       Corporation in its Place.” Enterprise & Society 8.3, 687-729.

Hansmann, Henry, and Reinier Kraakman. 2000a. “Organizational Law as Asset Partitioning.” European

       Economic Review 44.x, 807-817.

Hansmann, Henry, and Reinier Kraakman. 2000b. “The Essential Role of Organizational Law.” Yale Law

       Journal 110.3, 387-440.

Hansmann, Henry, Reinier Kraakman, and Richard Squire. 2006. “Law and the Rise of the Firm.”

       Harvard Law Review 119.x, 1333-1403.

Jehiel, Phillipe and Ady Pauzner. 2006. “Partnership Dissolution with Interdependent Values.” Rand

       Journal of Economics 37.1, 1-22.

Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency

       Costs and Ownership Structure.” Journal of Financial Economics 3(4), 305-360.

                                                 -27-
Kahn, James. 1985. “Another Look at Free Banking in the United States.” American Economic Review

       75.4, 881-885.

Keene, Oliver N. 2002. “Alternatives to the Hazard Ratio in Summarizing Efficacy in Time-to-Event

       Studies: An Example from Influenza Trials.” Statistics in Medicine 21.22, 3687-3700.

Kittsteiner, Thomas, Axel Ockenfels, and Hadja Trhal. 2012. “Partnership Dissolution Mechanisms in the

       Laboratory.” Economics Letters 117.x, 394-396.

Lazear, Edward P. 1999. “Gloabalisation and the Market for Team-Mates.” Economic Journal 109.454,

       C15-C40.

Levin, Jonathan and Steven Tadelis. 2005. “Profit Sharing and the Role of Professional Partnerships.”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 120.1, 131-171.

Morgan, John. 2004. “Dissolving a Partnership (Un)Fairly.” Economic Theory 23.x, 090-923.

Morrison, Alan D. and William J. Wilhelm, Jr. 2004. “Partnership Firms, Reputation, and Human

       Capital.” American Economic Review 94.5, 1682-1692.

Mumford, Karen and Peter N. Smith. 2004. “Job Tenure in Britain: Employee Characteristics versus

       Workplace Effects.” Economica 71. 282, 275-298.

Nelson, Robert C. 1983. “The Changing Structure of Opportunity: Recruitment and Careers in Large Law

       Firms.” American Bar Foundation Research Journal 8.1, 109-142.

Penny Cyclopaedia of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. Vol. XVII. 1840. London:

       Charles Knight and Co.

Rosenberg, Nathan and L. E. Birdzell, Jr. 1986. How the West Grew Rich: The Economic Transformation

       of the Industrial World. New York: Basic Books.

Rothenberg, Winifred. 1985. “The Emergence of a Capital Market in Rural Massachusetts, 1730-1838.”

       Journal of Economic History 45.4, 781-808.

                                                -28-
Selwyn, William. 1831. An Abridgement of the Law of Nisi Prius. Vol. II. Philadelphia: P. H. Nicklin &

       T. Johnson.

Van Huyck, John B., Raymond C. Battalio, and Richard O. Bell. 1990. “Tacit Coordination Games,

       Strategic Uncertainty, and Coordination Failure.” American Economic Review 80.1, 234-248.

Wang, Ta-Chen. 2008. “Banks, Credit Markets, and Early American Development: A Case Study of Entry

       and Competition.” Journal of Economic History 68.2, 438-461.

Williamson, Oliver E. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: The Free Press.

Wright, Robert E. 2011. “Rise of the Corporation Nation.” In Founding Choices: American Economic

       Policy in the 1790s, 217-258. Edited by Douglass Irwin and Richard Sylla. Chicago: University

       of Chicago Press.




                                                -29-
                                              Table 1
                      Summary statistics on Baltimore partnerships, 1850-1857
                           All partners          Two partners         Three partners    Four+ partners

                          Completed spells (observed formation and dissolution dates)

Days to dissolution           718.85                 719.75                743.96           619.47
                             (545.66)               (573.65)              (514.91)         (393.25)

Wholesale                     0.551                  0.578                 0.487            0.563

Retail                        0.103                  0.107                 0.102            0.063

Manufacturing                 0.081                  0.100                 0.051            0.031

Professionals                 0.002                  0.004                   0                0

Construction                  0.010                  0.007                 0.017              0

Finance                       0.053                  0.037                 0.077            0.094

Unreported industry           0.191                  0.159                 0.256            0.218

Consent                       0.678                  0.733                 0.598            0.500

Death                         0.057                  0.056                 0.051            0.094

Limitation                    0.134                  0.089                 0.205            0.250

Illness                       0.021                  0.022                 0.009            0.063

Unknown cause                 0.110                  0.100                 0.137            0.094

                                          Completed and censored spells

Days to dissolution           961.38                 974.03                969.62           811.43
or censoring date            (729.41)               (753.44)              (700.45)         (571.80)

Wholesale                     0.497                  0.519                 0.449            0.453

Retail                        0.099                  0.108                 0.075            0.107

Manufacturing                 0.102                  0.112                 0.082            0.080

Professionals                 0.008                  0.011                   0                0

Construction                  0.010                  0.010                 0.015              0

Finance                       0.043                  0.036                 0.045            0.093

Unreported industry           0.233                  0.199                 0.326            0.240

Source: Baltimore American (1850-1857).


                                                      -30-
-31-
                                                 Table 2
                                     Covariates of time-to-dissolution
                        Complete spells        Complete spells         All spells              All spells
                         Weibull-AFT           lognormal-AFT          Weibull-AFT           lognormal-AFT

Family partners              0.203*                0.261*                 0.268*               0.381*
                             (0.080)               (0.099)                (0.109)              (0.113)

Three partners                0.024                 0.081                 -0.206*               -0.149
                             (0.078)               (0.097)                (0.105)              (0.113)

Four+ partners                -0.202                -0.027                 -0.313               -0.225
                             (0.120)               (0.126)                (0.180)              (0.176)

Retail                        0.147                0.290*                  0.122                0.261
                             (0.095)               (0.129)                (0.147)              (0.155)

Manufacturing                 0.020                 0.012                  0.324                0.335
                             (0.138)               (0.171)                (0.176)              (0.180)

Professional                  -0.154               0.257*                  1.665               1.595*
                             (0.086)               (0.106)                (0.951)              (0.803)

Construction                  -0.458                -0.391                 -0.187               -0.114
                             (0.398)               (0.359)                (0.480)              (0.467)

Finance                       -0.161                -0.084                 -0.257               -0.188
                             (0.150)               (0.167)                (0.209)              (0.211)

Unreported industry           -0.132                -0.129                0.381*               0.325*
                             (0.098)               (0.112)                (0.130)              (0.135)

Constant                     6.642*                6.173*                 7.616*               7.202*
                             (0.063)               (0.069)                (0.074)              (0.083)

ln(p)                        0.326*                   ---                 0.087*                 --
                             (0.035)                                      (0.032)

ln(F)                          ---                 -0.161*                   --                0.280*
                                                   (0.035)                                     (0.036)

Observations                  419                    419                   1057                 1057

Log likelihood               -517.2                 -527.1                -1042.9              -1025.1

AIC                          1054.3                1074.1                 2107.7               2072.3

Notes: * implies p<0.05. The excluded categories are two partners and wholesale business.
Sources: Author’s calculation from data in Baltimore American (1850-1857).




                                                    -32-
                                             Table 3
                           Firm naming patterns and number of partners
Name style                           1             2              3              4    5+   Total

Jones & Smith                        0            785             39             4    2    830

Jones, Smith & Brown                 0             0              78             4    0     82

Jones & Co                           3            238            110             21   3    375

Jones, Smith & Co                    0            60             126             44   7    237

Jones, Smith, Brown & Co             0             0              0              7    2     9

Jones & Son (Bro)                    0            24              13             1    0     38

Jones & Sons (Bros)                  0            23              42             8    0     73

Total                                3           1,130           408             89   14   1,644

Note: includes all firm types delineated in Figure 1 as described in the text.
Source: Baltimore American and Commercial Advertiser (1850-1857).




                                                         -33-
                                               Table 4
                                 Black River Bank Summary Statistics
Variable                                                     1                 2            3
                                                       All borrowers       Proprietors   Partners

Interest rate (%)                                             7.04             7.02        7.06
                                                             (0.65)           (0.56)      (0.77)

Maturity (days)                                               74.58           75.78        72.68
                                                             (28.37)         (27.56)      (29.52)

Loan amount ($)                                           708.31             646.58       806.14
                                                         (1223.79)          (1229.35)    (1208.71)

Prior relationship length (months since first loan)           39.08           45.68        28.62
                                                             (35.03)         (35.92)      (30.80)

Renewal (=1 if loan was renewed at maturity)                  0.02             0.03        0.02

New York City (=1 if loan payable in NYC)                     0.20             0.14        0.30

Boston (=1 if loan payable in Boston)                         0.05             0.03        0.07

Albany (=1 if loan payable in Albany)                         0.08             0.07        0.11

Upstate (=1 if loan payable in Upstate NY)                    0.01             0.01        0.01



Observations                                                  7353            4508         2845

Notes:
Sources: Author’s calculations from information in Black River Bank (1845-1859).




                                                      -34-
                                           Table 5
                     Determinants of credit costs at the Black River Bank
                           OLS               FE                OLS            FE

Partnership               0.044*            0.100*              --            --
                          (0.018)           (0.036)

Jones & Smith               --                --               0.023        0.105*
                                                              (0.032)       (0.048)

Jones, Smith &              --                --               0.087         0.220
Brown                                                         (0.140)       (0.116)

Jones & Co                  --                --              0.097*        0.126*
                                                              (0.026)       (0.063)

Jones, Smith & Co           --                --               0.146         0.005
                                                              (0.257)       (0.367)

Jones & Jones               --                --               -0.028        0.038
                                                              (0.027)       (0.054)

Jones & Brothers            --                --               0.153        0.523*
                                                              (0.109)       (0.054)

Prime rate                 -0.002            -0.001            -0.002        -0.001
                          (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.004)       (0.005)

ln(loan amount)            -0.002            -0.002            -0.003        -0.002
                          (0.008)           (0.011)           (0.008)       (0.009)

ln(loan maturity)        -0.276*           -0.317*           -0.280*        -0.318*
                         (0.027)           (0.033)           (0.028)        (0.033)

Renewal                    0.085             0.064             0.082         0.061
                          (0.066)           (0.067)           (0.066)       (0.067)

Months since first         0.000            0.002*             0.000        0.002*
loan                      (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)       (0.000)

NYC                      -0.107*             -0.020          -0.131*         -0.022
                         (0.028)            (0.050)          (0.031)        (0.043)

Boston                   -0.192*           -0.236*           -0.234*        -0.244*
                         (0.041)           (0.090)           (0.045)        (0.091)

Albany                   -0.053*             -0.043          -0.065*         -0.040
                         (0.026)            (0.024)          (0.026)        (0.025)

Upstate                   1.450*            1.372*            1.453*        1.382*
                          (0.257)           (0.357)           (0.260)       (0.370)




                                             -35-
                                      Table 5
                Determinants of credit costs at the Black River Bank
                      OLS               FE                OLS           FE

Constant             8.249*            8.446*            8.269*        8.447*
                     (0.172)           (0.170)           (0.174)       (0.147)

Year dummies          Yes               Yes               Yes           Yes

Month dummies         Yes               Yes               Yes           Yes

Obs                   7353              7353              7353          7353

F-stat               5.95*             8.60*

R-square             0.086             0.076             0.089         0.079




                                        -36-
                                              Table 6
                      Partnership effects on usurious and high interest rates
                                Linear probability specifications
                            rate>7%                rate>7%               rate>8.5%              rate>8.5%
                               FE                     FE                     FE                     FE

Partnership                  0.071*                    --                  0.025*                    --
                             (0.010)                                       (0.007)

Jones & Smith                   --                  0.103*                    --                  0.021*
                                                    (0.049)                                       (0.010)

Jones, Smith &                  --                  0.287*                    --                   0.062
Brown                                               (0.052)                                       (0.054)

Jones & Co                      --                   0.060                    --                  0.033*
                                                    (0.033)                                       (0.013)

Jones, Smith & Co               --                  0.365*                    --                  0.522*
                                                    (0.083)                                       (0.097)

Jones & Jones                   --                   0.040                    --                   0.015
                                                    (0.031)                                       (0.011)

Jones & Brothers                --                  0.238*                    --                  0.050*
                                                    (0.032)                                       (0.012)



Notes: All regressions include the additional controls reported in Table x. Columns (1) and (2): dependent
variable=1 if interest rate on loan exceeded the legal limit (7%); =0 otherwise. Columns (3) and (4): dependent
variable=1 if interest rate on loan exceeded 8.5%; =0 otherwise. * implies p<0.05.




                                                     -37-
                          Figure 1
Timing of partnership formation and dissolution observations




                            -38-
