                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




LETTING DOWN THE TEAM? EVIDENCE OF SOCIAL EFFECTS OF TEAM INCENTIVES

                                            Philip Babcock
                                             Kelly Bedard
                                            Gary Charness
                                            John Hartman
                                            Heather Royer

                                        Working Paper 16687
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16687


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




We would like to thank Ted Bergstrom, Tom Chang, Uri Gneezy, Michael Kuhn, Peter Kuhn, Justin
Sydnor, and participants at the Southwest Economic Theory Conference 2011, Southern California
Conference in Applied Microeconomics 2011, the Society for Labor Economics 2011, University
of Stavanger Conference on Work and Family, and Yale University for helpful comments. We particularly
thank Chris Clontz for assistance with UCSB Recreation Center usage information. We would also
like to thank Allison Bauer, Stefanie Fischer, Ryan Knefel, Jennifer Milosch, Ruth Morales, Bonnie
Queen, Ryan Smart, Carina Rammelkamp, Stefanie Fischer, George Tam, and Kevin Welding for
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Philip Babcock, Kelly Bedard, Gary Charness, John Hartman, and Heather Royer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Letting Down the Team? Evidence of Social Effects of Team Incentives
Philip Babcock, Kelly Bedard, Gary Charness, John Hartman, and Heather Royer
NBER Working Paper No. 16687
January 2011, Revised June 2012
JEL No. B49,C93,J01,J33

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper estimates social effects of incentivizing people in teams. In two field experiments featuring
exogenous team formation and opportunities for repeated social interactions, we find large team effects
that operate through social channels. The team compensation system induced agents to choose effort
as if they valued a marginal dollar of compensation for their teammate from two-thirds as much (in
one study) to twice as much as they valued a dollar of their own compensation (in the other study).
We conclude that social effects of monetary team incentives exist and can induce effort at lower cost
than through direct individual payment.


Philip Babcock                                     John Hartman
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
2036 North Hall                                    2028 North Hall
University of California, Santa Barbara            University of California, Santa Barbara
Mail Code 9210                                     Mail Code 9210
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                            Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER                                           hartman@econ.ucsb.edu
babcock@econ.ucsb.edu
                                                   Heather Royer
Kelly Bedard                                       Department of Economics
UCSB                                               University of California, Santa Barbara
kelly@econ.ucsb.edu                                2127 North Hall
                                                   Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Gary Charness                                      and NBER
UC, Santa Barbara                                  royer@econ.ucsb.edu
charness@econ.ucsb.edu
1. Introduction

        The interest in incentives to elicit effort or alter behavior is pervasive and growing. In the context

of schooling, Angrist, Lang, and Oreopoulos (2009), Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton (2009), Barrow et al.

(2012), Bettinger (2010), and Fryer (2010) study how incentives affect students’ performance. Charness

and Gneezy (2009), Volpp et al (2009), Ackland and Levy (2011), John et al (2011), Royer, Stehr, and

Sydnor (2011), and Babcock and Hartman (2012), show that financial incentives can promote healthy

behaviors such as exercise, weight loss, and smoking cessation. In many cases, the effectiveness of such

incentives, however, has been questioned. In a review article, Gneezy, Meier, and Rey-Biel (2011) argue

that the experimental results for educational incentives have been “somewhat disappointing.” Similarly,

for healthy behaviors, incentives are often large (e.g., $750 for smoking cessation in Volpp et al (2009))

with limited improvements in behavior.

        One common feature of these incentive programs is their use of individual-based incentives; that

is, an individual’s payment is tied to his/her own behavior. But can we elicit more effort by changing the

structure of these incentives? In particular, a vibrant but separate literature suggests that peers influence

one another through social interactions or social pressure (Sacerdote, 2001, Zimmerman 2003, Bandiera,

Barankay, and Rasul, 2005, 2010, forthcoming, Falk and Ichino 2005, Boisjoly et al, 2006, Foster 2006,

Lyle, 2007, Kremer and Levy, 2008, Carrell, Fullerton, and West, 2009, Mas and Moretti, 2009, Carrell,

Hoekstra, and West, 2011). Incentive structures, then, that take advantage of the full potential of these

social influences may be quite effective.

        Some believe that team compensation accomplishes this. One can imagine that peer influences

are magnified when teammates’ incentives are linked. The popular press is full of accounts of harnessing

the power of a team.1 In real-world environments such as firms, the military, and health and wellness

programs, it is not uncommon to see team-based incentives A best-selling management consultant goes so

1
  As a small snapshot of examples, see http://businessfinancemag.com/article/tailored-team-compensation-0501,
http://compensationmaster.com/articles/tips-for-compensating-teams.html,
http://www.teambuildinginc.com/article_incentives.htm, http://smallbusiness.chron.com/advantages-offering-
teambased-incentive-pay-plan-21644.html, and http://www.mbaknol.com/human-resource-management/team-based-
compensation-system/.


                                                                                                            1
far as to argue that team incentives are more effective than any other policy, and that the effectiveness

derives from social factors: “More than any policy or system, there is nothing like the fear of letting down

respected teammates that motivates people to improve their performance.”2

        Despite the prevalence of this perception, there is a scarcity of empirical research on group

incentive effects of this kind, research connecting the pay-for-behavior literature with the literature on

peer effects. We study the effect of team-based incentives in two separate randomized field experiments,

one featuring pay-for-studying, which incentivized attendance at a study hall in the library and the other

featuring pay-for-exercise, which incentivized gym attendance in a university setting. These are two

settings in which the power of peers has been emphasized,3 each providing a controlled environment in

which to learn about social effects related to effort elicitation. Given concerns about poor education

outcomes and rising obesity, we consider both these outcomes, in and of themselves, to be of first-order

importance. Evidence shows that study times among college students are declining steadily (Babcock and

Marks, 2011) and rates of inactivity among adults are nearly fifty percent.4 We focus on inputs (e.g.,

studying and exercising) rather than outputs (e.g., grades or weight loss), in line with the Fryer (2010)

argument that incentivizing inputs is more effective than incentivizing outputs because individuals may

be unclear about the production function.

        Our study is a rare combination of the positive elements of laboratory experiments, where the

environment can be carefully manipulated, and field experiments, which more closely resemble reality. In

both settings, subjects were randomly assigned either to a) a control group, which received either no

incentives or minimal incentives,5 b) an individual-incentive group, which earned incentives based on

their own behavior, or c) a team-incentive group, which was subject to the same-sized monetary



2
  Lencioni (2002), p. 213
3
  The new Go4Life campaign funded by the National Institute on Aging (http://go4life.niapublications.org/) to
encourage physical activity for older Americans allows participants to sign up with a buddy to increase motivation.
The website (http://www.exercisefriends.com/home.aspx) allows individuals to find others with whom to exercise.
4
  See http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus10.pdf#070.
5
  In the case of studying, we incentivized attendance to a study hall in the library. Since we would not be able to
monitor the attendance of students who did not receive incentives, our control group for the study experiment
received a small monetary incentive for attendance.


                                                                                                                 2
incentives as the individual incentive group but whose payment was partially contingent on the behaviors

of a randomly-assigned and known teammate. In the pay-for-studying experiment, we also had an

additional treatment, the anonymous treatment, which was identical to c), except that the teammate was

unknown. Within the incentive groups, all individuals received small per-visit incentives with a much

larger bonus payment contingent on attending at least a specified number of times. To create the team

incentive, the awarding of the bonus was dependent on both the individual and his/her partner attaining

the threshold number of visits in the case of the team treatments.

        The goal of our experimental design is to tease out the social effects of incentives. To be clear, we

define such effects as those that are related in a direct way to the utility an individual derives from

interacting with others, including but not limited to effects from altruism, guilt, shame, embarrassment,

commitment devices, fear of social punishment, or a desire to be liked or respected. Thus, these effects

exclude specialization in production or knowledge transfers, even though these, too, could be viewed as

types of peer effects. It has been theorized that social pressures are an important factor in the design of

incentives to elicit effort. Kandel and Lazear (1992) argue that many practices at firms have more to do

with creating social pressure in the form of “empathy, loyalty, and guilt” than with improving the

production process in a direct way. It is effects of this kind, rarely analyzed explicitly in environments

with team-based compensation, that are of interest in this paper.6

        There are several key features of the experimental design that enable us to uniquely isolate the

social effects. First, the tasks involve minimal production complementarities. In most research, the

possibility of production complementarities is significant. For example, Hamilton, Nickerson, and Owan

(2003), find that worker productivity rose at a garment plant with the introduction of team incentives. But

it is not clear whether these gains were due to increased effort that resulted from social pressure or from

complementarities in production among workers that involved specialization, knowledge transfer, and


6
 Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (forthcoming), a notable exception, study performance under different team
compensation schemes (rank and tournament incentives) allowing for endogenous team formation. Though they are
able to study endogenous team formation, involving friendships and other social factors, they are not able to
compare individual-based incentive schemes to those that are team-based, and so do not estimate social effects.


                                                                                                              3
other factors directly related to the production process. Second, the team incentive structure is such that a

subject cannot rely exclusively on his/her partner’s effort to earn rewards: If anyone defaults, no one

earns the bonus.7 While this may seem less generalizable to real-world settings that feature payment for

group performance, we do observe this kind of incentive structure outside of academic settings. In the

military, for example, it is common in boot camp for individuals to be incentivized in much the same

manner as in our experiment: When one fails, all members of the team are punished.8 Moreover, since the

goal of our experiment is to understand the social effects of incentives, closing off the channel for this

type of free-riding is desirable. Third, since subjects in the team treatment belong to the same class in the

middle of the term, the setting facilitates social interaction between teammates over an extended period of

time—hard to accomplish in the laboratory, where one-time sessions predominate.

         These features of the experiment imply that if there is no social component to utility and there is

some nonzero probability of default by one’s partner, then attendance will be higher for those in the

individual treatment than for those in the team treatment. But if the reverse is true, we interpret this as

evidence of the existence of social effects. Using a structural model, we can leverage differences across

the different treatments to estimate the size of the social effect.

         To our surprise, we find in the pay-for-study intervention that individuals assigned to the team

treatment frequented the study room roughly twice as often as individuals assigned to the individual

treatment. Individuals assigned to the anonymous team treatment performed only about as well as the

individual treatment, suggesting that the knowledge of your partner has important effects. We estimate

similar but slightly more nuanced effects for the gym study. Our findings are all the more unanticipated

given the claim of earlier literature that production complementarities are absolutely necessary for team

incentives to be effective, and that arbitrarily assigned or “artificial” teams do not produce positive results

(Lazear 2000). Results from our structural model suggest that the pay-for-study experiment induced

7
  This nonlinear incentive structure is similar in spirit to Holmstrom’s (1982) “forcing contracts” except that effort
here is observable.
8
  Kandel and Lazear (1992) argue that “Guilt, in the form of loyalty to… comrades, provides incentives that operate
even in the absence of observability. Thus the military spends much time and money creating loyalty and team
spirit” (p.807).


                                                                                                                     4
agents to choose their effort as if they valued a marginal dollar of compensation for their teammate more

than twice as much as they valued a dollar of their own compensation, while in the pay-for-exercise

experiment, agents chose effort as if they valued a marginal dollar for their teammate two thirds as much

as a dollar of their own compensation.

        We highlight two central implications of these findings. Firstly, social effects of team

compensation can be decisive in inducing agents to accomplish effort-intensive tasks. Secondly, team

compensation schemes can be designed that elicit effort at much lower cost per unit than direct individual

payment, even in the absence of production complementarities. As in any field experiment, it is not clear

how well the findings generalize beyond the two environments studied. However, the findings here—

robust across two settings and based on tasks that institutions and policymakers have attempted to

incentivize in the past—raise the intriguing possibility that there may be large returns to harnessing the

power of the group.

        We view our study as a first step to developing programs to address the lingering issues of

obesity and poor academic success. Our intervention was likely too short to observe effects on these

outcomes. But since the outcomes we study here, studying and exercise, are related to the downstream

outcomes of obesity and academic success, we might expect that more intensive team-based interventions

inspired by those here, would be particularly effective.



2. Conceptual Framework

        To fix ideas, it is worth developing a simple framework to track benefits and costs for the

incentive schemes in our experiment. Consider a program analogous to our own in which individuals

receive a bonus pay-off for completing an effort-intensive task. We imagine two incentive schemes. In the

individual treatment, person i gains utility Ui = Vi + B - Ci from completing the task, where V is the

intrinsic value i has for completing the task, B is the utility derived from the bonus earned for completing

the task, and C is the effort cost of completing the task. If person i does not complete the task, he earns

zero. In the second treatment, there is an additional condition: The individual is assigned a teammate j and


                                                                                                          5
receives the bonus only if his teammate also completes the task. We define pj as the probability that

person i assigns to his/her partner (person j) completing the task9 and θ as the magnitude of the social

effect. This is the degree to which enabling person j to earn the bonus enters person i’s utility function.

We emphasize that this is not, strictly speaking, an altruism parameter, though it could be due in part to

altruism and enters the utility function in the way traditionally used to capture altruism. (It could capture

guilt, embarrassment, fear of social punishment, commitment and other subtle social responses that will

be discussed in Section 5). Lastly, imagine there is also a control group that receives no external

compensation for completing the task and whose utility for completion, Ui = Vi - Ci, is based entirely on

the intrinsic benefit and cost. The conditions under which various subjects complete the task are then:



(1a)    Control Group:                     Undertake the action if:

(1b)    Individual Treatment:              Undertake the action if

(1c)    Team Treatment:                    Undertake the action if:


        We note first that the incentive structure in the team treatment does not allow for subjects to earn

the bonus by depending solely on partner effort. If person i does not put forth effort, neither she nor her

partner receives payment. Secondly, in both experiments, the task in question did not allow in any direct

way for knowledge transfers. (All subjects were told where the library was or where the gym was—

which, of course, nearly everyone already knew.) We will also show that there is little evidence of

subjects harnessing any other possible production complementarities related to teamwork (e.g., studying

more effectively by studying together, exercising more effectively by going to the gym together): Pairs of

teammates in the team treatment made simultaneous library (or gym) visits only slightly more often than

randomly paired subjects.10




9
 We all assume all individuals receive the same benefit.
10
 This also suggests that teamed subjects do not go to the library or gym together as a commitment mechanism to
help them overcome time-inconsistency in their preferences. See the discussion in section 5.


                                                                                                                 6
        Thirdly, we model the decision to undertake the action in the team treatment for person i to be

independent of the cost of effort for person j, their partner, and we also consider that pj is exogenous to

person i. Person i takes j’s effort level as given, ex ante. The decision to abstract from strategic behavior

is motivated by the fact that it would be difficult or nearly impossible to model such interactions without

information about beliefs. But simply gathering information about beliefs could change the nature of the

intervention, so we avoided collecting such information. Inquiring about a subject’s beliefs about his

partner may lead the subject to change beliefs about the partner’s future actions. Fourthly, we do not

allow for strategic behavior in form of side payments between teammates. We monitored teammates

closely when the assignment of teammates occurred and subsequently when payments were delivered. We

observed no evidence of threats or negotiation of side payments. In fact, at the time of payment, most

teammates seemed unaware of their partner’s attendance.

        Overall, if there is no social component to utility ( = 0) and the probability of partner default is

greater than 0, then individuals are more likely to undertake the action under the individual treatment than

under the team treatment. If incentives work as or more effectively for the team treatment than for the

individual treatment, we will interpret this as evidence that social effects exist and are large enough to

compensate for lowered expectations of monetary gain. Leveraging the three treatments in the

experimental design will also allow us to estimate      , and quantify the magnitude of the social effect

relative to the direct pecuniary effect. At the end of the paper, we will consider several different

behavioral mechanisms and speculate about which are most consistent with our findings.


3. Experimental Design and Sampling

A. Experimental Design, Pay for Studying

        In the pay for studying part of the experiment, subjects were recruited in several classes at

University of California-Santa Barbara. We summarize the experiment design here and relegate further

details to the appendix. At the beginning of class, we had students fill out a short survey. Most students

present in class filled out this survey. Each survey had a unique identifier that determined the treatment



                                                                                                           7
arm but which students were unable to decipher. In fact most students were not cognizant of the presence

of the identifier.11 At the end of class, students were notified of their treatments. To induce students to

show up at the end of class, we told them of their opportunity to earn additional money and of their

eligibility to earn a $50 raffle. Participant rates were high (over 70 percent). 12 Participant rates did not

differ across treatment status; p-values of differences always exceed 0.25. For descriptive ease, we refer

to the students who decide to participate in the after-class part of the experiment as participants

throughout the paper.

        Unlike many settings, here we are able to understand the degree of selectiveness of our sample

because of the setup of the experiment. In the first stage of the experiment, we gathered the distribution of

characteristics of the intended target population (i.e., students in the class13), and thus, we can see how the

intended target population differs from the students who partake in the experiment.

        Participants were incentivized to attend the 24-hour study room in the UCSB library over a two-

week period at the beginning of the quarter. We required students to attend at least 40 consecutive

minutes between the hours of 11am and 7pm on Monday-Friday. Visits at the study room were supervised

by a member of the research team; the research team did not divulge the attendance record of others when

subjects inquired. Further details on data collection are discussed in the appendix. Subjects could receive

credit for no more one visit in a day. The treatment groups and control group were as follows:



Control: Subjects were eligible to earn $2 per visit (up to 4 visits).


Individual Treatment: Subjects were eligible to earn $2 per visit (up to 4 visits), but also received an

additional bonus of $25 for attendance equal to or exceeding 4 visits ($33 in total possible earnings).




11
   We varied the scheme mapping the identifier to treatment assignment across classes as described in the appendix.
12
   Participation rates for the control, individual, team, and anonymous treatments were 67, 74, 74 and 69 percent,
respectively.
13
   Of course, we will miss collecting data for those who do not attend class. But any classroom-based program is
likely to miss those persons too.


                                                                                                                 8
Team Treatment: Subjects were eligible to earn $2 per visit (up to 4 visits), but also received an additional

bonus of $25 if and only if both team members accumulated four or more eligible visits. Team members

were randomly assigned according to the procedure described in the appendix. Team members were not

required to attend the study hall at the same time. As it was important that team members had a chance to

meet and talk, we had teammates stand next to each other during the sign-up process and exchange names

by filling out their partner’s name and email on a sheet of paper.


Anonymous Team Treatment: Subjects were eligible to earn $2 per visit (up to 4 visits), but also received

an additional bonus of $25 if and only if both team members accumulated four or more eligible visits.

Different from the team treatment, the teammate was randomly assigned but unknown (i.e., a member of a

different class).



        Several aspects of the experimental design warrant comment. First, the “control” subjects were

paid a minimal incentive of $2 per visit. This was done because absent our experiment, study room usage

is not recorded. In all treatments, students can earn $2 per visit. Thus, the experiment offers variation in

bonus size ($0 vs $25) and the method of earning the bonus (either dependent on one’s own behavior or

the combined behavior of oneself and a randomly-assigned partner). Second, to encourage studying we

emphasized that it was a study hall and monitored subjects. Students appeared to be studying rather than

socializing. Third, since subjects in the team treatment are in the same class and we conducted the

experiment at the beginning of the quarter, the experiment was designed to allow for repeated interaction.

To ensure treatment salience, subjects were reminded of their treatment at the end of the recruitment

week. In addition, subjects were informed that payments would be made with several weeks left in the

quarter. Thus, there was ample time for social interaction after team members received information (i.e.,

payment) that potentially revealed whether they had “let down the team.”




                                                                                                           9
B. Experimental Design, Pay for Exercise

        For pay-for-exercise part of the experiment, subjects were recruited at several classes at

University of California-Santa Barbara during a summer session in 2010. The sign-up process was similar

to that for the library experiment except that there was no anonymous team treatment. All details are the

same as in the library experiment, except as stated below.

        In this part of the experiment, subjects were incentivized to attend the UCSB Recreation Center

(“Rec Center”) at the beginning of the summer session during a two-week period. The Rec Center is the

on-campus student gym, which is free for registered students. The Rec Center collects electronic data of

ID card swipes. Note, unlike in the studying experiment, we do not require that students spend a specified

amount of time at the Rec Center, but it should be noted that the Rec Center is located sufficiently far

away from the academic buildings that Rec Center attendance incurs substantial time cost.

        As in the studying experiment, all subjects were eligible for the $50 raffle. Additionally, subjects

were randomly assigned to one of the following groups:



Control: Subjects were not eligible for extra payment.


Individual Treatment: Subjects were eligible to earn $2 per visit (up to 5 visits), but also received an

additional bonus of $25 for attendance equal to and exceeding 5 visits ($35 in total possible earnings).


Team Treatment: Subjects were eligible to earn $2 per visit (up to 5 visits), but also received an additional

bonus of $25 if and only if both team members accumulated five or more eligible visits.



        Unlike in the pay-for-study experiment, control subjects were not paid for visits. This is because

the Rec Center, unlike the library, requires subjects to sign-in and records the information. Just as in the

study experiment, there was no significant difference in participation rates between treatment groups.

Participation rates for the control, individual, and team treatments were 79, 75, and 76 percent,

respectively.


                                                                                                           10
D. Survey Response and Experiment Participants

         Table 1 reports the distribution of enrollment sizes, the number of in-class surveys collected, and

the number of experiment participants (students who came outside after class and were assigned to a

treatment or control group) for the library experiment. In terms of participation in the experiment,

conditional on completing a survey, 71 percent of survey participants stayed after class for the lottery and

were assigned to a treatment or control group. This attrition rate is not large when gauged against other

field experiments (e.g., Card, Mas, Moretti, and Saez, 2010). The difference between enrollment size and

survey response reflects almost entirely differences in class attendance, late arrival, and subjects enrolled

in multiple classes used in this study. While exact class attendance is unknown on the day of recruitment,

the vast majority of students present in class completed the survey.14 The last row of Table 1 reports the

survey and participant sample sizes used in all analyses.15

         Table 2 shows the analogous table for the Rec Center experiment. Again, participation in the

experiment given completion of the in-class survey is high at 76 percent. Overall participation rates (the

fraction of the enrolled students partaking in our study) is higher here likely for two reasons: the

recruitment was done earlier in the term and there are fewer students taking multiple classes in our

experimental pool. Only a few observations are excluded from the final analysis sample.16



4. Empirical Results – Pay for Studying

         We divide the discussion of the empirical results in two sections. We first describe the results for

the pay-for-studying experiment and then finish with the results for the pay-for-exercise experiment.


14
   Students were told not to sign-up more than once. Since some students enroll in multiple Economics classes
simultaneously each quarter, this lowered the participation rate in some classes. For example, the last four
Economics classes (122, 118, 106, and 114) we signed up each had lower-than-average participation rates.
15
   The small number of sample exclusions stem from three possible reasons: ten subjects filled out surveys in two
different classes, four people who came to the after-class treatment assignment left after being assigned a partner but
before signing the informational treatment sheet given to subjects, and one subjects is excluded from the anonymous
treatment because we had an odd number of people assigned to that treatment.
16
   About three percent of subjects were excluded due to leaving after being assigned treatment, signing up multiple
times, giving a fake name, or having a partner excluded for one of the reasons just mentioned. The partner exclusion
includes one subject that was excluded for being matched with a person who had previously been matched with a
partner who left after being treated for assignment.


                                                                                                                    11
A. Descriptive Statistics

        Panel A of Table 3 shows sample means of descriptive characteristics (gender, age, and pre-

treatment library usage) by treatment status for all subjects who completed the in-class survey in the pay-

for-studying experiment. For this sample, there were no statistically significant differences across groups

in these characteristics as seen in the p-values for mean differences. Panel B reports the same

comparisons for participants (i.e., those who showed up after class) and non-participants (i.e., those who

did not show up after class). The only statistically significant difference is in age: Older students were

somewhat less likely to participate. Inferences will be based on the sample of participants. We draw no

conclusions about the 28 percent of in class-responders who were non-participants and who appear to

have been somewhat older, on average. Panel C shows sample means of descriptive characteristics by

treatment status for the 491 subjects who participated in the experiment. Age, gender, and pre-treatment

library usage do not differ significantly between group treatment, individual treatment, anonymous

treatment, and control groups, as indicated by the p-values at the bottom of the table.



B. Results

        We examine three attendance outcomes: 1) the number of study room visits during the treatment

period; 2) whether the subject went at least once to the study room during the treatment period; 3)

whether the subject used the study room on four different days during the treatment period (which is the

threshold for receiving the $25 bonus). These outcomes are designated “Visits,” “Try,” and “Bonus,”

respectively. Table 4 displays means of these outcomes for the different treatment groups. Control

subjects in the sample visited the study room 1.3 times on average during the treatment period. 40 percent

of the control subjects showed up to the study room at least once, and 19 percent reached the 4-visit bonus

threshold. The individual treatment estimates in Table 4 show that subjects responded strongly to the

direct individual pecuniary incentive. Specifically, subjects in the individual treatment made about 0.9

more visits to the study room during the treatment period than did controls, were 17 percentage points

more likely to have gone to the study room at least once, and were more than twice as likely (21


                                                                                                        12
percentage points) to have met the 4-visit bonus payment threshold, with all differences statistically

significant at the 5 percent level as indicated by the p-values at the bottom of the table. It is clear that

subjects eligible for a bonus for study room visits visited more often.

          The more striking finding is for the difference between individual and team treatments.

Participants randomized into the team-incentive scheme made about 0.6 more visits to the study room

during the treatment period, were 13 percentage points more likely to have gone to the study room at least

once, and were 17 percentage points more likely to have met the 4-visit threshold than those in the

individual treatment, with all differences being statistically significant at the 5 percent level. The team

incentive elicited higher effort on all margins.

          Interestingly, subjects paired with an anonymous partner put forth more effort than controls (1.8

visits versus 1.3 for the controls), but the anonymous treatment was somewhat less effective than the

individual treatment (2.2 visits), and much less effective than the team treatment in which subjects met

their partners (2.8 visits). Thus, knowing the identity of one’s partner (and knowing that said partner also

knew one’s identity, etc.) would appear to be a crucial factor influencing the magnitude of the social

effect.

          In is also interesting to see the distribution of effects. Figure 1 shows the distribution of Study

Room visits during the treatment period, by treatment group. We emphasize the stark rightward shift of

the distribution for team treatment relative to individual treatment. In short, both incentive schemes

produced an effect, but the team treatment was more effective. This was in spite of the fact that the risk of

a partner’s default in the team treatment was 43 percent. It is clear, then, even at first glance, that large,

team-related social effects are implied, because the rate of bonus-earning in the team treatment is more

than 40 percent higher than in the individual treatment, despite the fact that both teammates had to satisfy

the requirement.

          In order to check the robustness of the findings to the inclusion of covariates, we formalize the

group mean comparisons using the following simple regression specification:




                                                                                                           13
(2)        Yi   0  1Ti Any   2TiTeam  3Ti Anon   i ,

where Yi is an attendance outcome for individual i, TAny is an indicator variable for having been

randomized into either the individual or the team treatment, TTeam is an indicator variable for being in the

team treatment, TAnon is an indicator variable for being in the anonymous treatment, and ε is the usual

error term. The coefficient of primary interest is β2, as this captures the difference between team treatment

and individual treatment effects. In the absence of social effects, we would expect β2 to be negative (i.e.,

the team treatment to do worse).

           Table 5, column 1 displays results of OLS regressions for the continuous outcome variable

“Visits” on treatment status; columns 2 and 3 report results of analogous linear probability regressions for

the dichotomous outcome variables “Try” and “Bonus.”17 These columns duplicate results from Table 4

in a regression setting, using equation 2). To test the robustness of our results, we add varying controls to

these basic regressions. The inclusion of such controls should not affect our treatment effect estimates

much because of the randomness of our treatments, but regardless, some may worry that our recruitment

process induced some selection. Columns 4-6 of Table 5 show results of regression models that include

age, gender, and pre-treatment library usage as covariates. Columns 7-9 add class fixed effects. Under all

specifications, the same pattern emerges and the differences in bonus-earning between treatments are

similar.

           In addition to the relative magnitudes of the effects of the different treatments, we are also

interested in relative costs of the different treatments. Not only is the team treatment more effective, it

costs less because it includes subjects who put forth effort to meet the threshold but did not get paid the

bonus (due to a teammate defaulting). The average per visit cost in the team treatment was $5.00, whereas

the average cost for the same outcome in the individual treatment was $6.30. Thus the per-visit cost of the

individual treatment is 26 percent higher than for the team treatment.


17
  Standard errors are clustered at the group level. Thus, group sizes are two for those assigned to the team and
anonymous treatments and one for those assigned to the control and individual treatment. All conclusions for this
table and all subsequent tables are similar if probit models are used instead of linear probability models.


                                                                                                                    14
         In the next subsection we use the model of Section 2 to separate out pecuniary and social effects,

and to estimate their relative magnitudes.



C. The Social Effect

         How large is the social effect implied by these results? We revisit the model of Section 2 to

answer this question. The decision to complete the task and earn a $25 bonus for person i is given by

equations (1a), (1b) and (1c), if she is assigned to the control, individual, or team treatments, respectively.

For the moment, we restrict the analysis to these treatments, and do not consider the anonymous

treatment.

         We estimate the components of utility described in Section 2, allowing individuals to vary in their

tastes and predicted behavior based on observable characteristics. First, we model the utility that

individual i derives from his/her partner completing the task. Second, we use the generated probability of

individual i’s partner completing the task based on the first step as an input in the utility model for

individual i (along with the treatment status and individual characteristics). More formally, this non-linear

model featuring a set of probit regressions is as follows:

(3)

(4)

where        is the utility for individual i associated with completing the task,    is 1 if i completes the task

and zero otherwise,        is 1 if i’s partner completes the task and zero otherwise (note that it is zero by

definition when no partner is present),         and      are background characteristics of person i and his

partner, respectively,        is an indicator variable identifying assignment to the individual treatment

group,       , predicted from the probit in equation (3), indicates i’s belief about the probability that his/her

partner will complete the task (and is zero if i is not in the team treatment), and        and     are the usual

probit error terms. Here, equation (3) is only relevant for the subjects with partners (i.e., the team sample).




                                                                                                              15
For everyone else,             (thus,           . We start with this approach and later consider deviations

from this approach in which we vary the way in which         is derived.

        There are three identifying assumptions implicit in this approach. The first is that the non-

monetary utility (net of cost) associated with going to the study hall is independent of the availability of

the monetary incentive. The second simplifying assumption is that beliefs about partner study hall

attendance are based on partner’s initial observables (which we gather from our recruitment survey done

at the beginning of class), and that subjects do not take into consideration their partner’s reactions to their

own initial observables when predicting their partner’s behavior (i.e., the lack of strategic behavior

discussed earlier). The third is that predictions of the partners’ probability of completing the task are

correct on average, since the estimate is based on observed data. Under these assumptions, we can

estimate the probability of going to the study hall at least four times for all individuals in the three

treatments in a single equation that includes a generated regressor (i.e., the probability of the partner

completing the task).

        This estimation strategy leverages the experimental design in several ways to identify the

components of utility (compare equation (4) with 1a-c): 1) Observed characteristics (age, gender, and pre-

treatment library usage) identify intrinsic benefits and costs associated with study hall visits without

compensation (                           ); 2) The difference between observationally similar subjects in

control and individual treatments identifies utility gains associated with own pecuniary benefits (          );

3) a comparison of observationally similar subjects in individual and team treatments identifies social

effects related to partners’ pay-off (                                ).

        We bootstrap to account for the presence of the generated regressor. Table 6 displays the results.

The estimates imply that subjects received a utility gain of 0.54 utils from their own pecuniary benefit of

being paid $25 (i.e., the estimate in the individual treatment indicator row), and received a utility gain of

1.64 utils from pecuniary and social benefits together (i.e., the estimate from the predicted partner bonus

status row). Bootstrapped confidence intervals indicate that both estimates are distinguishable from zero



                                                                                                            16
at the 5 percent level. Thus, our estimate of the social parameter           , is 2.03, and is also statistically

distinguishable from zero at the 5 percent level. Recall that this social parameter identifies the weight one

puts on one’s partner’s utility in determining one’s own utility. Thus, the implied social impact of team

compensation is very large – more than twice as large as the effect of own pecuniary compensation.

Importantly, we emphasize that one cannot infer from the findings that agents care more about others than

about themselves. We have captured a broad social effect, rather than simple altruism, and will attempt to

interpret it more carefully in the next subsection.

        The coefficient of 2.030 in Table 6, derived from a model in which agents use information to

predict teammates’ choices, is our preferred estimate of        However, it could be argued that subjects have

difficulty estimating their partners’ probability of meeting the payment threshold, given observables. One

might question whether previous library usage is observable.18 To explore robustness, then, it is worth

estimating the social parameter given different beliefs about the probability of partner default.

        Panel B of Table 6 displays the estimate of , given several different focal beliefs about teammate

performance. If subjects believe their teammates will meet the bonus payment threshold with certainty,

then they are more willing to meet the threshold, themselves, for their own pecuniary benefit. We do not

think it is realistic that subjects would be so optimistic, but have reported this result because it gives us a

lower bound on        Belief with certainty that teammates will earn the bonus yields a lower bound on

possible values of    because it implies that agents think they will receive the maximum possible monetary

gain (and leaves less utility gain to be explained by social factors.) As shown in Row 1 of Panel B, even if

agents believe their partners will never default, the implied social parameter is large: Agents act as though

they value a marginal dollar of compensation for their teammate 64 percent as much as they value a

marginal dollar of compensation for themselves.


18
  One might also be concerned that subjects consider how their partners will react to their own observables when
they form their estimates of their partners’ probability of completing the task. The simultaneous two-person game
that could be used to represent the team treatment is a simple coordination game with two pure-strategy Nash
equilibria and a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium. We do not argue that agents find their way to the mixed-strategy
Nash equilibrium in this one-shot game (which depends on the form of their utility functions) but map out scenarios
consistent with a range of beliefs.


                                                                                                                17
        In Row 2, we consider what happens under the scenario where subjects are correct on average but

lack the ability to make finer distinctions between individuals, based on observables. The estimated        is

1.88, close to our preferred estimate in Panel A. On the other hand, if subjects are very pessimistic about

teammate performance, the implied social effect is even larger. Row 2 of Table 6, Panel B, shows results

if subjects believe their partners will not respond at all to the $25 bonus incentive, and will instead behave

exactly as the controls do. In this somewhat unrealistic case, pessimism about own pecuniary

compensation would imply that the only way to explain higher observed effort choices in the team

treatment would be with an extremely large social parameter:      =7.79.

        We can also consider the implied social effect under the anonymous treatment. The structural

model of equations (3) and (4) is inappropriate for the anonymous treatment because a subject cannot

observe the characteristics of his/her teammate and use them to predict default probability. But it is

possible in the anonymous treatment for subjects to form estimates of teammate default probability based

on group means or other possible focal beliefs. Column 2 shows estimates of               in the anonymous

treatment for the three beliefs described above. If subjects believe their anonymous partners will never

default, the estimated    is negative but not significantly different from zero. If subjects are correct, on

average, about teammate performance, then the implied social factor is 0.86, but imprecisely estimated,

and if subjects believe their anonymous teammates will not respond to the prospect of earning a bonus,

the implied    is 2.28. Not surprising, the social effect, then, is stronger when subjects have met their

partners than when they are paired with an anonymous stranger. This could be because knowing and

being known by one’s teammate creates the opportunity for social punishment that is not present in the

anonymous case. It could also be that subjects value the pay-offs of people they have met more than they

value the pay-offs of anonymous strangers.




                                                                                                           18
D. Mechanisms

        The parameter      is intended to capture incentive effects due to social factors. It is an umbrella

term covering a number of potential mechanisms. We will focus on three broad classes of mechanisms

that have been posited in previous research.



1) Altruism, guilt, shame, fear of social punishment. There are a number of different forms of social

motivations that could come into play in our environment. One such motivation is altruism, in which the

payoff of another person (or persons) enters into one’s own utility function regardless of circumstances,

beliefs, actions, etc. But it bears emphasizing that social motivations come in many flavors besides this,

and that θ in our framework could capture any of these.19 For example, guilt aversion involves an

individual feeling guilty about disappointing the expectations of people who act favorably on one’s

behalf; the more one believes that the other people expect one to perform an act, the more guilty one

would feel from non-performance. Shame involves negative feelings about one’s observed behavior,

regardless of the expectations of others. It is also possible that subjects feel neither altruism, nor guilt, nor

shame, but simply wish to avoid reprisal and social punishment from peers they disappoint.


2) Production Complementarities. Production complementarities have been the dominant justification

for the construction of teams in the workplace. Lazear (2000) asserts that production complementarities

are absolutely necessary for team incentives to be effective, and that teams should not be used when these

are not present. Production complementarities could explain the large estimate of          if subjects put forth

more effort in the team treatment because studying is more valuable or productive (or even more fun)

when done jointly.




19
  Recent papers investigating forms of social preferences include Loewenstein, Bazerman, and Thompson (1989),
Bolton (1991), Fehr and Schmidt (1999), Bolton and Ockenfels (2000), and Charness and Rabin (2002). Guilt
aversion is considered in Dufwenberg and Gneezy (2000), Charness and Dufwenberg (2006), and Battigalli and
Dufwenberg (2007, 2009). See Charness and Kuhn (2011) for a survey of the literature on these social motivations.


                                                                                                              19
3) Self-control and pre-commitment. In models of self-control and pre-commitment, individuals fail to

meet goals because the present self lacks the ability to bind itself to a plan of action that would benefit the

future self; the present self would instead rather engage in a more-immediately-pleasurable activity.20

Having a partner could remedy this problem, even if the individual does not value the teammate’s payoff.

If one commits oneself to study with a partner, it is more difficult to back out. In short, individuals who

have been jointly incentivized may use each other to devise commitment mechanisms.



        We now briefly offer some evidence to distinguish among these channels. The production

complementarities mechanism requires some coordination. If production complementarities make

studying more productive and valuable, then in order to take advantage of the complementarities

individuals must visit the study room at the same time. Similarly, those facing a commitment problem

may use coordination to overcome their self-control problem. Since we have data on visit times, we can

test whether we observe coordination of this type.

        In Table 7, we test whether subjects in the team treatment go to the study hall at the same time as

their teammates much more often than would random pairs of “placebo” teammates. In the team

treatment, there were 26 instances in which a subject showed up at the study hall at about the same-time

(plus or minus 10 minutes) as a teammate. For comparative purposes, we randomly assigned placebo

‘teammates’ to all subjects in the team treatment within classes. For the placebo pairings, there were 10

instances of simultaneous visits. There were thus 16 additional simultaneous visits associated with true

teammate pairings for the 168 subjects in the team treatment. This accounts for only 0.095 visits per

subject, a very small impact. The difference in visits between team treatment and individual treatment

was more than 6 times larger, at 0.606 visits per subject. These few visits associated with coordination



20
  For some models of self-control and commitment, see Laibson (1997), O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999, 2001), Gul
and Pesendorfer (2001), Bénabou and Tirole (2004), Fudenberg and Levine (2006), and Ozdenoren, Salant, and
Silverman (2012). For empirical and experimental work on this topic, see DellaVigna and Malmendier (2006),
Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006), Burger, Charness, and Lynham (2011), and Houser, Schunk, Winter, and Xiao
(2009).


                                                                                                            20
could explain only about 18 percent of the estimated social parameter, , in Table 6. We conclude that

mechanisms requiring coordination explain at most a small part of the effectiveness of the team treatment.

        We do not find strong evidence, then, that effectiveness of team incentives in our setting arises

from production complementarities or a need for commitment mechanisms related to joint study hall

attendance. This leaves guilt, shame, altruism, embarrassment, fear of reprisal, commitment devices

unrelated to joint attendance, and other social factors as possible mechanisms.

        Distinguishing more finely between these subtle channels is a subject for future research. One

might imagine that manipulation of subjects’ interaction with their teammates may be interesting line of

study. For instance, a face-to-face meeting with a teammate may have a larger effect on inducing effort

than an online meeting. Understanding how these effects operate is useful—for example, workers at a

workplace may not necessarily have in-person meetings with their co-workers but instead be in different

physical environments.

        Are the observed social effects an artifact of the pay-for-study environment? In any field

experiment, generalizability is a concern. It is worth investigating, then, whether there is evidence of

social effects of team incentives in other effort-elicitation contexts, beyond the library. Our pay-for-

exercise field experiment, the results of which are reported in the next section, parallels the analysis above

in a different context.



5. Empirical Results – Pay for Exercise

A. Descriptive Statistics

        Panel A of Table 8 shows sample means of descriptive characteristics by treatment status for all

subjects who filled out the in-class survey for the exercise experiment. There were no statistically

significant differences between average characteristics of subjects randomized into the individual

treatment, the group treatment, or the control group (Panel A). We report two measures of exercise for the

pre-treatment period. “Self-Reported Exercise” is the number of times per week that individuals claim to

have exercised during the previous month. Previous gym visits is the number of times subjects went to the


                                                                                                           21
Rec Center in the week prior to the treatment period, based on data provided by the Rec Center. For the

remainder of the paper, we focus on the second pre-treatment measure, as it is not self-reported and

relates more directly to the outcome we incentivize in the experiment: usage of the Rec Center.

        Not all subjects chose to participate in the second stage of the experiment (i.e., come outside of

class) at which point they formally became a part of the experiment and learned their treatment

assignment. As displayed in Panel B, 364 of the 479 students who filled out surveys in class, or about 76

percent, went on to participate in the experiment, net of exclusions. There were no statistically significant

differences in age or gender between participants and non-participants. However, participants were more

apt to have used the Rec Center before, on average, than non-participants. We infer that this is the case

either because subjects who are energetic enough to come outside for a lottery are also more apt to have

the self-discipline to go to the Rec Center, or because students inferred from the survey questions that the

experiment might be about exercise. Inferences now will be based on the sample of participants. We draw

no conclusions about the 24 percent of in class-responders who were non-participants and who appear to

have been less likely to go to the gym, on average. However, our sample population includes many

individuals who are similar to these non-participants at least in terms of observable dimensions—

potentially allowing us to infer the effect of the incentive schemes on these non-participants.

        Panel C shows sample means of descriptive characteristics by treatment status for the 364

subjects who participated in the experiment. Average age, self-reported exercise, and previous Rec Center

visits do not differ significantly between group treatment, individual treatment, and control groups. The

randomization was such that more males ended up in the group treatment than in either of the other two

groups. However, conclusions from regressions reported in the remainder of the paper are not sensitive to

the inclusion or omission of age and gender controls.



B. Results

        In Table 9, analogous to Table 4, we report mean effort outcomes by treatment status. Control

subjects in the sample visited the Rec Center 2.1 times on average during the treatment period. 52 percent


                                                                                                          22
of the control subjects showed up to the Rec Center at least once, and 17 percent reached the 5-visit bonus

threshold. We see that subjects responded to the incentives provided by the treatments. Subjects in the

individual and team treatments made about 1.7 more and 2.0 more visits to the Rec Center, respectively,

during the treatment period than did controls. They were also 16 and 30 percentage points more likely,

respectively, to have gone to the Rec Center at least once and about 38 and 39 percentage points more

likely to have met the 5-visit bonus payment threshold. Figure 2 shows the distribution of Rec Center

visits during the treatment period, by treatment. We emphasize the noticeable rightward shift of the

distribution for team and individual treatments relative to the distribution of the control group and that of

the non-participants. In short, both incentive schemes produced an effect: Incentivized subjects went to

the Rec Center more than non-incentivized subjects.

        Table 10, analogous to Table 5, shows that the effects persist in a regression setting with

additional covariates, based on the regression model (equation (2)). Evidence that the team and individual

compensation schemes evoked significantly different responses is visible in the set of no controls

regressions, column 2: Subjects randomized into the team-incentive scheme were 14.3 percentage points

more likely to have visited the Rec Center during the treatment period than subjects in the individual

treatment, and the difference is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Unlike in the study room

experiment, the rate of bonus-earning in the team treatment for the exercise was about the same as in the

individual treatment. However, even though team and individual treatments evoked very similar task

completion rates in this setting, the team treatment cost substantially less per visit, just as in the pay-for-

study setting. The average per visit cost for the team treatment was $3.89, whereas the average per visit

cost for the individual treatment was $5.23, or 31 percent higher. The team incentive again elicited similar

effort at lower cost per person.

        Further, the results in Tables 9 and 10 contain evidence on the existence of a social effect of the

team incentive. The risk of a partner’s default in the team treatment was 44 percent. Despite this high risk

of default, subjects in teams were just as likely to put forth effort to earn bonuses as subjects for whom




                                                                                                            23
there was no default risk (i.e., those who had no teammate). We will show that this requires a large social

effect, though not as large an effect as was found in the study hall experiment.

        In the exercise experiment, participants may have had fairly good ex-ante measures of Rec Center

attendance, as observable physical fitness may have given subjects a good indication of their partner’s

propensity to exercise. In contrast, propensity to study may have been harder for subjects to observe. If

gym-going propensity is indeed easily observed, then one might imagine there are heterogeneous

treatment effects, by type and partner type. In Table 11, we show heterogeneous effects—dividing

individuals into “active” types, who visited the Rec Center in the pre-treatment period, and “inactive”

types, who did not.

        On balance, the coefficients on team treatment in Panels B and C reveal that active types go to the

Rec Center more when incentivized as individuals and inactive types show up more when incentivized in

the team setting. We investigate differences between active types and inactive types by partner type in

Panels D and E. In Panel D, the point estimates on team treatment are all negative, indicating that active

types go to the Rec Center less when incentivized in teams than when incentivized as individuals,

regardless of partner type. For actives, responses to changes in expected own monetary payoff appear to

dominate social effects.

        Panel E, however, tells a very different story for the inactive types. This panel reports results for

the inactive types—individuals who are less likely, ex ante, to go to the gym, and for whom these external

incentives are more likely to be a decisive factor. Focusing on the specification with no controls (columns

1-3), inactive types with active types as partners go to the Rec Center 1.49 more times, are 21.6

percentage points more likely to go at least once, and are 25.5 percentage points more likely to meet the

5-visit bonus threshold than inactive types incentivized as individuals. This occurs despite the fact that the

expected monetary pay-off is lower than in the individual treatment. A large non-pecuniary effect must

exist for these choices to make sense. However, interestingly, inactive types randomly partnered with

inactive types do not behave in this way. The team treatment is less strong when an inactive type is

matched with another inactive as opposed to being matched to an active type. We take this as clear


                                                                                                           24
evidence that subjects estimate the probability of default by their partners, based on observables. Own

expected pay-out matters, but so too do social factors.



C. The Social Effect

        Exactly as in the analysis of the study hall experiment, we use the model defined by equations (3)

and (4) to estimate pecuniary and social components of utility for the exercise experiment. Table 12

displays the results. The estimates imply that subjects received a utility gain of 1.29 utils from their own

pecuniary benefit of being paid $35, and received a utility gain of 2.17 utils from pecuniary and social

benefits together. Bootstrapped confidence intervals indicate that both estimates are distinguishable from

zero at the 5 percent level. The social parameter,        , is estimated to be 0.68 and is statistically

distinguishable from zero at the 5 percent level. Subjects choose their effort as if they valued a marginal

dollar of compensation for their teammate as much as they value 68 cents of compensation for

themselves. The social impact of team compensation, then, is large enough to compensate for the 0.44

probability of teammate default, and is two thirds as large as the effect of own pecuniary compensation.

        Panel B of Table 12 shows the estimated social effect for various focal beliefs about partner

default. If subjects are wrong in their belief about teammate defaults, and instead believe their teammates

will meet the bonus threshold with certainty, there is no social effect. In such a case, subjects would put

forth effort in the team treatment simply because they believe they’d earn the bonus. However, if the

subjects are correct on average about partner performance (the remaining two estimates of ), the social

component of utility is large.

        Exactly as in study room setting, production complementarities and commitment mechanisms do

not appear to explain the social factor. The Rec Center data contain information on the precise time of the

Rec Center visit. As reported in Table 13, in the team treatment, there were 14 instances in which a

subject showed up at the Rec Center at about the same-time (plus or minus 10 minutes) as a teammate.

For the placebo pairings, there were 6 instances of simultaneous visits. There were thus 8 additional

simultaneous visits associated with true teammate pairings for the 190 subjects in the team treatment. This


                                                                                                         25
accounts for only 0.04 visits per subject, and accounts for at most 7 percent of additional bonus-earning

behavior. Again, we conclude that that mechanisms requiring coordination explain at most a very small

part of the effectiveness of the team treatment in the exercise setting.

        In short, social effects of team incentives do not appear to be an idiosyncratic feature of being

paid to study. We find large social effects in both the pay-for-study and pay-for-exercise settings;

however, the effect is larger in for the pay-for-study intervention.



7. Conclusion

        Incentives that offer direct pay for behavior have been studied extensively and found to produce

modest results, at best. However, there is not much credible empirical work on behavior interventions that

compensate individuals for team behavior. Management consultants allege that team compensation

harnesses a powerful social mechanism, that individuals will perform actions for their team that they

would be unwilling to perform strictly for themselves. If this is true, in part or in total, then it should be

taken into account in designing interventions that seek to elicit effort.

        A first step is to observe the effect in simple settings that allow for rigorous causal inference but

also preserve the possibility of repeated social interactions over time. Our primary contribution is that we

demonstrate the existence of a social effect of team compensation: We observe people in two real-world

settings raising their effort level because a teammate’s payoff is at stake. Findings indicate that the

magnitude of this effect can be considerably larger than that of own pecuniary compensation. In addition,

the team incentive scheme in our experiment was 26 percent to 31 percent more cost effective than the

individual incentive.

        Ultimately, this study examines a crucial issue related to the optimal structure of incentive

schemes and how best to use incentives to elicit behaviors at lowest cost. We have just scratched the

surface on this crucial issue. Future work will help to understand more fully the mechanisms and the

environments under which team incentives are most effective.




                                                                                                           26
References

Acland, Daniel, and Matthew Levy. (2011). “Habit Formation, Naiveté, and Projection Bias in Gym
       Attendance,” mimeo.

Angrist, Joshua, Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos. (2009). “Incentives and Services for College
        Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American Economic Journal: Applied
        Economics, 1(1): 136-63.

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. (2006). “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a
        Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2): 635-
        672.

Babcock, Philip, and John Hartman. (2010). “Exercising in Herds: Treatment Size and Status Specific
       Peer Effects in a Randomized Exercise Intervention,” mimeo.

Babcock, Philip and Mindy Marks. (2011). “The Falling Time Cost of College: Evidence from Half a
       Century of Time Use Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2): 468-478.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul. (2005). “Social Preferences and the Response to
       Incentives: Evidence From Personnel Data, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120: 917-62.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul. (2010). “Social Incentives in the Workplace,” Review
       of Economics Studies 77(2): 417-458.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul. (forthcoming). “Team Incentives: Evidence from a
       Firm Level Experiment,” Journal of European Economic Association.

Barrow, Lisa, Lashawn Richburg-Hayes, Cecilia Elena Rouse, and Thomas Brock. (2012). “Paying for
       Perfomance: The Educational Impacts of a Community College Scholarship Program for Low-
       Income Adults.Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper No. 2009-13.

Battigalli, Pierpaolo, and Martin Dufwenberg. (2007). “Guilt in Games,” American Economic Review
        Papers & Proceedings 97(2): 170-76.

Battigalli, Pierpaolo, and Martin Dufwenberg. (2009). “Dynamic Psychological Games,” Journal of
        Economic Theory 144(1): 1-35.

Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. (2004). “Willpower and personal rules,” Journal of Political Economy
      112: 848-886.

Bettinger, Eric. (2010). “Paying to Learn: The Effect of Financial Incentives on Elementary School Test
        Scores,” NBER Working Paper 16333.

Bolton, Gary. (1991). “A comparative model of bargaining: Theory and evidence,” American Economic
        Review 81(5): 1096-1136.

Bolton, Gary, and Axel Ockenfels. (2000). “ERC: A theory of equity, reciprocity and competition,”
        American Economic Review 90(1): 166-193.




                                                                                                    27
Boisjoly, Johanne, Greg J. Duncan, Michael Kremer, Dan M. Levy, and Jacque Eccles. (2006). “Empathy
        or Antipathy? The Impact of Diversity,” American Economic Review 96(5): 1890-1905.

Burger, Nicholas, Gary Charness, and John Lynham. (2011). “Field and Online Experiments on Self-
        Control,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 77(3), 393-404.

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. (2010). “Inequality at Work: The
       Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction,” NBER Working Paper #16396.

Carrell, Scott E., Richard L. Fullerton, and James E. West. (2009). "Does Your Cohort Matter?
       Measuring Peer Effects in College Achievement," Journal of Labor Economics, 27(3):
       439-464.

Carrell, Scott E., Mark Hoekstra, and James E. West. (2011). “Is Poor Fitness Contagious?: Evidence
         From Randomly Assigned Friends,” Journal of Public Economics 95(7-8): 657-663.

Charness, Gary, and Matthew Rabin. (2002). “Understanding Social Preferences with Simple Tests,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3): 817-869.

Charness, Gary, and Martin Dufwenberg. (2006). “Promises and Partnership,” Econometrica, 74(6):
       1579-1601.

Charness, Gary, and Uri Gneezy. (2009). “Incentives to Exercise,” Econometrica 77(3): 909–931.

Charness, Gary, and Peter Kuhn. (2011). “Lab Labor: What Can Labor Economists Learn from the Lab?”
       forthcoming in the Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and
       David Card, North Holland, 1st edition.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier. (2006). “Paying Not To Go To the Gym,” American
       Economic Review 96(3): 694-719.

Dufwenberg, Martin, and Uri Gneezy. (2000). “Measuring Beliefs in an Experimental Lost Wallet
      Game,” Games and Economic Behavior 30(2): 163-82.

Falk, Armin, and Andrea Ichino. (2006). “Clean Evidence on Peer Effects,” Journal of Labor Economics
        24(1): 39-58.

Fehr, Ernst, and Klaus Schmidt. (1999). “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Cooperation,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 114(3): 817-868.

Foster, Gigi. (2006). “It’s Not Your Peers, and It’s Not Your Friends: Some Progress Toward
        Understanding the Educational Peer Effect Mechanism,” Journal of Public Economics 90(8-9):
        1455-1475.

Fudenberg, Drew and David Levine. (2006). “A Dual-Self Model of Impulse Control,” American
       Economic Review 96: 1449-1476.

Fryer, Roland F, Jr. (2010) “Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence From
        Randomized Trials,” NBER Working Paper 15898.




                                                                                                   28
Gneezy, Uri, Stephan Meier, and Pedro Rey-Biel. (2011). “When and Why Incentives (Don’t) Work to
       Modify Behavior,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(4): 191-210.

Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. (2001). “Temptation and Self-Control,” Econometrica 69: 1403–
        1435.

Hamilton, Barton, Jackson Nickerson, and Hideo Owan. (2003). “Team Incentives and Worker
       Heterogeneity: An Empricial Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and Participation,”
       Journal of Political Economy 111(3): 465-497.

Holmstrom, Bengt. (1982). “Moral Hazard in Teams,” Bell Journal of Economics 13(2): 324-340.

Houser, Daniel, Daniel Schunk, Joachim Winter, and Erte Xiao. (2009), “Temptation, Commitment, and
       Self-control in the Laboratory,” mimeo, ICES, George Mason University.

John, LK, G Loewenstein, AB Troxel, L Norton, JE Fassbender, Kevin Volpp. (2011), Financial
   Incentives for Extended Weight Loss: A Randomized, Controlled Trial, Journal of General Internal
   Medicine.

Kandel, Eugene, and Edward Lazear. (1992). “Peer Pressure and Partnerships,” Journal of Political
       Economy 100(4): 801-817.

Kremer, Michael, and Dan Levy. (2008). “Peer Effects and Alcohol Use among College Students,”
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(3): 189-206.

Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. (2009). “Incentives to Learn.” The Review of
   Economics and Statistics 91(3): 437-456.

Laibson, David. (1997). “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    112: 443-477.

Lazear, Edward P. (2000) “Personnel Economics and Economic Approaches to Incentives,” HKCER
   Letters, 61.

Lencioni, Patrick. (2002). “The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership Fable,” Jossey-Bass, 1st
       edition.

Loewenstein, George, Max Bazerman, and Leigh Thompson. (1989). “Social Utility and Decision
      Making in Interpersonal Contexts,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57: 426-441.

Lyle, David S. (2007). “Estimating and Interpreting Peer and Role Model Effects from Randomly
       Assigned Social Groups at West Point,” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2): 289-299.

MacDonald, Heather, Lawrence Bernstein, and Cristofer Price. (2009). “Foundations for Success:
      Short-Term Impacts Report.” Report to the Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation.

Mas, Alexandre, and Enrico Moretti. (2009). “Peers at Work,” American Economic Review 99(1): 112-
       145.

Nalbantian, Haig and Andrew Schotter. (1995). “Matching and Efficiency in the Baseball Free-Agent
       System: An Experimental Examination,” Journal of Labor Economics 13(1): 1-31.


                                                                                                   29
O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. (1999). “Doing it Now or Later,” American Economic Review
      89(1): 103-124.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. (2001). “Choice and Procrastination,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 116(1): 121-160.

Ozdenoren, Emre, Stephen Salant, and Daniel Silverman. (2012). “Willpower and the Optimal Control of
      Visceral Urges,” Journal of the European Economic Association 10(2): 342-368.

Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Syndor. (2011). “Using Incentives and Commitments to
       Overcome Self-Control Problems: Evidence from a Workplace Field Experiment,” mimeo.

Sacerdote, Bruce. (2001). “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2): 681-704.

Volpp, Kevin, AB Troxel, Mark V. Pauly, Henry Glick, Andrea Puig, David Asch, R Galvin, J Zhu, F
       Wan, J DeGuzman, E Corbett, J Weiner, J Audrain-McGovern. (2009) “A Randomized
       Controlled Trial of Financial Incentives for Smoking Cessation,” The New England Journal of
       Medicine, 360:699-709.

Zimmerman, David J. (2003). “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural
      Experiment,” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(1): 9-23.




                                                                                                 30
Appendix A: Details of Experimental Design

Pay for Studying Experiment

Subjects were recruited at the beginning of 17 Economics classes and 1 Psychology class at
University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB), during the fall quarter of 2011. All sign-ups for
the experiment occurred about two weeks into the quarter (October 3-7). The first stage of
recruitment involved asking students to fill out a brief survey at the beginning of each lecture
(Appendix B contains an in-class survey).1 Students were told that they would be entered in a
draw to win $50 if they filled out the survey. In order to claim the $50 they were also told that
they would have to bring the bottom portion of their survey (which they were instructed to tear
off and keep) and be present at the drawing that would take place outside the lecture hall after
class.

All surveys had a unique identification code. From the perspective of the students this appeared
to be an alphanumeric code for the lottery to be held after class. For our purposes, it was a
random code that identified treatment group and, in the case of the team treatment, potential
partners. Survey identification codes included an A, B, C, D, E, or F as the first character,
followed by a number. The letter indicated group assignment. For example, A might indicate
control group, B individual treatment, C and D anonymous treatment, and E and F team
treatment. We rotated the letter-experimental group match across classes to ensure that students
in subsequent classes could not successfully inform their friends about what specific letters
meant. The letter codes were not explained to students prior to their arrival after class and were
designed to look like a random raffle identifier, or even go unnoticed, until described after class.
There is no evidence that students were able to infer their treatment status from these codes or
that the codes influenced their decision to participate: There were no significant differences in
participation rates between treatment groups.

Subjects were informed of their treatment status both verbally at the end of class and via email.
The study room seats about 100 people, so the researchers can visibly see who arrives and leaves
the room.

Assignment of Team Treatment

To facilitate rapid pairing, the in-class team treatment surveys had a built-in paring; for example,
if subjects with sign-up forms with letters C and D in their alphanumeric code, students with the
same number would automatically be matched with each other. For example, if C8 and D8 both
show up after class, they would be matched together. Subjects with a “partner” who did not show
up after lecture were randomly re-matched with another subject without a “partner.”2


1
  All surveys, for all treatment groups, came from a randomized pile. This ensured that subjects did not know with
whom they were matched until after lecture, and that subjects were not sitting near their potential partner (except by
random chance).
2
  This was done by matching in ascending sequential order. If C10 showed up but not D10 and the next unmatched
group treatment number was C12, we matched C10 and C12. This preserves randomization since surveys were
distributed randomly in class. In the few circumstances in which this process left a group treatment participant
without a partner, we randomly selected a control group member to pair with her/him.
B. Experimental Design, Pay for Exercise

Subjects were recruited during and after lectures in all nine Economics classes at University of
California Santa Barbara (UCSB), during the second six-week summer session in 2010. All sign-
ups for the experiment occurred during week one (August 3-6). The sign-up process only
differed slightly from that for the library experiment.

Assignment of Team Treatment

Subjects with the same alphanumeric code were matched when possible (e.g. C1 and C1*), with
random re-matching when the potential partner did not show up outside.

Subjects were informed that payments would be made in week five of the six-week session. Just
as in the library study, we wanted to ensure that subjects in the team treatment knew that they
would potentially see their partners after the partner knew if the bonus threshold was reached.

C. Measuring Visits

One benefit of the library experimental design is that it allows for study room visits to be
supervised by a researcher or research assistant. Logs were kept every day to determine who
studied at the study room each day. Identities were checked by photo identification at check-in.
When a subject asked if another subject had visited the study room, the person with access to the
daily log would deny the subject’s request.

In the case of Rec Center attendance, we used electronic collection. Whenever anyone wishes to
enter the Rec Center the attendant at the front desk takes her or his student photo ID card and
electronically scans it. The time, date, and student card barcode of every gym entry is stored
electronically. The Rec Center generously provided us with data that included all gym visits for
every in-class survey respondent from July 21 through August 20, 2010. Because the Rec Center
has the universe of student names and identification numbers they also verified for us that every
student who filled out an in-class survey was in their database. In other words, there are no cases
in which we are confounding non-attendance with an incorrect name and/or student identification
number.
                                    Appendix B

                            Survey and Consent Forms


Pay-For-Study

   1. In-Class Consent Form and Survey

   2. Participant Consent Forms
          a. Control Group
          b. Individual Treatment
          c. Team Treatment
          d. Anonymous Treatment


Pay-For-Exercise

   1. In-Class Consent Form and Survey

   2. Participant Consent Forms
          a. Control Group
          b. Individual Treatment
          c. Team Treatment
                                                                                                                                 F1
Hi, you are being asked to participate in a study by Philip Babcock, Kelly Bedard, Gary Charness, John Hartman, and Heather Royer. You
must be at least 18 years old to participate. For your participation today, we will enter you in a random drawing, in which one person
in this class will receive $50 cash today (photo ID required).

We are conducting a study to analyze monetary incentives to study. By signing up for this experiment, you are acknowledging that the
authors of this study will follow your academic records at UCSB from the beginning of your enrollment through Summer 2012. By
participating in the study, you will be given monetary incentives for studying at a given location at UCSB. In some cases, monetary
incentives will depend solely on your attendance. In other cases, the monetary incentives will depend partially on your attendance and
partially on the attendance of you and one other person. In this case, you may or may not be notified of the identity of your partner.

I am aware that in this study, I allow Philip Babcock, Kelly Bedard, Gary Charness, John Hartman, Heather Royer, and research
assistants related to this study, to access my academic records at UCSB through Summer 2012. I am aware that my UCSB student
number will be used to link survey and study data. It will not be used for any other purpose nor will any information ever be made
public. That being said, absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed, since research documents are not protected from subpoena.

We would also like to ask you a few questions:

What is your sex?              M      F

How old are you?               18     19        20      21         22     23       24        25       other_______
                                                                                                      (indicate age)

Over the last 7 days, how many HOURS did you study in TOTAL (outside of class time)?         ____________
                                                                                             (indicate hours)

Over the last 7 days, how many DAYS did you study for 40 minutes or more ANYWHERE in the library?

  0        1         2         3      4         5       6          7

Over the last 7 days, how many DAYS did you study for 40 minutes or more in the 24-HOUR STUDY ROOM in the library? The 24-hour
study room is located near the main entrance to the library.

  0        1         2         3      4         5       6          7

Please state whether you agree or disagree with the following statement:
  “I encounter difficulties motivating myself to study.” (Circle one of the answers below)




Strongly            Disagree        Somewhat             Neutral        Somewhat              Agree             Strongly
Disagree                             Disagree                             Agree                                  Agree


__________________________           _____________________________                 October _____, 2011          ____________________
Print name                           Signature                                     Date                         Perm #

______________________________________________________                             ___________________________
Primary e-mail address                                                             Local phone number



……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…………………………………………………..



  _________________________                     ________________________                                                           F1
  Print last name                               first name
You have been selected to earn additional money for attendance at the 24-hour study room in the library. You will
receive $2 per study visit for up to 4 visits in the specified 2-week treatment period. Only one visit per day is
eligible for payment. In order for a study visit to count, students must log in with a researcher posted in the 24-
hour study room and remain in the study room for at least 40 minutes before logging out with the researcher. We
will man the 24-hour study room from 11:00am to 7:00pm Monday through Friday from October 10-21, 2011.
Students must log in by 6:20pm for the visit to qualify.

We will pay you for qualifying study room visits in approximately four weeks. You will receive an e-mail in about
three weeks with more information.

Your participation is voluntary. There will be no repercussions should you decide not to participate. Please note
that you may withdraw your participation at any time, and you will be paid based on your attendance at the study
room up to the point that you withdraw from participating. If you have any questions, you may contact Philip
Babcock at babcock@econ.ucsb.edu or 805-893-4823, or John Hartman at hartman@econ.ucsb.edu.

If you have any questions concerning any matter relating to your participation, you may also call the University of
California Santa Barbara Human Subjects committee at 805-893-3807.

By signing below, I acknowledge the above information.




Signature_____________________________________ Print name____________________________________
You have been selected to earn additional money for attendance at the 24-hour study room in the library. You will
receive $2 per study visit for up to 4 visits in the specified 2-week treatment period. Only one visit per day is
eligible for payment. In order for a study visit to count, students must log in with a researcher posted in the 24-
hour study room and remain in the study room for at least 40 minutes before logging out with the researcher. We
will man the 24-hour study room from 11:00am to 7:00pm Monday through Friday from October 10-21, 2011.
Students must log in by 6:20pm for the visit to qualify.

If you have qualifying visits on at least 4 different days from October 10-21 you will earn an additional $25.

We will pay you for qualifying study room visits in approximately four weeks. You will receive an e-mail in about
three weeks with more information.

Your participation is voluntary. There will be no repercussions should you decide not to participate. Please note
that you may withdraw your participation at any time, and you will be paid based on your attendance at the study
room up to the point that you withdraw from participating. If you have any questions, you may contact Philip
Babcock at babcock@econ.ucsb.edu or 805-893-4823, or John Hartman at hartman@econ.ucsb.edu.

If you have any questions concerning any matter relating to your participation, you may also call the University of
California Santa Barbara Human Subjects committee at 805-893-3807.

By signing below, I acknowledge the above information.




Signature_____________________________________ Print name____________________________________
You have been selected to earn additional money for attendance at the 24-hour study room in the library. You will
receive $2 per study visit for up to 4 visits in the specified 2-week treatment period. Only one visit per day is
eligible for payment. In order for a study visit to count, students must log in with a researcher posted in the 24-
hour study room and remain in the study room for at least 40 minutes before logging out with the researcher. We
will man the 24-hour study room from 11:00am to 7:00pm Monday through Friday from October 10-21, 2011.
Students must log in by 6:20pm for the visit to qualify.

You have also been matched with another person for this part of the study. If both of you have qualifying visits on
at least 4 different days from October 10-21 you will both earn an additional $25. Note that if either one of you
does not meet this requirement, the $50 that you could have collectively earned is lost.

We will pay you for qualifying study room visits in approximately four weeks. You will receive an e-mail in about
three weeks with more information.

Your participation is voluntary. There will be no repercussions should you decide not to participate. Please note
that you may withdraw your participation at any time, and you will be paid based on your attendance at the study
room up to the point that you withdraw from participating. If you have any questions, you may contact Philip
Babcock at babcock@econ.ucsb.edu or 805-893-4823, or John Hartman at hartman@econ.ucsb.edu.

If you have any questions concerning any matter relating to your participation, you may also call the University of
California Santa Barbara Human Subjects committee at 805-893-3807.

By signing below, I acknowledge the above information.



Partner’s name ___________________________________________


My Signature______________________________               Print my name_________________________


My number (e.g. B6) ________________________             Partner’s number ______________________




………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….……………………………..




Partner’s name ___________________________________________
You have been selected to earn additional money for attendance at the 24-hour study room in the library. You will
receive $2 per study visit for up to 4 visits in the specified 2-week treatment period. Only one visit per day is
eligible for payment. In order for a study visit to count, students must log in with a researcher posted in the 24-
hour study room and remain in the study room for at least 40 minutes before logging out with the researcher. We
will man the 24-hour study room from 11:00am to 7:00pm Monday through Friday from October 10-21, 2011.
Students must log in by 6:20pm for the visit to qualify.

You will be matched with another person from another class for this part of the study. The identity of your partner
will not be revealed to you or your partner – it is entirely anonymous. If both of you have qualifying visits on at
least 4 different days from October 10-21 you will both earn an additional $25. Note that if either one of you does
not meet this requirement, the $50 that you could have collectively earned is lost.

We will pay you for qualifying study room visits in approximately four weeks. You will receive an e-mail in about
three weeks with more information.

Your participation is voluntary. There will be no repercussions should you decide not to participate. Please note
that you may withdraw your participation at any time, and you will be paid based on your attendance at the study
room up to the point that you withdraw from participating. If you have any questions, you may contact Philip
Babcock at babcock@econ.ucsb.edu or 805-893-4823, or John Hartman at hartman@econ.ucsb.edu.

If you have any questions concerning any matter relating to your participation, you may also call the University of
California Santa Barbara Human Subjects committee at 805-893-3807.

By signing below, I acknowledge the above information.



Signature______________________________ Print name_________________________
                                                                                                                  A1*
Hi, you are being asked to participate in a study by Philip Babcock, Kelly Bedard, Gary Charness, John Hartman,
and Heather Royer. You must be at least 18 years old to participate. For your participation today, we will enter you
in a random drawing, in which one person in this class will receive $50 cash today (subject to presentation of photo
ID).

We are conducting a study to analyze monetary incentives to exercise. By signing up for this experiment, you are
acknowledging that the authors of this study will follow your attendance at the UCSB Recreation Center (“Rec
Center”) for June through September 2010. By participating in the study, you may be randomly selected to earn
money for attending the Rec Center. In some cases, the monetary incentives will depend solely on your attendance.
In other cases, the monetary incentives will depend partially on your attendance and partially on the attendance of
you and one other person (whom you will be notified about if you are selected).

I am aware that in this study, I allow Philip Babcock, Kelly Bedard, Gary Charness, John Hartman, Heather Royer,
and research assistants related to this study, to access my attendance records at the UCSB Recreation Center for June
to September 2010.

I also acknowledge the following information: Exercise has potential risks and benefits. Before starting any exercise
program, you may want to consider contacting a doctor or other professional qualified to help determine what types
of exercise are appropriate for you. When exercise is tailored to your physical condition and health, the gains from
exercise usually outweigh the costs. Please also note that pregnancy may complicate the type and amount of exercise
that you need. If you are pregnant or plan on becoming pregnant in the next six weeks, or if you are 17 years old or
younger, you are not allowed to participate in this study.

After making payment to participants, all identifiers will be immediately removed from the data. The anonymized
attendance records will be kept in a locked drawer in the office of Gary Charness.


We would also like to ask you a few questions:

What is your sex?      M       F

How old are you?       18      19      20      21     22      23      24      25      other_______

In the last month, how many times per week did you moderately or vigorously exercise for 30 minutes or more?

0       less than 1    1       2       3       4      5       6       7       more than 7



_____________________                  ____________________________           August _____, 2010
Print name                             Signature                              Date


_____________________                  __________________________                     ______________________
Perm #                                 Primary e-mail address                         Local phone number



………………………………………………………………..………………………………………………………….


A1                                                                 _______________ _______________
                                                                   Print last name first name                    *
You have been selected to receive information on the benefits of exercise.

Exercise has potential risks and benefits. Before starting any exercise program, you may want to consider
contacting a doctor or other professional qualified to help determine what types of exercise are
appropriate for you. When exercise is tailored to your physical condition and health, the gains from
exercise usually outweigh the costs. Please also note that pregnancy may complicate the type and amount
of exercise that you need.

If you have any questions, you may contact Philip Babcock at babcock@econ.ucsb.edu or 805-893-4823,
or John Hartman at hartman@econ.ucsb.edu.

If you have any questions concerning any matter relating to your participation, you may also call the
University of California Santa Barbara Human Subjects committee at 805-893-3807.

The University of California does not provide compensation for injury to human subjects of research
except that the University will provide for any medical care required to treat any injury resulting from
participation as a human subject in a University-approved activity. If you have any questions concerning
this or any other matter relating to your participation in this activity, please call 893-3807.

By signing below, I acknowledge the above information. I will also do the following immediately if I
become pregnant or suspect that I am pregnant:
• Stop attending the UCSB Recreation Center.
• Notify one of the researchers listed above.




Signature______________________________             Print name_________________________
You have been selected to earn additional money from attendance at the UCSB Recreation Center (“Rec
Center”). From August 7-20, 2010, you will earn $2 for exercising at the Rec Center on any of these
dates, up to $10. If you attend the Rec Center at least five different days from August 7-20, 2010, you will
earn an additional $25.

We will pay you for qualifying Rec Center visits in approximately four weeks. You will receive an e-mail
in about three weeks with more information.

Recall the following information that you acknowledged earlier today: Exercise has potential risks and
benefits. Before starting any exercise program, you may want to consider contacting a doctor or other
professional qualified to help determine what types of exercise are appropriate for you. When exercise is
tailored to your physical condition and health, the gains from exercise usually outweigh the costs. Please
also note that pregnancy may complicate the type and amount of exercise that you need. If you are
pregnant or plan on becoming pregnant in the next six weeks you are not allowed to participate in this
exercise study.

Your exercise participation is voluntary. There will be no repercussions should you decide not to
participate. Please note that you may withdraw your participation at any time, and you will be paid based
on your attendance at the Rec Center up to the point that you withdraw from participating. If you have any
questions, you may contact Philip Babcock at babcock@econ.ucsb.edu or 805-893-4823, or John
Hartman at hartman@econ.ucsb.edu.

If you have any questions concerning any matter relating to your participation, you may also call the
University of California Santa Barbara Human Subjects committee at 805-893-3807.

The University of California does not provide compensation for injury to human subjects of research
except that the University will provide for any medical care required to treat any injury resulting from
participation as a human subject in a University-approved activity. If you have any questions concerning
this or any other matter relating to your participation in this activity, please call 893-3807.

By signing below, I acknowledge the above information. I will also do the following immediately if I
become pregnant or suspect that I am pregnant:
• Stop attending the UCSB Recreation Center.
• Notify one of the researchers listed above.




Signature______________________________              Print name_________________________
You have been selected to earn additional money from attendance at the UCSB Recreation Center (“Rec
Center”). From August 7-20, 2010, you will earn $2 for exercising at the Rec Center on any of these
dates, up to $10. You have also been matched with another person for this part of the study. If both of you
attend the Rec Center at least five different days from August 7-20, 2010, you will each earn an additional
$25. Note that if either one of you does not meet this requirement, the $50 that you could have
collectively earned is lost.

We will pay you for qualifying Rec Center visits in approximately four weeks. You will receive an e-mail
in about three weeks with more information.

Recall the following information that you acknowledged earlier today: Exercise has potential risks and
benefits. Before starting any exercise program, you may want to consider contacting a doctor or other
professional qualified to help determine what types of exercise are appropriate for you. When exercise is
tailored to your physical condition and health, the gains from exercise usually outweigh the costs. Please
also note that pregnancy may complicate the type and amount of exercise that you need. If you are
pregnant or plan on becoming pregnant in the next six weeks you are not allowed to participate in this
exercise study.

Your exercise participation is voluntary. There will be no repercussions should you decide not to
participate. Please note that you may withdraw your participation at any time, and you will be paid based
on your attendance at the Rec Center up to the point that you withdraw from participating. If you have any
questions, you may contact Philip Babcock at babcock@econ.ucsb.edu or 805-893-4823, or John
Hartman at hartman@econ.ucsb.edu.

If you have any questions concerning any matter relating to your participation, you may also call the
University of California Santa Barbara Human Subjects committee at 805-893-3807.

The University of California does not provide compensation for injury to human subjects of research
except that the University will provide for any medical care required to treat any injury resulting from
participation as a human subject in a University-approved activity. If you have any questions concerning
this or any other matter relating to your participation in this activity, please call 893-3807.

By signing below, I acknowledge the above information. I will also do the following immediately if I
become pregnant or suspect that I am pregnant:
• Stop attending the UCSB Recreation Center.
• Notify one of the researchers listed above.


Partner’s name ___________________________________________


Signature______________________________              Print name_________________________



………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..


Partner’s name ___________________________________________
                 1. Control Group                            2. Individual Treatment
            .6




            .3
 Fraction




            0

                 3. Team Treatment                           4. Anonymous Team Treatment
            .6




            .3




            0
                 0                            4              0                             4

                                              Number of Visits
                             Figure 1. Distribution of Study Room Visits

Notes: Number of visits=4 denotes number of visits equal to 4 or more.
                 1. Non-Participants                         2. Control Group
            .6




            .3
 Fraction




            0

                 3. Individual Treatment                     4. Team Treatment
            .6




            .3




            0
                 0                            5              0                             5

                                              Number of Visits
                              Figure 2. Distribution of Rec Center Visits

Notes: Number of visits=4 denotes number of visits equal to 4 or more.
Table 1. Study Room Samples
                                                   Official      Survey      Experiment
Course Number                                     Enrollment   Respondents   Participants
Econ 101                                             205           40            20
Econ 106                                              91           32            27
Econ 114                                              85           22            13
Econ 118                                              58           13            10
Econ 122                                             145           34            23
Econ 130                                              54           37            22
Econ 132A                                             58           42            29
Econ 136A - 1                                         59           52            34
Econ 136A - 2                                         55           40            34
Econ 136B                                             76           60            41
Econ 137A                                             56           23            16
Econ 138A                                            118           38            24
Econ 140A                                            113           54            29
Econ 160                                              50           19            16
Econ 171                                              55           32            27
Econ 189 - 1                                          59           28            20
Econ 189 - 2                                          72           32            31
Psych 7                                              201          100            76
Total                                               1610          698            496
Removing 1 mismatched anonymous treatment                         697            495
group member
Removing duplicate survey respondents                             687            495
Removing individuals who left experiment in the                   683            491
midst of treatment assignment
Table 2. Rec Center Samples
                                                            Official      Survey      Experiment
Economics Course Number                                    Enrollment   Respondents   Participants
2                                                             101           79            62
3B                                                            119           85            66
100B                                                           83           35            21
101                                                            79           76            58
114                                                            62           47            39
118                                                            62           37            28
136A                                                           48           33            21
136B                                                           55           41            30
136C                                                           75           60            50
Total                                                         684          493            375
Removing individuals and their contaminated partners                       490            373
who left experiment in the midst of treatment assignment
Removing duplicate survey respondents and their                            480            364
contaminated partners
Removing respondent who gave a fake name                                   479            364
Table 3. Study Room Survey Response and Experiment Participation
                                                                                      Library
                                                         Male           Age            Days         Sample

Panel A: Classroom Survey Response
    Sample Means
        Control (C)                                      0.65          21.04           1.70            111
                                                         (0.48)         (1.48)         (1.98)
        Individual Treatment (IT)                        0.57          21.22           1.81            109
                                                         (0.50)         (1.48)         (1.77)
        Team Treatment (TT)                              0.60          21.13           1.68            232
                                                         (0.49)         (1.45)         (1.88)
        Anonymous Team Treatment (AT)                    0.56          21.18           1.67            231
                                                         (0.50)         (1.70)         (1.81)

    Mean Differences (P-Values)
        IT - C                                           0.20           0.35           0.69
        AT - C                                           0.11           0.42           0.89
        AT - IT                                          0.91           0.82           0.52
        TT - C                                           0.32           0.57           0.91
        TT - IT                                          0.61           0.60           0.54
        TT - AT                                          0.44           0.75           0.98

Panel B: Experiment Participation
    Sample Means
        Non-Participants (NP)                            0.57          21.42           1.77            192
                                                         (0.50)         (1.80)         (2.01)
        Participants (P)                                 0.60          21.04           1.67            491
                                                         (0.49)         (1.43)         (1.79)

    Mean Differences (P-Values)
        P - NP                                           0.46           0.01           0.56

Panel C: Treatment Assignment Conditional on Participation
    Sample Means
        Control                                          0.60          20.93           1.51            75
                                                         (0.49)         (1.40)         (1.78)
        Individual Treatment                             0.59          21.13           1.82            82
                                                         (0.49)         (1.39)         (1.81)
        Team Treatment                                   0.64          21.02           1.67            172
                                                         (0.48)         (1.27)         (1.83)
        Anonymous Team Treatment (AT)                    0.57          21.07           1.68            162
                                                         (0.50)         (1.61)         (1.76)

    Mean Differences (P-Values)
        IT - C                                           0.85           0.37           0.28
        AT - C                                           0.61           0.51           0.50
        AT - IT                                          0.76           0.74           0.56
        TT - C                                           0.55           0.63           0.50
        TT - IT                                          0.41           0.54           0.99
        TT - AT                                          0.17           0.78           0.81
Standard deviations are in parentheses. P-values are for two-sided t-tests assuming unequal variances for
continuous variables and two-sample proportion tests for discrete variables. Some sample sizes vary slightly due
to non-reporting for specific variables.
Table 4. Study Room Visits by Treatment Group
                                                Visits          Try          Bonus         Sample

Control (C)                                     1.33           0.40           0.19            75
                                                (2.04)         (0.49)         (0.39)
Individual Treatment (IT)                       2.22           0.57           0.40            82
                                                (2.32)         (0.49)         (0.49)
Team Treatment (TT)                             2.83           0.70           0.57           172
                                                (2.18)         (0.46)         (0.50)
Anonymous Team Treatment (AT)                   1.75           0.49           0.33           162
                                                (2.06)         (0.50)         (0.47)

Mean/Proportion Differences (P-Values)
IT - C                                          0.01           0.03           0.00
AT - C                                          0.14           0.18           0.03
AT - IT                                         0.13           0.24           0.25
TT - C                                          0.00           0.00           0.00
TT - IT                                         0.05           0.05           0.01
TT - AT                                         0.00           0.00           0.00
Standard deviations are in parentheses. P-values are for two-sided t-tests assuming unequal variances
for continuous variables and two-sample proportion tests for discrete variables.
Table 5. Study Room Visits for Individual, Team Treatments, and Anonymous Team Treatments
                                                           No Controls                                            With Controls                            With Controls and Class Fixed Effects
                                              Visits             Try             Bonus                Visits             Try             Bonus                Visits             Try             Bonus
                                               (1)               (2)              (3)                  (4)               (5)              (6)                  (7)               (8)              (9)
Any Treatment                                0.886**           0.173*           0.216**              0.850**          0.164**           0.217**              0.768**           0.149*           0.199**
                                              (0.347)          (0.079)           (0.071)              (0.345)           (0.079)          (0.072)              (0.352)           (0.081)          (0.073)

Team Treatment                               0.606*            0.125*           0.167**              0.622*            0.130*           0.164**              0.740**           0.148**          0.186**
                                              (0.317)          (0.067)           (0.068)              (0.321)           (0.067)          (0.069)              (0.333)           (0.072)          (0.071)

Anonymous Team Treatment                     -0.466            -0.079            -0.075              -0.486*           -0.084            -0.085              -0.444            -0.084            -0.079
                                              (0.295)          (0.065)           (0.064)              (0.294)           (0.066)          (0.065)              (0.299)           (0.070)          (0.065)

Male                                                                                                 -0.143            -0.054            -0.049              -0.153            -0.069            -0.044
                                                                                                      (0.199)           (0.047)          (0.046)              (0.204)           (0.049)          (0.047)
Age 20                                                                                               -0.155            -0.040            -0.010              -0.382            -0.123            -0.029
                                                                                                      (0.352)           (0.081)          (0.082)              (0.397)           (0.092)          (0.096)
Age 21                                                                                               -0.152            -0.056            0.013               -0.451            -0.142            -0.017
                                                                                                      (0.330)           (0.080)          (0.077)              (0.411)           (0.097)          (0.098)
Age 22                                                                                               -0.377            -0.055            -0.114              -0.792            -0.154            -0.173
                                                                                                      (0.411)           (0.096)          (0.087)              (0.503)           (0.115)          (0.112)
Age 23+                                                                                              -0.004            -0.006            0.023               -0.394            -0.111            -0.030
                                                                                                      (0.428)           (0.097)          (0.097)              (0.494)           (0.110)          (0.117)
Library Days                                                                                         0.168**          0.033**            0.013               0.164**           0.032**           0.012
                                                                                                      (0.064)           (0.013)          (0.013)              (0.065)           (0.013)          (0.014)
Constant                                     1.333**          0.400**           0.187**              1.312**          0.423**           0.206**                  --               --                --
                                              (0.235)          (0.057)           (0.045)              (0.370)           (0.091)          (0.081)

Sample size is 491. Standard errors are clustered at the group level and reported in parentheses. ** (*) indicates statistically significant at the 5 (10) percent level. Columns (4)-(9) also include
indicators for missing age and sex.
Table 6. Structural Estimates
                                                                                95% Percentile           95% Percentile
                                                           Coefficient           Lower Bound              Upper Bound
Panel A - Structural parameters
Male                                                          0.013                   -0.290                   0.320

Age 20                                                       -0.123                   -0.728                   0.555

Age 21                                                        0.171                   -0.397                   0.797

Age 22                                                       -0.200                   -0.890                   0.568

Age 23+                                                       0.189                   -0.506                   0.938

Library Days                                                  0.086                  0.0002                    0.181

Predicted partner bonus status                                1.642                   0.970                    2.266

Individual treatment indicator                                0.542                   0.079                    0.955

Constant                                                     -0.976                   -1.678                  -0.366

Theta                                                         2.030                   0.939                    6.167

Panel B - Theta under different probability of completion assumptions
Theta: certainty                                              0.643                   0.156                    2.027

Theta: unconditional team treatment mean                      1.883                   1.029                    4.312

Theta: unconditional control group mean                       7.786                   5.182                   15.186

Panel C - Anonymous Treatment - Theta under different probability of completion assumptions
Theta: certainty                                             -0.386                   -0.797                   0.059

Theta: unconditional anonymous treatment mean                 0.864                   -0.394                   2.412

Theta: unconditional control group mean                       2.284                   0.088                    4.661
1000 bootstrap replications. Sample excludes anonymous treatment group members and individuals with missing data for
themselves or their partners. The sample size is 327.
Table 7. Incidence of Pairs Visiting the Study Room Together
                                Same Time = +/- 10 Minutes                             Same Time = +/- 20 Minutes
 Number of Same
   Time Visits            Team Treatment             Random Partner              Team Treatment             Random Partner
           0                       150                       158                          146                       156
                                  (89.3)                    (94.1)                       (86.9)                    (92.9)
           1                       14                        10                           18                        10
                                   (8.3)                     (6.0)                       (10.7)                     (6.0)
           2                        2                         0                            2                         2
                                   (1.2)                     (0.0)                        (1.2)                     (6.0)
           3                        0                         0                            0                         0
                                   (0.0)                     (0.0)                        (0.0)                     (0.0)
           4                        2                         0                            2                         0
                                   (1.2)                     (0.0)                        (1.2)                     (0.0)

        Total                      168                       168                          168                       168
Percentage of visits in pairs in parentheses. Random partners are random 'pairs' within class within the team treatment.
Table 8. Rec Center Survey Response and Experiment Participation
                                                                       Self-Reported Previous              Sample
                                             Male           Age          Exercise    Gym Visits             Size

Panel A: Classroom Survey Response
    Sample Means
        Control (C)                          0.59          21.19             3.80             1.01            112
                                             (0.49)         (2.24)          (2.21)            (1.55)
        Individual Treatment (IT)            0.57          21.39             4.30             1.05            116
                                             (0.50)         (2.72)          (2.63)            (1.59)
        Team Treatment (TT)                  0.65          21.09             4.19             1.04            251
                                             (0.48)         (2.16)          (2.48)            (1.40)

    Mean Differences (P-Values)
        IT - C                               0.69           0.55             0.12             0.84
        TT - C                               0.27           0.69             0.15             0.86
        TT - IT                              0.11           0.29             0.69             0.95


Panel B: Experiment Participation
    Sample Means
        Non-Participants (NP)                0.64          21.26             4.13             0.80            115
                                             (0.48)         (2.43)          (2.51)            (1.33)
        Participants (P)                     0.61          21.16             4.13             1.11            364
                                             (0.49)         (2.30)          (2.45)            (1.52)

    Mean Differences (P-Values)
        P - NP                               0.56           0.71             1.00             0.04


Panel C: Treatment Assignment Conditional on Participation
    Sample Means
        Control                              0.55          21.14             3.98             1.17             87
                                             (0.50)         (2.43)          (2.29)            (1.65)
        Individual Treatment                 0.54          21.24             4.16             1.17             87
                                             (0.50)         (2.19)          (2.49)            (1.69)
        Team Treatment                       0.67          21.14             4.18             1.05            190
                                             (0.47)         (2.30)          (2.51)            (1.38)

    Mean Differences (P-Values)
        IT - C                               0.88           0.77             0.62             1.00
        TT - C                               0.05           0.99             0.51             0.56
        TT - IT                              0.03           0.71             0.94             0.56

Standard deviations are in parentheses. P-values are for two-sided t-tests assuming unequal variances for continuous
variables and two-sample proportion tests for discrete variables. Some sample sizes vary slightly due to non-reporting
for specific variables.
Table 9. Rec Center Visits by Treatment Group
                                                Visits          Try          Bonus         Sample

Control (C)                                     2.13           0.52           0.17            87
                                                (2.99)         (0.50)         (0.38)
Individual Treatment (IT)                       3.82           0.68           0.55            87
                                                (3.23)         (0.47)         (0.50)
Team Treatment (TT)                             4.16           0.82           0.56           190
                                                (2.78)         (0.38)         (0.50)

Mean/Proportion Differences (P-Values)
IT - C                                          0.00           0.03           0.00
TT - C                                          0.00           0.00           0.00
TT - IT                                         0.39           0.01           0.86
Standard deviations are in parentheses. P-values are for two-sided t-tests assuming unequal variances
for continuous variables and two-sample proportion tests for discrete variables.
Table 10. Rec Center Visits for Individual and Team Treatments
                                                         No Controls                                            With Controls                           With Controls and Class Fixed Effects
                                            Visits             Try             Bonus                Visits             Try             Bonus                Visits             Try             Bonus
                                             (1)               (2)              (3)                  (4)               (5)              (6)                  (7)               (8)              (9)
Any Treatment                              1.690**          0.161**           0.379**              1.736**          0.169**           0.388**             1.806**           0.178**           0.395**
                                            (0.471)          (0.074)           (0.067)              (0.362)          (0.063)           (0.059)              (0.365)          (0.064)           (0.059)

Team Treatment                              0.347           0.143**            0.011                0.330           0.137**            -0.005               0.288           0.135**            -0.014
                                            (0.412)          (0.059)           (0.067)              (0.341)          (0.054)           (0.061)              (0.340)          (0.054)           (0.061)

Male                                                                                               0.454*            0.079*           0.099**               0.319            0.056             0.081*
                                                                                                    (0.270)          (0.044)           (0.047)              (0.259)          (0.044)           (0.048)
Age 20                                                                                             -0.593           -0.108*            -0.076              -0.724           -0.121*            -0.111
                                                                                                    (0.439)          (0.058)           (0.075)              (0.440)          (0.062)           (0.076)
Age 21                                                                                             -0.560            -0.078            -0.093              -0.556            -0.077            -0.124
                                                                                                    (0.434)          (0.055)           (0.072)              (0.490)          (0.069)           (0.083)
Age 22                                                                                            -1.274**          -0.235**          -0.193**            -1.208**          -0.210**         -0.224**
                                                                                                    (0.572)          (0.077)           (0.091)              (0.611)          (0.082)           (0.097)
Age 23+                                                                                           -1.580**          -0.271**          -0.271**            -1.704**          -0.279**         -0.317**
                                                                                                    (0.503)          (0.074)           (0.082)              (0.528)          (0.083)           (0.092)
Pre-period Rec Center visits                                                                       0.945**          0.098**           0.092**             0.938**            0.102*           0.091**
                                                                                                    (0.097)          (0.012)           (0.015)              (0.097)          (0.012)           (0.015)
Constant                                   2.126**          0.517**           0.172**              1.499**          0.477**            0.127*                 --                --                --
                                            (0.320)          (0.054)           (0.041)              (0.471)          (0.067)           (0.070)

Sample size is 364. Standard errors are clustered at the group level and reported in parentheses. ** (*) indicates statistically significant at the 5 (10) percent level. Columns 4- 6 also include
indicators for missing age.
Table 11. Rec Center Visits for Individual and Team Treatments - Restricted Samples
                                                             No Controls                                     With Controls                           With Controls and Class FEs
                                                 Visits           Try           Bonus              Visits           Try           Bonus              Visits           Try          Bonus      Sample Size
                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)                (4)             (5)            (6)                (7)             (8)           (9)
Panel A                                                                                                                                                                                          364
Any Treatment                                   1.690**         0.161**        0.379**            1.736**        0.169**         0.388**            1.806**        0.178**         0.395**
                                                 (0.471)         (0.074)         (0.067)           (0.362)         (0.063)        (0.059)            (0.365)        (0.064)         (0.059)
Team Treatment                                   0.347          0.143**          0.011             0.330         0.137**          -0.005             0.288         0.135**         -0.014
                                                 (0.412)         (0.059)         (0.067)           (0.341)         (0.054)        (0.061)            (0.340)        (0.054)         (0.061)

Panel B: Sample Restricted to Actives                                                                                                                                                            164
Any Treatment                                   1.759**          0.023         0.409**            1.682**          0.027         0.418**            1.862**         0.031          0.443**
                                                 (0.679)         (0.059)         (0.106)           (0.610)         (0.058)        (0.100)            (0.625)        (0.061)         (0.099)
Team Treatment                                   -0.883         -0.022          -0.122            -0.489          -0.012          -0.100            -0.634          -0.020         -0.129
                                                 (0.539)         (0.050)         (0.089)           (0.480)         (0.040)        (0.086)            (0.502)        (0.045)         (0.092)

Panel C: Sample Restricted to Inactives                                                                                                                                                          200
Any Treatment                                   1.782**         0.286**        0.372**            1.829**        0.304**         0.382**            1.811**        0.308**         0.380**
                                                 (0.444)         (0.091)         (0.072)           (0.429)         (0.089)        (0.071)            (0.428)        (0.090)         (0.072)
Team Treatment                                  1.047**         0.240**          0.088             0.815         0.204**          0.051              0.711         0.188**          0.036
                                                 (0.486)         (0.086)         (0.088)           (0.469)         (0.086)        (0.086)            (0.464)        (0.084)         (0.086)

Panel D: Sample Restricted to Actives                                                                                                                                                            164
Any Treatment                                   1.759**          0.023         0.409**            1.682**          0.027         0.417**            1.877**         0.030          0.443**
                                                 (0.682)         (0.059)         (0.106)           (0.612)         (0.058)        (0.100)            (0.628)        (0.061)         (0.099)
Team Treatment: Inactive Partner                 -0.887         -0.033          -0.160            -0.498          -0.025          -0.134            -0.400          -0.029         -0.133
                                                 (0.667)         (0.063)         (0.110)           (0.596)         (0.058)        (0.105)            (0.603)        (0.061)         (0.110)
Team Treatment: Active Partner                   -0.881         -0.016          -0.099            -0.484          -0.004          -0.077            -0.797          -0.014         -0.127
                                                 (0.584)         (0.057)         (0.102)           (0.508)         (0.044)        (0.098)            (0.530)        (0.050)         (0.106)

Panel E: Sample Restricted to Inactives                                                                                                                                                          200
Any Treatment                                   1.782**         0.286**        0.372**            1.844**        0.303**         0.387**            1.840**        0.309**         0.390**
                                                 (0.445)         (0.092)         (0.072)           (0.429)         (0.089)        (0.071)            (0.427)        (0.091)         (0.072)
Team Treatment: Inactive Partner                 0.818          0.252**          0.002             0.581         0.211**          -0.036             0.450         0.183**         -0.055
                                                 (0.542)         (0.094)         (0.097)           (0.507)         (0.093)        (0.091)            (0.480)        (0.089)         (0.089)
Team Treatment: Active Partner                  1.490**         0.216**        0.255**            1.303**         0.191*         0.232**            1.235*          0.199*         0.217*
                                                 (0.612)         (0.106)         (0.108)           (0.625)         (0.108)        (0.112)            (0.651)        (0.109)         (0.115)

Sample size is 364. Standard errors are clustered at the group level and reported in parentheses. ** (*) indicates statistically significant at the 5 (10) percent level. Columns 4-9 also
include indicators for missing age.
Table 12. Structural Estimates
                                                                                    95% Percentile            95% Percentile
                                                             Coefficient             Lower Bound               Upper Bound
Panel A - Structural parameters
Male                                                            0.275                     1.138                     1.138

Age 20                                                          -0.292                    -0.796                    0.205

Age 21                                                          -0.357                    -0.841                    0.113

Age 22                                                          -0.613                    -1.257                    0.002

Age 23+                                                         -0.913                    -1.473                   -0.389

Pre-period Rec Center Visits                                    0.293                    0.1880                     0.417

Predicted partner bonus status                                  2.168                     1.403                     2.789

Individual treatment indicator                                  1.291                     0.833                     1.722

Constant                                                        -1.152                    -1.676                   -0.613

Theta                                                           0.679                     0.269                     1.138

Panel B - Theta under different probability of completion assumptions
Theta: certainty                                                -0.043                    -0.226                    0.198

Theta: unconditional team treatment mean                        0.699                     0.375                     1.127

Theta: unconditional control group mean                         4.486                     3.440                     5.868

1000 bootstrap replications. Sample excludes individuals with missing data for themselves or their partners. The sample size is 362.
Table 13. Incidence of Pairs Visiting the Rec Center Together
                                Same Time = +/- 10 Minutes                             Same Time = +/- 20 Minutes
 Number of Same
   Time Visits            Team Treatment             Random Partner              Team Treatment             Random Partner
           0                       178                       184                          178                       176
                                  (93.7)                    (96.8)                       (93.7)                    (92.6)
           1                       10                         6                           10                        14
                                   (5.3)                     (3.2)                        (5.3)                     (7.4)
           2                        2                         0                            2                         0
                                   (1.1)                     (0.0)                        (1.1)                     (0.0)

        Total                      190                       190                          190                       190
Percentage of visits in pairs in parentheses. Random partners are random 'pairs' within class within the team treatment.
