                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           STOCHASTIC GROWTH IN THE UNITED STATES AND EURO AREA

                                          Peter N. Ireland

                                       Working Paper 16681
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16681


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




I would like to thank Fabio Canova and three anonymous referees for extremely helpful comments
and suggestions. The opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed herein are my
own and do not reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Peter N. Ireland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Stochastic Growth in the United States and Euro Area
Peter N. Ireland
NBER Working Paper No. 16681
January 2011
JEL No. E32,F41,F43,O41,O47

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper estimates, using data from the United States and Euro Area, a two-country stochastic growth
model in which both neutral and investment-specific technology shocks are nonstationary but cointegrated
across economies. The results point to large and persistent swings in productivity, both favorable and
adverse, originating in the US but not transmitted to the EA. More specifically, the results suggest
that while the EA missed out on the period of rapid investment-specific technological change enjoyed
in the US during the 1990s, it also escaped the stagnation in neutral technological progress that plagued
the US in the 1970s.


Peter N. Ireland
Boston College
Department of Economics
140 Commonwealth Ave.
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu
1    Introduction

For more than two centuries, the United States and Europe have been linked economically, through
international trade in goods and services and two-way flows of technical and scientific knowledge.
Now, following European monetary unification, the US and Euro Area stand among the world’s
largest economies, roughly equal in population and productive capacity. Still, even over periods as
long as decades, key aggregate variables can behave quite differently across the US and EA.
    For instance, the top panel of figure 1 plots the natural logarithms of real consumption and
investment in the US (the appendix describes in more detail these and all other data used in this
study). The graph normalizes the level of each series to zero in 1970 so as to highlight one of
the most remarkable developments in recent macroeconomic history: the growth of US investment
that has far outstripped growth in consumption, especially since 1990. Greenwood, Hercowitz, and
Krusell (1997) interpret this aspect of the US data as part of a larger body of evidence pointing to-
wards the importance of investment-specific, or capital-embodied, technological progress, thereby
offering up an alternative explanation for the long-run growth of the US economy that contrasts
with the traditional view, going back to Solow (1957), that emphasizes neutral, or disembodied,
technological change instead. Likewise, Fisher (2006) argues that investment-specific technology
shocks are more important in accounting for US output and employment fluctuations than the neu-
tral technology shocks that appear in standard real business cycle models starting with Kydland
and Prescott’s (1982).
    But, as the bottom panel of figure 1 reveals, the same rapid growth in investment simply fails to
appear in data from the EA. To an extent, some of this difference may be due to errors in measure-
ment, since the US National Income and Product Accounts are generally believed to do a better
job than the Euro Area statistics aggregated by Fagan, Henry, and Mestre (2005) at accounting for
quality change in capital goods. However, Sakellaris and Vijselaar (2005) present results of de-
tailed calculations that suggest that when similar adjustments for quality improvements are made
to data from both economies, the differences not only remain, but may become larger still. Fur-
thermore, the comparisons drawn in figure 1 are striking because they show that while the US and

                                                 1
EA have both experienced extended departures from the type of balanced growth that appears in
the traditional one-sector stochastic growth model studied by King, Plosser, Stock, and Watson
(1991), these departures have taken the two economies in totally different directions: in the US,
real investment has grown faster than consumption, whereas in the EA, exactly the opposite has
been true.
   In any case, the analysis in this paper takes the data from figure 1 at face value, while awaiting
improvements in the collection, adjustment, and presentation of those data by national and interna-
tional authorities, and interprets them using a two-country dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium
model like that first developed by Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994). Here, in particular, Backus,
Kehoe, and Kydland’s international real business cycle model is converted into what might more
accurately be called a two-country stochastic growth model by allowing, within the context of that
model, for highly persistent movements in the rates of both neutral and investment-specific tech-
nological change that can explain the departures from balanced growth exhibited in figure 1. This
two-country model is then estimated via maximum likelihood using data from both economies; the
estimated model works, quantitatively, to break the differential action in those data into compo-
nents attributable to both types of productivity growth.
   This empirical exercise delivers a set of clear and consistent results that not only work to
confirm that the Euro Area missed out on the period of rapid investment-specific technological
change enjoyed by the US during the 1990s, but also reveal that the EA escaped the stagnation
in neutral technological progress that appears responsible for the US productivity slowdown of
the 1970s. More generally, maximum likelihood estimates of the model’s parameters, the implied
impulse response functions, and full-sample estimates of the levels of neutral and investment-
specific productivity in the two economies all point repeatedly to large and persistent swings, both
favorable and unfavorable, in both types of technological progress experienced in the US but not
transmitted to the EA. According to the estimated model, therefore, productivity trends appear
considerably smoother for the EA than they have been in the US.
   By examining the data with the help of a fully-specified dynamic, stochastic, general equilib-


                                                 2
rium model, the empirical analysis conducted here can also look beyond the time series that are
used to estimate the rates of neutral and investment-specific technological change and consider the
quantitative implications of those productivity trends for other key macroeconomic variables as
well. In particular, the estimated model is also used below to explore the links between macroe-
conomic quantities like real consumption and investment and macroeconomic prices like the real
exchange rate and the relative price of investment goods. By comparing the model’s implica-
tions along these extra dimensions to additional data, this study relates to and extends a body
of other recent work that attempts to account for the joint dynamics of aggregate quantities and
prices using calibrated or estimated DSGE models. These extra results, for example, extend to
an open-economy setting the findings reported previously by Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti
(2009) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2009) for the US as a closed economy, suggesting that
investment-specific productivity shocks identified by DSGE models may reflect important vari-
ations in financial-sector frictions as well purely technological improvements in newly-installed
capital goods. And these extra results join with those presented recently by Raffo (2009), Rabanal,
Rubio-Ramirez, and Tuesta (2009), and Mandelman, Rabanal, Rubio-Ramirez, and Vilan (2010)
by highlighting the successes and shortcomings of international real business cycle models featur-
ing highly persistent neutral and investment-specific technology shocks. But, to begin, the next
section presents the model itself.



2     A Two-Country Stochastic Growth Model

2.1    Overview

The basic elements of this two-country model are drawn from Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland’s
(1994) framework, modified by replacing their assumption of complete international capital mar-
kets with Heathcote and Perri’s (2002) alternative that only a single, non-contingent bond gets
traded across economies. In addition, investment-specific technology shocks get introduced as
in recent work by Raffo (2009), and both neutral and investment-specific technology shocks are

                                                3
assumed to be nonstationary but cointegrated across countries, borrowing a key element from
Rabanal, Rubio-Ramirez, and Tuesta’s (2009) specification. As noted above, these various modifi-
cations and extensions turn Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland’s international real business cycle model
into a two-country stochastic growth model that can account for the persistent departures from
balanced growth shown in figure 1 but, at the same time, also admits that flows of scientific and
technological knowledge ought, in the very long run at least, to equalize the levels of productivity
across the US and EA.
   In all that follows, home (US) and foreign (EA) variables are denoted with H and F super-
scripts, time periods with t = 0, 1, 2, ... subscripts. Each economy has a representative consumer,
a representative intermediate goods-producing firm, a representative final goods-producing firm,
and a government, whose activities will now be described in turn.


2.2   Consumers

The representative home consumer has preferences described by the expected utility function

                                           [(CtH )µ (1 − LtH /MtH )1−µ ]1−γ − 1
                              ∞                                                
                                   t
                          E0 ∑ β                                                  ,              (1)
                             t=0                           1−γ

where CtH and LtH denote consumption and hours worked, the discount factor β and the consumption-
versus-leisure share parameter µ lie between zero and one, and the risk aversion coefficient γ is
strictly positive. The preference shock MtH impacts on the marginal rate of substitution between
consumption and leisure in a way that associates positive innovations with increases in equilibrium
employment. Hall (1997), Mulligan (2002), Chang, Doh, and Schorfheide (2007), Kahn and Rich
(2007), and Ireland and Schuh (2008) also consider preference shocks of this kind, emphasizing
that they can stand in for a wide variety of nontechnological disturbances that potentially play a
role in driving aggregate fluctuations. Here, these shocks are introduced in a similar spirit, as an
additional source of dynamics, so that the estimated model is not forced from the start to attribute
all or even most of the action found in the data to the various technology shocks. Below, two


                                                        4
extensions of Chang, Doh, and Schorfheide’s (2007) specifications are considered: one in which
the preference shocks in both countries are persistent but stationary and the other in which the
preference shocks are nonstationary but cointegrated across countries.
   For convenience, all prices in both countries are expressed in terms of a common, abstract unit
of account. Accordingly, let WtH denote the domestic nominal wage, QtH the domestic nominal
rental rate for capital, PtH the nominal price of the home consumption good, XtH the nominal price
of the home investment good, and 1/Rt the price at time t in units of the home consumption good
of a real bond that returns one unit of the home consumption good at time t + 1. Let KtH denote the
domestic consumer’s holdings of physical capital at the beginning of period t, DtH the number of
bonds carried by the domestic consumer from period t − 1 into period t, and TtH lump-sum taxes,
expressed in nominal terms, paid by the domestic consumer to the domestic government during
period t. Then the consumer’s budget constraint can be written in real terms as

                                                          H
        WtH LtH + QtH KtH     H     H   XtH ItH + TtH Dt+1
                          + Dt  ≥ Ct  +                +
               PtH                            PtH         Rt
                                                     H
                                                         !2                          !2              (2)
                                                                            LtH
                                      
                                       φd      H Dt+1        φl   H                          H
                                  +         Ut        H
                                                           +    Ut−1        H
                                                                                  −1        Lt−1
                                       2            Ut       2             Lt−1

for the model with stationary preference shocks and

                                                     H
   WtH LtH + QtH KtH    H     H   XtH ItH + TtH Dt+1
                     + Dt ≥ Ct  +                +
          PtH                           PtH         Rt
                                               H
                                                   !2                           !2
                                                                                        H
                                                                                               !       (3)
                                                                       LtH
                                
                                 φd          D t+1      φl                             Lt−1
                            +         UtH       H
                                                      +      H
                                                           Ut−1        H
                                                                           −m            H
                                                                                                   .
                                 2            Ut        2             Lt−1             Mt−1

for the model with nonstationary preference shocks.
   As discussed by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003) for the case of a small open economy, the
second-to-last term on the right-hand side of (2) and (3) introduces arbitrarily small costs of bond
purchase or issuance, measured in units of the consumption good, that guarantee that a suitably-
transformed set of conditions describing the model’s equilibrium has a unique stationary solution.
Meanwhile, the last terms in (2) and (3) introduce adjustment costs for hours worked, following

                                                 5
Ireland and Schuh (2008), that slow down and smooth out the response of home employment to
both domestic and foreign disturbances. A preference specification that allows for habit formation
in leisure might accomplish the same goal. Here, however, the introduction of adjustment costs
makes the set-up directly comparable to that used by Chang, Doh, and Schorfheide (2007), who
find, in fact, that labor adjustment costs of this kind matter when assessing the importance of
persistent preference shocks in a DSGE model. The form of the labor adjustment cost must vary
across (2) and (3) to reflect the fact that in the model with nonstationary preference shocks, hours
worked LtH inherits a stochastic trend from the preference shock MtH and therefore grows in the
long run at the same gross rate m as the preference shock itself. Also, as in Rabanal, Rubio-
Ramirez, and Tuesta (2009), both adjustment cost terms must be scaled by a factor UtH , equal to
(VtH )α/(1−α) ZtH for the model with stationary preference shocks and MtH (VtH )α/(1−α) ZtH for the
model with nonstationary preference shocks, where ZtH is the home neutral technology shock, VtH
is the home investment-specific technology shock, and the parameter α measures capital’s share in
production, so that these costs expand in line with the overall economy in this model with long-run
growth. The bond adjustment cost parameter φd must be strictly positive for the model to have
a unique steady-state growth path, the labor adjustment cost parameter φl is nonnegative, and the
form of both adjustment cost specifications is such that the level of these costs is zero along the
steady-state growth path.
   By purchasing ItH units of the domestic investment good during period t, the consumer in-
creases the stock of capital available in the home country between t and t + 1 according to

                                                                   2
                                                        ItH
                                                  
                                              φk
                       (1 − δ)KtH   + ItH   −               − ηH        KtH ≥ Kt+1
                                                                               H
                                                                                   ,             (4)
                                              2         KtH

where the depreciation rate δ lies between zero and one. The last term on the left-hand side of (4)
introduces capital adjustment costs, common to most international real business cycle models, that
slow down and smooth out the response of home investment to both domestic and foreign shocks.
The capital adjustment cost parameter φk is nonnegative, and a value for the positive parameter ηH



                                                    6
will be set later on to equal the constant ratio of investment to capital in the home country along
the steady-state growth path, so that the level of these costs again equals zero along that path.
                                                                       H , and DH for all t =
    Hence, the representative home consumer chooses CtH , LtH , ItH , Kt+1      t+1

0, 1, 2, ... to maximize the utility function (1) subject to the budget constraint (2) or (3) and the cap-
ital accumulation constraint (4), both of which must hold for all t = 0, 1, 2, , .... The representative
foreign consumer solves a symmetric problem, involving the choice of foreign consumption CtF ,
                                                             F and bonds DF for all t = 0, 1, 2, ...
hours worked LtF , investment ItF , and holdings of capital Kt+1          t+1

to maximize a utility function having the same form as (1) but which gets hit by the foreign pref-
erence shock MtF , subject to constraints that parallel (2) or (3) and (4) for all t = 0, 1, 2, ....


2.3    Intermediate Goods-Producing Firms

The representative home intermediate goods-producing firm rents KtH units of capital and hires LtH
units of labor to produce YtA units of an internationally-traded intermediate good according to the
Cobb-Douglas specification
                                        (KtH )α (ZtH LtH )1−α ≥ YtA ,                                  (5)

where the share parameter α lies between zero and one and, as noted above, ZtH denotes the neutral
technology shock experienced in the home country. The firm sells its output domestically and
abroad at the common price PtA ; during each period t = 0, 1, 2, ..., it chooses YtA , KtH , and LtH in
order to maximize its profits, PtAYtA − QtH KtH −WtH LtH , subject to the technological constraint (5).
    Symmetrically, the representative foreign intermediate goods-producing firm uses KtF units of
capital and LtF units of labor to produce YtB units of a second internationally-traded intermediate
good that sells in both countries at the common price PtB . The firm operates with a technology of
the same Cobb-Douglas form described in (5), but which gets hit by the foreign neutral productivity
shock ZtF ; the firm acts to maximize its profits, measured likewise as revenues minus costs.




                                                     7
2.4    Final Goods-Producing Firms

The representative domestic final goods-producing firm uses AtH units of the home intermediate
good and BtH units of the foreign intermediate good to produce C̃tH units of the home consumption
good and I˜tH units of the home investment good according to the technology described by


                [(1 − ω)1/θ (AtH )(θ−1)/θ + ω1/θ (BtH )(1−θ)/θ ]θ/(1−θ) ≥ C̃tH + (1/VtH )I˜tH ,              (6)


where the term 1/VtH out in front of investment I˜tH on the right-hand side of (6) captures the
effects of stochastic, investment-specific technological change of the kind described in a closed
economy by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988) and Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell
(1997) and introduced into small-open-economy or two-country models by Finn (1999), Boileau
(2002), Letendre and Luo (2007), Raffo (2009), Coeurdacier, Kollmann, and Martin (2010), and
Mandelman, Rabanal, Rubio-Ramirez, and Vilan (2010). The positive parameter θ measures the
elasticity of substitution between the two intermediate goods in producing the final goods; the
share parameter ω lies between zero and one.
   The firm chooses C̃tH , I˜tH , AtH , and BtH at each date t = 0, 1, 2, ... to maximize its profits, PtH C̃tH +
XtH I˜tH − PtA AtH − PtB BtH , subject to the technological constraint (6). The solution to this problem
requires that
                                              XtH /PtH = 1/VtH                                               (7)

hold in any equilibrium in which both consumption and investment goods get produced in the home
country, confirming that Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell’s (1997) insight that investment-
specific technological progress manifests itself partly in a falling price of investment relative to
consumption goods applies in this model as well.
   The representative foreign final goods-producing firm uses AtF units of the home intermediate
good and BtF units of the foreign intermediate good to produce C̃tF units of the foreign consumption
good and I˜tF units of the foreign investment good according to a constant-elasticity-of-substitution
production function that is symmetric to the one shown in (6). The same argument used above to

                                                       8
derive (7) implies that, in equilibrium, the relative price XtF /PtF of investment to consumption in
the foreign country is inversely related to the foreign investment-specific technology shock VtF .


2.5    Governments

Both governments run balanced budgets, according to which lump-sum taxes raised from con-
sumers are used to fund purchases of the local consumption good; hence, TtH /PtH = GtH and
TtF /PtF = GtF for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... Stochastic fluctuations in the home and foreign government
spending variables GtH and GtF , as described below, provide an additional source of volatility in
output and employment beyond the two types of technology shocks.


2.6    Equilibrium Conditions

Keeping in mind that the two intermediate goods are traded internationally and that the bond hold-
ing costs, labor adjustment costs, and government purchases are all measured in units of the local
consumption goods, the model’s market clearing conditions are YtA = AtH + AtF , YtB = BtH + BtF ,

                                                !2                          !2
                                          H
                                                                     LtH
                                                       
                              φd         Dt+1          φl
             C̃tH   = CtH   +      UtH               +        H
                                                            Ut−1               H
                                                                         − 1 Lt−1 + GtH ,               (8)
                              2          UtH           2             H
                                                                    Lt−1

                                                !2                            !2
                                          F
                                                                     LtF
                                                       
                F    F   φd              Dt+1          φl
              C̃t = Ct +      UtF                    +        F
                                                            Ut−1         −1         F
                                                                                   Lt−1 + GtF ,         (9)
                         2               UtF           2             F
                                                                    Lt−1

I˜tH = ItH , I˜tF = ItF , and DtH + DtF = 0 for all t = 0, 1, 2, ... in the model with stationary preference
shocks. In the model with nonstationary preference shocks, (8) and (9) must be modified, replacing
the labor adjustment cost specification from (2) with the alternative form shown in (3).


2.7    Exogenous Shocks

In addition, the model’s equilibrium conditions include laws of motion for the eight exogenous
shocks: the preference shock, the neutral technology shock, the investment-specific technology


                                                      9
shock, and the government spending shock in each of the two countries.
      Following Rabanal, Rubio-Ramirez, and Tuesta (2009), the neutral and investment-specific
technology shocks are assumed to be nonstationary but cointegrated, so that


        ln(ZtH /Zt−1
                 H
                     ) = (1 − ρH            H     H     H        H      F           H         H
                               z ) ln(z) + ρz ln(Zt−1 /Zt−2 ) + κz [ln(Zt−1 ) − ln(Zt−1 )] + εzt ,        (10)


        ln(ZtF /Zt−1
                 F
                     ) = (1 − ρFz ) ln(z) + ρFz ln(Zt−1
                                                    F     F
                                                        /Zt−2 ) + κFz [ln(Zt−1
                                                                           H           F
                                                                               ) − ln(Zt−1 )] + εFzt ,    (11)

        ln(VtH /Vt−1
                  H
                     ) = (1 − ρH            H      H     H       H       F           H        H
                               v ) ln(v) + ρv ln(Vt−1 /Vt−2 ) + κv [ln(Vt−1 ) − ln(Vt−1 )] + εvt ,        (12)

and
           ln(VtF /Vt−1
                     F
                        ) = (1 − ρFv ) ln(v) + ρFv ln(Vt−1
                                                        F     F
                                                           /Vt−2 ) + κFv [ln(Vt−1
                                                                               H           F
                                                                                  ) − ln(Vt−1 )] + εFvt   (13)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, .... In (10)-(13), z and v are positive parameters governing the long-run average
rates of neutral and investment-specific technological progress in both countries along the model’s
steady-state growth path, ρH    F    H        F
                           z , ρz , ρv , and ρv , all lying between zero and one, are parameters

governing the persistence of movements in the growth rates of the neutral and investment-specific
technology shocks, κH    F    H        F
                    z , κz , κv , and κv are nonnegative error-correction parameters governing the

speed of technological convergence across the two economies, and εH     F H             F
                                                                  zt , εzt , εvt , and εvt are mutually

and serially uncorrelated innovations that are normally distributed with zero means and standard
deviations σH    F    H        F
            z , σz , σv , and σv .

      Since this specification allows for serial correlation in the growth rates of both country-specific
technology shocks, it can account for the highly persistent differences in real consumption and
investment growth both within and across economies displayed for the US and EA in figure 1.
Meanwhile, the assumptions, implicit in (10)-(13), that the neutral and investment-specific shocks
are cointegrated and have the same long-run average growth rates across countries, imply that over
very long periods of time, productivity levels and growth rates converge across countries: these
restrictions get enforced when at least one in each pair, κH      F                             H
                                                           z and κz for the neutral shocks and κv

and κFv for the investment-specific shocks, is strictly positive. Finally, when v > 1, so that there is


                                                       10
a nonzero average growth rate of the investment-specific technology shock, a common, downward
trend in the price of investment appears in both countries and real investment will tend to grow
faster than real consumption in both countries over time; again, these dynamics generalize those
studied in a closed economy setting by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997).
      Following Chang, Doh, and Schorfheide (2007), two alternative specifications for the pref-
erence shocks are considered. The first specification assumes that the preference shock in each
country follows a stationary autoregressive process, so that


                            ln(MtH ) = (1 − ρH       H     H     H        H
                                             m ) ln(m ) + ρm ln(Mt−1 ) + εmt                         (14)


and
                             ln(MtF ) = (1 − ρFm ) ln(mF ) + ρFm ln(Mt−1
                                                                     F
                                                                         ) + εFmt                    (15)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where the positive parameters mH and mF determine the steady-state val-
ues of the shocks, the persistence parameters ρH      F
                                               m and ρm both lie between zero and one, and the

innovations εH       F
             mt and εmt are mutually and serially uncorrelated with zero means and standard de-

viations σH      F
          m and σm . The second specification assumes instead that the two preference shocks are

nonstationary but cointegrated, so that


   ln(MtH /Mt−1
            H
                ) = (1 − ρH            H     H     H        H      F           H         H
                          m ) ln(m) + ρm ln(Mt−1 /Mt−2 ) + κm [ln(Mt−1 ) − ln(Mt−1 )] + εmt          (16)


and


      ln(MtF /Mt−1
               F
                   ) = (1 − ρFm ) ln(m) + ρFm ln(Mt−1
                                                  F     F
                                                      /Mt−2 ) + κFm [ln(Mt−1
                                                                         H           F
                                                                             ) − ln(Mt−1 )] + εFmt   (17)


for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where the positive parameter m determines the common long-run growth
rate of the preference shocks in the two countries, the parameters ρH      F
                                                                    m and ρm , now governing the

persistence of movements in the growth rates of the preference shocks, both lie between zero and
one, at least one of the nonnegative error-correction parameters κH      F
                                                                  m and κm is strictly positive to


                                                     11
enforce cointegration, and the innovations εH       F
                                            mt and εmt are again mutually and serially uncorrelated

with zero means and standard deviations σH      F
                                         m and σm .

      Finally, so that the levels of government spending in the two economies increase as those
economies experience stochastic long-run growth, it is assumed that fiscal policies give rise to ran-
dom fluctuations in gtH = GtH /UtH and gtF = GtF /UtF ; the government spending variables therefore
get scaled by the same growth factors that keep the adjustment cost specifications consistent with
long-run balanced growth. In particular, these scaled government spending variables are assumed
to follow the stationary autoregressive processes


                           ln(gtH ) = (1 − ρH       H     H     H        H
                                            g ) ln(g ) + ρg ln(gt−1 ) + εgt                     (18)


and
                           ln(gtF ) = (1 − ρFg ) ln(gF ) + ρFg ln(gt−1
                                                                   F
                                                                       ) + εFgt                 (19)

for all t = 0, 1, 2, ..., where the positive parameters gH and gF pin down the average ratios of
government spending to private consumption in the two economies, the persistence parameters ρH
                                                                                             g

and ρFg both lie between zero and one, and the innovations εH       F
                                                            gt and εgt are mutually and serially

uncorrelated with zero means and standard deviations σH      F
                                                      g and σg .



2.8     Equilibrium System

The first-order conditions describing private agents’ optimizing behavior, the market clearing con-
ditions, and the laws of motion describing the stochastic evolution of the exogenous shocks form
a system of equations that determines the equilibrium behavior of the model’s endogenous vari-
ables. This system implies that in each country, real consumption and investment inherit distinct
stochastic trends from the nonstationary neutral and investment-specific technology shocks and,
in the specification with nonstationary preference shocks, the preference shocks as well. Since
the nonstationary shocks are cointegrated across countries, however, home and foreign consump-
tion and home and foreign investment form pairs of cointegrated variables, and regardless of the

                                                   12
stationarity properties of the preference shocks, the scaling of the government spending variables
introduced in (18) and (19) implies that government spending and consumption are cointegrated
within each country. Hours worked, too, inherit their own stochastic trend but are cointegrated
across countries in the model with nonstationary preference shocks.
   Hence, the model with stationary preference shocks has implications for eight observable, sta-
tionary variables: the growth rate gCH
                                    t
                                               H of home consumption, the growth rate gIH =
                                       = CtH /Ct−1                                     t
      H of home investment, the ratio r GCH = GH /CH of government spending to consumption in
ItH /It−1                              t       t   t

the home country, hours worked LtH in the home country, the ratio rtCFH = CtF /CtH of foreign to
home consumption, the ratio rtIFH = ItF /ItH of foreign to home investment, the ratio rtGCF = GtF /CtF
of government spending to consumption in the foreign country, and hours worked LtF in the foreign
country. The model with nonstationary preference shocks has implications for the same eight ob-
servables, except that the hours worked variables LtH and LtF must be replaced by their stationary
counterparts: the growth rate gtLH = LtH /Lt−1
                                           H in the home country and the ratio r LFH = LF /LH
                                                                                t       t   t

of foreign to home hours worked. When the equilibrium system is rewritten in terms of these
stationary variables, it implies that in the absence of shocks, the global economy converges to a
steady-state growth path along which each stationary variable is constant. The system can therefore
be log-linearized around its steady state to form a set of linear expectational difference equations
that can be solved using methods outlined, for example, by Klein (2000).
   Conveniently, the approximate solution obtained in this way takes the form of a state-space
econometric model, linking the eight observable variables listed above to an unobservable state
vector that includes stationary transformations of the model’s eight shocks. Hence, under the addi-
tional assumption that the innovations to the eight shocks are normally distributed, Kalman filtering
algorithms described, for instance, by Hamilton (1994, Ch.13) can be used to estimate the model’s
structural parameters via maximum likelihood and to make inferences about the realizations of the
unobservable shocks based on information contained in the observable data. And while, in the
spirit of more traditional real business cycle studies, the estimation exercise performed here draws
on information on aggregate quantities only, the empirical performance of the estimated model


                                                 13
will also be assessed, below, based on its ability to account for movements in aggregate prices,
including the real exchange rate and the relative price of investment.



3    Empirical Strategy and Results

The empirical model has a large number of parameters, making it desirable to calibrate at least
some of them, especially those for which a wide consensus on reasonable values exists; the esti-
mation exercise can then focus all of its power on the remaining parameters, in particular those
describing the magnitudes of the labor and capital adjustment costs and, especially, the stochastic
processes for the various shocks, about which much less in known. For instance, Backus, Ke-
hoe, and Kydland (1994), Heathcote and Perri (2002), and Rabanal, Rubio-Ramirez, and Tuesta
(2009) all work with calibrated two-country models that set the discount factor β = 0.99, consump-
tion’s share parameter µ = 0.34, the risk aversion coefficient γ = 2, the quarterly depreciation rate
δ = 0.025, and capital’s share α = 0.36. These same settings are also used here; this study, like
those previous ones, thereby abstracts away from whatever cross-country heterogeneity may ap-
pear in those basic preference and technological parameters . The parameters ηH and ηF are then
set equal to the constant ratio of investment to capital in each country so that, as noted above, the
levels of the capital adjustment costs equal zero along the model’s steady-state growth path. Mean-
while, as also noted above, the small but positive setting φd = 0.001 guarantees that the model’s
steady-state growth path is unique.
    More controversy surrounds the settings for the trade parameters: the share parameter ω and, to
an even greater extent, the elasticity of substitution θ between home and foreign intermediate goods
in producing the final goods. Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994) propose the values ω = 0.15
and θ = 1.5. Heathcote and Perri (2002) continue to use ω = 0.15, but select a lower value of
θ = 0.9. Raffo (2009) also sets ω = 0.15, but takes θ = 0.5 as a benchmark. And Rabanal, Rubio-
Ramirez, and Tuesta (2009) use ω = 0.10 and study versions of their model with θ = 0.85 and
θ = 0.62. Much of the disagreement on appropriate values for θ reflects findings from recent



                                                 14
work by Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008) that emphasize the importance of this parameter in
determining the response of international variables to technology shocks. Here, therefore, the
analysis follows but broadens the strategy from Rabanal, Rubio-Ramirez, and Tuesta (2009) by
fixing ω = 0.10 but then leaving θ as one of the parameters to be estimated instead of calibrated.
   In the model with stationary preference shocks, the steady-state growth rates of real consump-
tion and investment in both countries get determined by the steady-state values of gCH
                                                                                    t  = vα/(1−α) z
and gtIH = v1/(1−α) z. In the model with nonstationary preference shocks, the steady-state growth
rates of hours worked, real consumption, and real investment in both countries get determined
by the steady-state values of gtLH = m, gCH
                                         t  = mvα/(1−α) z and gtIH = mv1/(1−α) z. Hence, while it
would in principle be possible to estimate the parameters z, v, and m in (10)-(13), (16), and (17)
together with the others that remain, it seems easier and more natural to simply select values for
these parameters beforehand, so as to ensure that the steady-state growth rates in the model match
the average growth rates of hours, consumption, and investment in the data. In particular, using
the quarterly series, 1970:1-2007:4, described in the appendix, the average annual growth rate of
real, per-capita consumption works out to be 1.83 percent for the US, 1.72 percent for the EA, and
hence 1.78 percent for the two economies combined. Similarly, the average annual growth rate of
real, per-capita investment equals 2.36 percent for the US, 1.51 percent for the EA, and hence 1.94
percent for the two countries combined, while the average annual growth rate of per-capita hours
worked is −0.14 percent for the US, −0.09 percent for the EA, and hence −0.12 percent for the
two economies combined. Converting these net, annual figures from the data into gross, quarterly
rates of change as in the model and using the value of α = 0.36 selected previously leads to the set-
tings z = 1.0042 and v = 1.0004 for the model with stationary preference shocks and m = 0.9997,
z = 1.0045, and v = 1.0004 for the model with nonstationary preference shocks.
   Finally, for the model with stationary preference shocks, the settings mH = mF = 0.9 for the
constants in (14) and (15) imply that the representative consumers in both economies spend 1/3
of their time working along the steady-state growth path, matching an assumption that is made
commonly in the real business cycle literature. And in both model variants, the settings gH = gF =


                                                 15
0.20 in (18) and (19) imply a steady-state ratio of real government spending to real consumption
of about 30 percent in both economies, roughly matching the facts that in the sample of data
themselves, government spending has averaged 31 percent of private consumption in the US and
34 percent of private consumption in the EA.
   Table 1 reports estimates of the model’s remaining parameters, numbering 23 for the model
with stationary preference shocks and 25 for the model with nonstationary preference shocks,
obtained via maximum likelihood using quarterly readings, 1970:1-2007:4, on the sets of eight
observables selected above to reflect the multiple stochastic trends that appear in and are shared by
those variables in theory. Since the calibrated parameters selected above suffice to pin down the
steady-state values of the model’s stationary variables, each of the eight series is demeaned prior
to estimation; thus, identification of the estimated parameters comes from the dynamics implied
by the model and seen in the data. The standard errors, also reported in table 1, are derived from
a bootstrapping procedure described by Efron and Tibshirani (1993, Ch.6), according to which the
model, with its parameters fixed at their estimated values, gets used to generate 1000 samples of
data on the same series found in the actual US and EA data. These artificial series then get used to
re-estimate the model’s parameters 1000 times, and the standard errors get computed as the stan-
dard deviations of the parameter estimates taken across those 1000 replications. Conveniently and
by construction, therefore, this bootstrapping procedure accounts for the finite-sample properties
of the maximum likelihood estimates as well as the constraints, requiring some parameters to be
nonnegative and others to lie between zero and one, that are imposed during estimation.
   For both versions of the model, with stationary and nonstationary preference shocks, the esti-
mate of the elasticity parameter θ comes in around 1.5, above several others found in the recent
literature, including Lubik and Schorfheide’s (2005) 0.43, Rabanal and Tuesta’s (2010) 0.94, and
Bergin’s (2006) 1.13. Each of these previous studies, however, works with a New Keynesian DSGE
model and therefore uses data on nominal as well as real variables in the estimation. Here, where
the focus remains exclusively on real variables, it is perhaps not surprising that the estimates of θ
gravitative back towards the value originally proposed by Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994) in


                                                 16
the calibration of their international real business cycle model. The estimates of the labor adjust-
ment cost parameter φl appear significant, both economically and statistically, confirming Chang,
Doh, and Schorfheide’s (2007) finding that these costs become important in models with persis-
tent preference shocks; the estimates of the capital adjustment cost parameter φk are smaller but
significant as well.
   Most interestingly, the estimates of the error-correction parameters display a highly consistent
pattern, with those for the US coming in positive but those for the EA always lying up against
their lower bound of zero. Also noteworthy, while both US and EA neutral technology shocks and
the US investment-specific technology shock are estimated to have growth rates with only modest
amounts of persistence, the EA investment-specific shock, though much less volatile than all of
the other disturbances on a quarter-to-quarter basis given the very small estimates of the standard
deviation σFv of its innovation, appears to be extremely persistent, with estimates of ρFv above 0.95
for both versions of the model.
   All these properties of the estimates get reflected in figure 2, which plots impulse responses of
the neutral and investment-specific productivity levels ZtH , ZtF , VtH , and VtF to innovations to each
of these four shocks; the graph shows results for the model with stationary preference shocks but,
given the stability of the parameter estimates across the two model variants, they look much the
same for the model with nonstationary preference shocks. The 95-percent confidence intervals,
also shown in each panel, are constructed from the same bootstrapping procedure described above
to attach standard errors to the parameter estimates themselves. In particular, the figure highlights
how the patterns in the estimated error-correction coefficients imply that neutral and investment-
specific shocks originating in the EA very gradually diffuse to affect the US as well, while the
same disturbances hitting the US leave EA productivity unchanged. The figure also reinforces
how much more persistent the EA investment-specific technology shock is compared to all of the
other disturbances.
   The zero error-correction coefficients estimated for the EA reported in table 1, as well as the
very slow diffusion of productivity shocks from the EA to the US shown in figure 2, suggest that


                                                  17
it might be interesting to respecify the model so that the nonstationary neutral and investment-
specific shocks, and in the model with nonstationary preference shocks those disturbances as well,
are no longer required to be cointegrated across the two economies. Unfortunately, as it stands now,
the model requires the nonstationary shocks to be cointegrated; otherwise, it lacks a steady-state
growth path and cannot be solved and estimated using standard methods. The same problem arises
when considering the possibility that the average growth rates of neutral and investment-specific
technological progress may differ across the two economies; without the restriction of common
values for the parameters m, z, and v, the model again lacks a steady-state growth path. Along
exactly these lines, however, the results from table 1 and figure 2 highlight that even with these
restrictions imposed, the estimated model implies that the growth rates of neutral and investment-
specific technological change, though equal in the long run, converge across countries very slowly.
This same feature of the estimated model also plays a key role in Rabanal, Rubio-Ramirez, and
Tuesta’s (2009) study, which shows how the extremely slow convergence of productivity trends
across countries can work to greatly magnify the responsiveness of the real exchange rate to tech-
nology shocks.
   And these same properties of the maximum likelihood estimates get reflected in the graphs
shown in the top two rows of figure 3, which illustrate most directly the model’s interpretation of
the data by plotting out model-based estimates of the historical paths of the productivity variables
ZtH , ZtF , VtH , and VtF . These estimates are constructed on the basis of full-sample information
using the Kalman smoothing algorithms described by Hamilton (1994, Ch.13) and generalized by
Kohn and Ansley (1983) to deal with cases like this one, where the presence of lagged variables
in the state vector implies that the covariance matrix of one-step-ahead forecast errors for the state
becomes singular. Once again the results do not depend sensitively on the specification, stationary
or nonstationary, for the preference shocks. The solid lines in these graphs confirm that the broad
characterization of post-World War II US macroeconomic history provided by Ireland and Schuh’s
(2008) closed-economy analysis is robust to the consideration of international data. In particular,
the figure suggests that the productivity slowdown experienced in the US during the 1970s reflects,


                                                 18
above all else, a complete lack of neutral technological progress over a period that extends from the
beginning of the sample in 1970 through the early 1980s. Meanwhile, the more recent productivity
revival that accompanied the long economic expansion of the 1990s in the US gets attributed to
rapid investment-specific technological change that, in retrospect, appears more like a one-time
permanent shift in the level of VtH than a persistent change in the growth rate of VtH .
   The dashed lines in figure 3, however, tell a very different story for postwar Europe. According
to the graphs, neutral productivity growth continued at a normal pace in Europe during the 1970s,
even as it was stalled out in the US. Instead, Europe’s productivity problems appear concentrated
in the investment-specific sector, with the EA apparently experiencing no spillovers, positive or
negative, from the US, even during the boom of the 1990s. Overall, the maximum likelihood
estimates of the parameters, the impulse responses, and the smoothed estimates of the shocks
point to the broader conclusion that over the decades since 1970, the EA economy has remained
insulated against a variety of technological disturbances – both neutral and investment-specific,
both favorable and adverse – experienced in the US.
   The graphs in the bottom row of figure 3 present alternative estimates of neutral and investment-
specific technological change in the US and EA that come from more conventional growth account-
ing exercises. As described in more detail in the appendix, the same data for investment used to
estimate the model are cumulated to form series for the capital stock in each economy; these series,
in turn, are combined with the same data on labor inputs used to estimate the model and new data
on real GDP to back out series for neutral productivity levels for each economy using aggregate
production functions of the same Cobb-Douglas form shown above in (5). Meanwhile, following
Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997) and as suggested by (7), the series for investment-
specific productivity are constructed using data on the relative price of investment to consumption.
Thus, these alternative estimates impose some, but not all, of the theoretical restrictions implied by
the DSGE model, yet also exploit additional data on real GDP and relative prices not used before.
   Broadly speaking, these growth accounting exercises lead to conclusions similar to those com-
ing from the estimated DSGE model: in the bottom panels of figure 3, neutral technological


                                                 19
progress continues throughout the 1970s in the EA even as it stagnates in the US, but the EA also
largely misses out on the more rapid investment-specific technological progress experienced in the
US during the 1990s. On the other hand, the measures of investment-specific technological change
implied by the estimated model do look different from those coming off the growth accounting
exercise, particularly for the US case, where the model-based estimates exhibit considerably more
high-frequency volatility. This last result echoes findings obtained for the US as a closed econ-
omy presented and discussed by Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2009) and Schmitt-Grohe
and Uribe (2009), suggesting that the investment-specific technology shocks identified by the two-
country model used here may reflect stochastic variations in, for example, financial-sector frictions
that affect the productivity of newly-installed physical capital as well as purely technological im-
provements in those same capital goods.
   As another set of checks on the estimated model, table 2 compares statistics describing the
volatilities of and co-movements between key macroeconomic variables in the US and EA data
to the same statistics as implied by the model, following the traditional approach used in the
real business cycle literature that passes all series, in natural logarithms, through the Hodrick-
Prescott (1997) filter to isolate movements at business cycle frequencies. The table confirms that
the stochastic growth model estimated here shares many of the same strengths and weaknesses as
other international real business cycle models. Panels A and B show that both model variants do
an adequate job of matching the business-cycle volatilities of real GDP, consumption, investment,
and hours worked, although government spending in the models moves too much at business cycle
frequencies when compared to the data. In addition, panel C shows that the model with station-
ary preference shocks can account for a key feature of the data that Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland’s
(1994) original specification cannot: that cross-country correlations in outputs exceed those in con-
sumptions. On the other hand, both versions of the estimated model fail to reproduce the positive
cross-country correlation in investments seen in the data, grossly underpredict the volatility in the
real exchange rate, computed in the model as RERt = PtF /PtH , and fail to solve the puzzle first iden-
tified by Backus and Smith (1993), that the ratio of consumptions across countries is negatively


                                                  20
correlated with the real exchange rate in the data but positively correlated with the real exchange
rate in the model. These last results echo those discussed in much more detail by Mandelman, Ra-
banal, Rubio-Ramirez, and Vilan (2010), who also work with an international real business cycle
model featuring nonstationary but cointegrated investment-specific technology shocks.
    Finally, table 3 reports on the correlations between the innovations to the model’s eight shocks.
In theory, these innovations ought to be mutually uncorrelated; reassuringly, most of the entries in
table 3 do come in close to zero and few if any appear glaringly large. Some of these statistics do
show modest evidence of model misspecification, however. For instance, the correlation between
the US and EA neutral technology shocks is around 0.30 for both versions of the model, suggesting
that there is a source of international comovement in the data that the theory is missing. The
statistics also suggest that the model’s depiction of fiscal policy using exogenous autoregressions
for government spending is oversimplified for both economies, as there is evidence of correlation
between the innovation in each country’s spending variable and neutral technology shock and
signs of correlation between the innovations to the US and EA spending variables as well. This
last set of results suggests that future work might fruitfully focus on developing richer and more
realistic characterizations of US and EA fiscal policies over the past four decades and tracing out
the implications of those specifications in a two-country DSGE framework.



4    Conclusion

Macroeconomic data from the United States and Euro Area economies often behave quite differ-
ently, even when summarized in terms of their most basic properties. Perhaps most significantly,
while over much of the post-World War II period real investment has grown faster than real con-
sumption in the US, exactly the opposite turns out to be true for the EA.
    This paper interprets these differential trends with a two-country stochastic growth model that
uses nonstationary but cointegrated neutral and investment-specific technology shocks to formalize
the idea that while productivity levels may converge across economies in the very long run, there



                                                 21
can also be highly persistent departures from the steady-state growth path lasting for decades or
more. When estimated with US and EA data on real consumption, investment, government spend-
ing, and hours worked, using an empirical strategy that exploits the fact that these data contain,
and to some extent share, multiple stochastic trends, this model confirms the popular suspicion
that the EA largely missed out on the rapid investment-specific technological change that fueled
the extended boom in the US economy during the 1990s. On the other hand, the estimated model
also suggests that neutral technological progress continued at a relatively healthy pace in the EA
during the 1970s, even as the US was experiencing its productivity slowdown. More generally, the
estimated model points in various ways to persistent swings in both neutral and investment-specific
productivity growth originating in the US but not transmitted to the EA.
    As noted above, measures of investment-specific technological change implied by the model,
which is estimated using data on macroeconomic quantities alone, appear different and in some
ways more volatile than those derived from a more conventional growth accounting exercise based
on price data, suggesting that the shocks identified by the model may reflect shifting financial-
sector frictions unique to each economy as well as purely technological changes. Alternatively,
European institutions may have done a better job at stabilizing the EA economy, but at the cost
of slowing down technological adoption and stifling technological innovation, at least to some
degree. Digging deeper into these, and possibly other, underlying causes for the strikingly differ-
ent productivity trends uncovered here for the US and EA remains an important task for future
research.



5    Appendix: Data Description and Sources

All US data come from the Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis’ FRED database; and all of the EA
data come from the Area Wide Model dataset first assembled by Fagan, Henry, and Mestre (2005)
and now made available by the Euro Area Business Cycle Network, except for the population
series, which comes from the OECD. In figure 1, the series for US real consumption and investment



                                                22
are those for real personal consumption expenditures and real gross private domestic investment,
measured in chained 2000 dollars. The series for EA consumption and investment are those for
real private consumption and real gross investment, both with base year 1995, from the EU-15.
   The same consumption and investment series are used to estimate the model, except that those
for the US are converted to per-capita terms by dividing by the civilian noninstitutional population
ages 16 and over and those for the EA are converted to per-capita terms by dividing by a measure
obtained by aggregating annual figures for national populations, ages 15-64, from 12 of the EA-15
countries (including Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxem-
bourg, Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain but excluding Cyprus, Malta, and Slovenia) for which
OEDC data are available and using linear interpolation to convert the annual figures into a quar-
terly series. For the US, the series for government expenditures and hours worked used to estimate
the model correspond to real government expenditures, again in chained 2000 dollars, and hours
of all persons in the nonfarm business sector, both converted to per-capita terms as just described
above. For the EA, the series for government spending used to estimate the model corresponds to
real government consumption, again with base year 1995 and again converted to per-capita terms as
described above. Since the AWM dataset lacks a series with direct observations on hours worked,
the series for total employment, again expressed in per-capital terms using the OECD population
figures, must be used instead.
   The growth accounting exercises summarized in the bottom row of figure 3 cumulate the series
for real investment used to estimate model according to the standard law of motion Kt+1 = (1 −
δ)Kt + It , assuming a quarterly depreciation rate of δ = 0.025 and an initial ratio of investment to
capital in each economy equal to the same steady-state value implied by the DSGE model. Labor
inputs are measured by the same series used to estimate the model, and output is measured by real
GDP, in chained 2000 dollars for the US and with base year 1995 for the EA. The measures of
neutral technological change are obtained with these data, assuming that the aggregate production
function is Cobb-Douglas with capital’s share α = 0.36. Meanwhile, the measures of investment-
specific technological change are constructed, as suggested by (7), using the price deflators for


                                                 23
investment and consumption to calculate the relative price of investment for each economy.
    The consumption, investment, government spending, and hours worked variables used to com-
pute the summary statistics in table 2 are all the same ones used to estimate the model. The output
variables are again measured by real GDP, and all of these series are converted to per-capita terms
using the population measures described above. The real exchange rate series is computed by tak-
ing the EA harmonized index of consumer prices provided in the AWM dataset, dividing by the
US consumer price index for all urban consumers, and dividing again by the nominal euro-per-US
dollar exchange rate series provided in the AWM dataset.
    Most series from the AWM dataset run from 1970:1 through 2007:4, determining the sample
period for the estimation exercise. The nominal euro-per-US dollar exchange rate series begins in
1971:1, however, implying that the real exchange rate data used in table 2 must begin in 1971:1
instead. For the US, all of the series, except for the population data, are seasonally adjusted, and
all are available quarterly, except for the monthly population and CPI data, which are converted to
quarterly terms through averaging. For the EA, all series, except for the population and nominal
exchange rate data, are seasonally adjusted; and all series are quarterly, except for the annual
population data which are converted to quarterly terms through interpolation as noted above.



6    References

 Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland (1994). “Dynamics of the Trade Bal-
      ance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve?” American Economic Review, 84, 84-103.

 Backus, David K. and Gregor W. Smith (1993). “Consumption and Real Exchange Rates in
      Dynamic Economies with Non-Traded Goods.” Journal of International Economics, 35,
      297-316.

 Bergin, Paul R. (2006). “How Well Can The New Open Economy Macroeconomics Explain the
      Exchange Rate and Current Account?” Journal of International Money and Finance, 25,
      675-701.

                                                24
Boileau, Martin (2002). “Trade in Capital Goods and Investment-Specific Technical Change.”
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 26, 963-984.

Chang, Yongsung, Taeyoung Doh, and Frank Schorfheide (2007). “Non-stationary Hours in a
    DSGE Model.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 39, 1357-1373.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Robert Kollmann, and Philippe Martin (2010). “International Portfolios,
    Capital Accumulation and Foreign Assets Dynamics.” Journal of International Economics,
    80, 100-112.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc (2008). “International Risk Sharing and the
    Transmission of Productivity Shocks.” Review of Economic Studies, 75, 443-473.

Efron, Bradley and Robert J. Tibshirani (1993). An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Boca Raton:
    Chapman and Hall/CRC Press.

Fagan, Gabriel, Jerome Henry, and Ricardo Mestre (2005). “An Area-Wide Model of the Euro-
    Area.” Economic Modelling, 22, 39-59.

Finn, Mary G. (1999). “An Equilibrium Theory of Nominal and Real Exchange Rate Comove-
    ment.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 44, 430-475.

Fisher, Jonas D.M. (2006). “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Specific Technology
    Shocks.” Journal of Political Economy, 114, 413-451.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W. Huffman (1988). “Investment, Capacity
    Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle.” American Economic Review, 78, 402-417.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell (1997). “Long-Run Implications of Investment-
    Specific Technological Change.” American Economic Review, 87, 342-362.

Hall, Robert E. (1997). “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time.” Journal of
    Labor Economics, 15, S223-S250.


                                             25
Hamilton, James D. (1994). Time Series Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri (2002). “Financial Autarky and International Business
    Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 601-627.

Hodrick, Robert J. and Edward C. Prescott (1997). “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical
    Investigation.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 29, 1-16.

Ireland, Peter N. and Scott Schuh (2008). “Productivity and US Macroeconomic Performance: In-
    terpreting the Past and Predicting the Future with a Two-Sector Real Business Cycle Model.”
    Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 473-492.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti (2009). “Investment Shocks
    and the Relative Price of Investment.” Staff Report 411. New York: Federal Reserve Bank
    of New York.

Kahn, James A. and Robert W. Rich (2007). “Tracking the New Economy: Using Growth Theory
    to Detect Changes in Trend Productivity.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1670-1701.

King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1991). “Stochastic
    Trends and Economic Fluctuations.” American Economic Review, 81, 819-840.

Klein, Paul (2000). “Using the Generalized Schur Form to Solve a Multivariate Linear Rational
    Expectations Model.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 24, 1405-1423.

Kohn, Robert and Craig F. Ansley (1983). “Fixed Interval Estimation in State Space Models
    when Some of the Data are Missing or Aggregated.” Biometrika, 70, 683-688.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott (1982). “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
    Econometrica, 50, 1345-1370.

Letendre, Marc-Andre and Daqing Luo (2007). “Investment-Specific Shocks and External Bal-
    ances in a Small Open Economy Model.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 40, 650-678.


                                             26
Lubik, Thomas and Frank Schorfheide (2005). “A Baynesian Look at New Open Economy
    Macroeconomics.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 20, 313-366.

Mandelman, Federico S., Pau Rabanal, Juan F. Rubio-Ramirez, and Diego Vilan (2010). “Invest-
    ment Specific Technology Shocks and International Business Cycles: An Empirical Assess-
    ment.” Working Paper 2010-3. Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Mulligan, Casey B. (2002). “A Century of Labor-Leisure Distortions.” Working Paper 8774.
    Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Rabanal, Pau, Juan F. Rubio-Ramirez, and Vicente Tuesta (2009). “Cointegrated TFP Processes
    and International Business Cycles.” Manuscript. Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Rabanal, Pau and Vicente Tuesta (2010). “Euro-Dollar Real Exchange Rate Dynamics in an Esti-
    mated Two-Country Model: An Assessment.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
    34, 780-797.

Raffo, Andrea (2009). “Technology Shocks: Novel Implications for International Business Cy-
    cles.” Manuscript. Washington: Federal Reserve Board.

Sakellaris, Plutarchos and Focco Vijselaar (2005). “Capital Quality Improvement and the Sources
    of Economic Growth in the Euro Area.” Economic Policy, 20, 268-306.

Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2003). “Closing Small Open Economy Models.”
    Journal of International Economics, 61, 163-185.

Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2009). “What’s News in Business Cycles.” Manuscript.
    New York: Columbia University.

Solow, Robert M. (1957). “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” Review
    of Economics and Statistics, 39, 312-320.




                                                27
            Table 1. Maximum Likelihood Estimates and Standard Errors

             Stationary Preference Shocks        Nonstationary Preference Shocks
Parameter       Estimate    Standard Error         Estimate      Standard Error
    θ           1.5709         0.0467               1.4658              0.0318
   φl           17.1136        1.4564               2.4080              0.3319
   φk           2.8582         0.5480               2.2507              0.4191
   κH
    m             —              —                  0.0077              0.0029
   κFm            —              —                  0.0000              0.0006
   κH
    z           0.0018         0.0014               0.0021              0.0015
   κFz          0.0000         0.0006               0.0000              0.0005
   κH
    v           0.0090         0.0053               0.0111              0.0043
   κFv          0.0000         0.0001               0.0000              0.0001
   ρH
    m           0.9671         0.0013               0.4870              0.0159
   ρFm          0.9924         0.0002               0.6456              0.0088
   ρH
    z           0.1751         0.0262               0.1519              0.0173
   ρFz          0.3597         0.0134               0.3835              0.0108
   ρH
    v           0.1579         0.0194               0.1491              0.0147
   ρFv          0.9834         0.0028               0.9682              0.0004
   ρH
    g           0.9695         0.0005               0.9648              0.0004
   ρFg          0.9414         0.0036               0.9608              0.0007
   σHm          0.0171         0.0011               0.0071              0.0005
   σFm          0.0064         0.0004               0.0028              0.0002
   σHz          0.0116         0.0007               0.0120              0.0007
   σFz          0.0085         0.0005               0.0087              0.0005
   σHv          0.0156         0.0011               0.0143              0.0010
   σFv          0.0006         0.0001               0.0006              0.0001
   σHg          0.0185         0.0009               0.0208              0.0011
   σFg          0.0098         0.0006               0.0105              0.0006
                                      Table 2. Business Cycle Volatilities and Co-Movements

                                                           A. US Volatilities
                                                       std(Y A )        std(CH )        std(I H )      std(GH )         std(LH )
 Data                                                    1.52            1.23            7.27            1.13             1.78
 Model with Stationary Preference Shocks                 2.28            1.28            5.92            3.17             1.70
 Model with Nonstationary Preference Shocks              1.72            1.18            5.90            3.68             1.79
                                                           B. EA Volatilities
                                                       std(Y B )        std(CF )        std(I F )      std(GF )          std(LF )
 Data                                                    1.15            0.98            2.60            0.54             0.83
 Model with Stationary Preference Shocks                 1.12            0.88            2.49            1.95             0.61
 Model with Nonstationary Preference Shocks              1.24            0.89            2.65            2.18             0.83
                                             C. US-EA Volatilities and Co-Movements
                                                     cor(Y A ,Y B )   cor(CH ,CF )   Cor(I H , I F )   std(RER)    cor(CH /CF , RER)
 Data                                                    0.50            0.39            0.31            7.43            −0.22
 Model with Stationary Preference Shocks                 0.51            0.14           −0.39            0.91             0.76
 Model with Nonstationary Preference Shocks             −0.03            0.13           −0.39            0.88             0.78

Notes: Panels A and B compare the percentage standard deviations of US and EA GDPs Y A and Y B , consumptions CH and CF , in-
vestments I H and I F , government spendings GH and GF , and hours worked LH and LF in the data to the analogous statistics implied
by the models with stationary and nonstationary preference shocks. Panel C compares the correlations between US and EA GDPs,
consumptions, and investments, the percentage standard deviation of the Euro-Dollar real exchange rate RER, and the correlation be-
tween US-EA relative consumptions CH /CF and the real exchange rate in the data to the analogous statistics implied by the models with
stationary and nonstationary preference shocks. All series from the data and the model are in natural logarithms and passed through
the Hodrick-Prescott (1997) filter with smoothness parameter 1600 to focus on business cycle frequencies. Statistics for the models are
computed as averages over 1000 replications, with each individual sample being of the same length as the actual sample of data.
       Table 3. Correlations Between Innovations to the Shocks

               A. Model With Stationary Preference Shocks
       εH
        m          εFm       εH
                              z        εFz       εH
                                                  v         εFv    εH
                                                                    g     εFg
εH
 m     1.00
εFm    0.01        1.00
εH
 z     0.12       −0.09      1.00
εFz    0.02       −0.04      0.30      1.00
εH
 v     0.12        0.03      0.15      0.27     1.00
εFv   −0.05        0.01     −0.16     −0.04    −0.23        1.00
εH
 g    −0.07       −0.20      0.23      0.11    −0.17        0.14   1.00
εFg   −0.15       −0.16      0.11      0.38    −0.11        0.14   0.32   1.00
              B. Model With Nonstationary Preference Shocks
       εH
        m          εFm       εH
                              z        εFz       εH
                                                  v         εFv    εH
                                                                    g     εFg
εH
 m     1.00
εFm    0.05        1.00
εH
 z    −0.12       −0.21      1.00
εFz    0.02       −0.12      0.28      1.00
εH
 v     0.03        0.03      0.16      0.23     1.00
εFv   −0.02        0.02     −0.14     −0.07    −0.22        1.00
εH
 g    −0.08       −0.24      0.15      0.04    −0.30        0.25   1.00
εFg   −0.15       −0.18      0.11      0.35    −0.14        0.10   0.28   1.00
                            United States
    2

  1.5

    1

  0.5

    0

 ‐0.5
       1970   1975   1980    1985   1990    1995   2000   2005




                             Euro Area
   1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2
 02

   0
    1970      1975   1980   1985    1990    1995   2000   2005



Figure 1. Natural logarithms of real consumption (dashed lines)
          and investment (solid lines), US and EA, normalized so
          that 1970=0 for all series.
            Response of US Z to US Z Shock                           Response of EA Z to US Z Shock
 2                                                        2

1.6                                                      1.6

1.2                                                      1.2

0.8                                                      0.8

0.4                                                      0.4

 0                                                        0
      0      10            20            30   40               0      10            20            30   40




            Response of US Z to EA Z Shock                           Response of EA Z to EA Z Shock
 2                                                        2

1.6                                                      1.6

1.2                                                      1.2

0.8                                                      0.8

0.4                                                      0.4

 0                                                        0
      0      10            20            30   40               0      10            20            30   40




           Response of US V to US V Shock                            Response of EA V to US V Shock
2.5                                                      2.5

 2                                                        2

1.5                                                      1.5

 1                                                        1

0.5                                                      0.5

 0                                                        0
      0      10            20            30   40               0      10            20            30   40




            Response of US V to EA V Shock                           Response of EA V to EA V Shock
2.5                                                      2.5

 2                                                        2

1.5                                                      1.5

 1                                                        1

0.5                                                      0.5

 0                                                        0
      0      10            20            30   40               0      10            20            30   40




Figure 2. Patterns of Technological Diffusion. Each panel shows the percentage‐point response of the
      neutral (Z) or investment‐specific (V) productivity variable in the US or EA to a
      one‐standard‐deviation shock to neutral (Z) or investment‐specific (V) productivity in the US or
      EA, as implied by the model with stationary preference shocks. Dashed lines depict
      95‐percent bootstrapped confidence intervals.
                      Z ‐ Stationary Preference Shocks                              V ‐ Stationary Preference Shocks
   1                                                               0.4
 0.8                                                               0.3
 0.6                                                               0.2
 0.4                                                               0.1
 0.2                                                                 0
   0                                                               ‐0.1
 ‐0.2                                                              ‐0.2
        1970   1975     1980   1985   1990    1995   2000   2005      1970   1975     1980   1985   1990    1995   2000   2005




                 Z ‐ Nonstationary Preference Shocks                           V ‐ Nonstationary Preference Shocks
   1                                                               0.4
 08
 0.8                                                               03
                                                                   0.3
 0.6                                                               0.2
 0.4                                                               0.1
 0.2                                                                 0
   0                                                               ‐0.1
 ‐0.2                                                              ‐0.2
    1970       1975     1980   1985   1990    1995   2000   2005      1970   1975     1980   1985   1990    1995   2000   2005




                      Z ‐ Standard Growth Accounting                                V ‐ Standard Growth Accounting
   1                                                               0.4
 0.8                                                               0.3
 0.6                                                               0.2
 0.4                                                               0.1
 0.2                                                                 0
   0                                                                0
                                                                   ‐0.1
 ‐0.2                                                              ‐0.2
    1970       1975     1980   1985   1990    1995   2000   2005      1970   1975     1980   1985   1990    1995   2000   2005




Figure 3. Estimates of neutral (Z) and investment‐specific (V) productivity in the US (solid lines) and EA (dashed
       lines). The top row shows smoothed (full‐sample) estimates from the model with stationary preference
       shocks. The middle row shows smoothed estimates from the model with nonstationary perference shocks.
       The bottom row shows estimates from a standard growth accounting exercise.
