NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID DOUBLING RESERVE REQUIREMENTS CAUSE THE RECESSION OF 1937-1938?
A MICROECONOMIC APPROACH
Charles W. Calomiris
Joseph Mason
David Wheelock
Working Paper 16688
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16688

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

The authors thank Hong Lee and David Lopez for research assistance, and Allan Meltzer for helpful
discussions. Views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Charles W. Calomiris, Joseph Mason, and David Wheelock. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Did Doubling Reserve Requirements Cause the Recession of 1937-1938? A Microeconomic
Approach
Charles W. Calomiris, Joseph Mason, and David Wheelock
NBER Working Paper No. 16688
January 2011
JEL No. E51,E58,G21,G28,N12,N22
ABSTRACT
In 1936-37, the Federal Reserve doubled the reserve requirements imposed on member banks. Ever
since, the question of whether the doubling of reserve requirements increased reserve demand and
produced a contraction of money and credit, and thereby helped to cause the recession of 1937-1938,
has been a matter of controversy. Using microeconomic data to gauge the fundamental reserve demands
of Fed member banks, we find that despite being doubled, reserve requirements were not binding on
bank reserve demand in 1936 and 1937, and therefore could not have produced a significant contraction
in the money multiplier. To the extent that increases in reserve demand occurred from 1935 to 1937,
they reflected fundamental changes in the determinants of reserve demand and not changes in reserve
requirements.

Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu
Joseph Mason
Patrick F. Taylor 2164-A
E. J. Ourso College of Business
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
joseph.r.mason@gmail.com

David Wheelock
Research Division
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166-0442
david.c.wheelock@stls.frb.org

1
I. Introduction
Today, U.S. banks hold roughly a trillion dollars in excess reserves. The potential for those excess
reserves to fuel a future expansion of money and credit, and possibly an acceleration of inflation, is a
concern being voiced by many observers who are encouraging the Federal Reserve (Fed) to be ready to
respond to such an expansion. This policy question today is closely related to monetary policy actions by
the Fed in the 1930s. In 1936 and early 1937, in response to high levels of excess reserves, the Federal
Reserve doubled the minimum reserve balances that member banks were required to hold with the Fed
as a proportion of their deposits. In May 1937, a recession began. As a result, many commentators
(most notably, Friedman and Schwartz, 1963) since that time have linked the onset of the recession to a
tightening of monetary policy, of which the doubling of reserve requirements was a major component.
Friedman and Schwartz contend that the increase in reserve requirements caused banks’ reserve
demands to rise, reducing the amount of deposits and credit that could be built upon the existing
monetary base.
Although widely accepted, the Friedman and Schwartz (1963) view of the origins of the
recession of 1937‐1938 has been challenged. Other policies – tax rate increases in 1936 (Romer 1992,
Calomiris and Hubbard 1995) and the sterilization of gold inflows beginning in December 1936 – also
preceded the recession of 1937‐1938, and have been recognized as important contributors to the
economic contraction. Some authors – notably Hanes (2006) – argue on the basis of time series analysis
that the changes in reserve requirements had no discernible effect on bond yields. Nonetheless, the
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) interpretation remains widely accepted among economists,
policymakers, and textbook authors (e.g., Romer, 1992, 2009; Mishkin, 1989, pp. 399‐400).
In this paper, we take a microeconomic approach to gauging the effects of doubling reserve
requirements in 1936‐1937, and in particular whether they represented a tightening of monetary policy

2
and thereby were a likely cause of the recession of 1937‐1938. If the increase in reserve requirements
reduced the supplies of credit and money, they would have done so by increasing the demand of Fed
member banks for reserves. We estimate the demand of Fed member banks for reserves during this
period to gauge whether the increase in reserve requirements increased reserve demand, and through
that increase, caused a reduction in the supplies of credit and money. We find that reserve
requirements were not binding on bank reserve demand, and thus the increase in reserve requirements
had little if any effect on the money multiplier and the supplies of money and credit.
Section II provides a review of the literature. Section III lays out the theoretical basis for our
empirical approach. Section IV describes the paths of required, excess, and total reserves, by bank type
and location, for various reserve concepts. Section V describes our microeconomic data. Section VI
presents our estimation results for reserve demand in the absence of increases in reserve requirements.
Section VII uses those estimates to simulate the level of reserves held by banks in the absence of any
reserve requirement increases in 1936 and 1937, and shows that there is no residual amount of
increased reserve demand attributable to the increases in reserve requirements. Section VIII concludes
by considering the implications of our findings for monetary policy today, given the high levels of excess
reserves currently in the banking system.
II. Literature Review
The Banking Act of 1935 expanded the Federal Reserve’s authority to set the reserve
requirements imposed on the System’s member banks. The Fed subsequently doubled requirements to
their legal maximum rates in three steps in August 1936, March 1937, and May 1937 (see Table 1). The
Fed took this action primarily in response to a rapid and large increase in reserve balances in excess of
legal requirements, which Fed officials viewed as posing a potential inflation threat that could derail the
economic recovery. A second consideration was a desire by Fed officials to regain control of monetary

3
policy from the Treasury and to make the Fed’s traditional policy tools—the discount rate and open‐
market operations—relevant and effective. The Fed viewed the significant slack in excess reserves as
undermining the effectiveness of its other tools (See Friedman and Schwartz, 1963, pp. 520‐22; Meltzer,
2003, pp. 495‐500). Finally, the use of the reserve requirement as a policy tool reflected the loss of
control by the Fed over the monetary base after 1935. The newly created monetary powers of the
Treasury (the Exchange Stabilization Fund and the power to set the price of gold and thereby determine
the size of gold inflows, established in 1934 and 1933, respectively) gave the Treasury effective control
over the supply of high‐powered money. The capacity of the Treasury to increase the monetary base
was greater than the capacity of the Fed to reduce it, and Secretary Morgenthau recognized and used
that strategic advantage to exert control over the Fed’s monetary policy (Calomiris and Wheelock 1998;
Meltzer 2003; Calomiris 2011). The Fed engaged in almost no open‐market operations over the period
1935‐1941. The power to set reserve requirements, and thereby potentially to influence the money
multiplier, however, remained with the Fed.
Fed officials did not view the increases in reserve requirement in 1936 and 1937 as a tightening
of monetary policy. Rather, they viewed excess reserves as “superfluous” balances, and expected that
the increases in reserve requirements would have little or no impact on interest rates or credit supply
(Meltzer, 2003, pp. 495‐96). Their goal was not to tighten monetary conditions, but to put the Fed into a
position to either tighten or ease policy later using open‐market operations and changes in the discount
rate. By contrast, Friedman and Schwartz (1963) contend that the increases in reserve requirements
substantially reduced money stock growth and were a main cause of the recession of 1937‐38, and their
view has remained widely accepted.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue that the hikes in reserve requirements were contractionary
because they increased the demand for reserves relative to deposits, and thereby reduced the money

4
multiplier. The familiar Friedman‐Schwartz monetary decomposition defines the money stock (M) as a
function of the monetary base (“high‐powered money”) and a multiplier determined by the public’s
relative holdings of currency and bank deposits (C/D), and the ratio of bank reserves to deposits (R/D).
Total bank reserves, in turn, can be written as the sum of required reserves (RR) and reserves held in
excess of legal requirements (ER). Hence,
(1)

M=D+C

(2)

Base = R + C

(3)

M = (Base) x [(1 + C/D) / (RR/D + ER/D + C/D)].

Thus, the money stock (M) is mechanically related to reserve requirements, which determine the ratio
RR/D; hence, all else equal, an increase in reserve requirements will reduce the money stock.
From the perspective of this calculation, the key issue is whether the ratio of excess reserves to
deposits is sensitive to a change in reserve requirements. If the demand for total reserves (for managing
portfolio risk and liquidity risk) is sufficiently high (see, for example, Calomiris and Wilson 2004), then
even a large increase in a non‐binding reserve requirement will have no effect on the demand for total
reserves. In that case, a change in required reserves will have no effect on the money multiplier.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) contend that the three increases in reserve requirements in
1936‐37 produced a decline in the money stock that, in turn, caused the recession of 1937‐38. Figure 1
plots the level of the money stock, the monetary base, and the ratios of bank deposits to reserves and
bank deposits to currency. The months in which the three increases in reserve requirements took effect
are indicated by vertical lines.
The money stock rose steadily between 1934 and early 1937. According to Friedman and
Schwartz (1970, p. 30), total deposits reached its peak in March 1937. Mechanically, the primary drivers

5
of money stock growth were a growing monetary base, caused mainly by a growing monetary gold
stock, and a rising ratio of bank deposits to currency, i.e., inverse of C/D. By contrast, the ratio of
deposits to reserves, i.e., the inverse of R/D, generally fell and, all else equal, would have caused the
money stock to fall. The ratio of deposits to reserves continued to fall after the first increase in reserve
requirements in August 1936 through December of that year. According to Friedman and Schwartz
(1963, p. 526), “[T]he increase in reserve requirements did have important current effects. … [F]rom the
end of July to the end of December 1936, the ratio of deposits to bank reserves declined sharply as
banks sought to restore their excess reserve positions. In consequence, although high‐powered money
grew by decidedly more in those five months than in the prior seven months, the stock of money grew
by less than half as much.”
Friedman and Schwartz (1963, p. 804) measure monthly changes in the ratio of deposits to
reserves, which was generally declining throughout the second half of the 1930s. The ratio of deposits to
reserves reached a peak in June 1936, regaining its March 1935 level after having fallen to a local
minimum in January 1936. It then declined from June to November 1936, and remained fairly stable
from October 1936 until November 1937 (varying between 4.93 and 5.12), and was nearly constant
(varying between 4.96 and 4.98) during March through June 1937.The ratio of deposits to reserves
changed little immediately following the increases in reserve requirements in March and May, 1937 and,
in fact, rose from 4.96 in May 1937 to 5.12 in August 1937. Beginning in August 1937, the ratio began
to fall once more. Thus, the three increases in reserve requirements occurred during a period in which
the aggregate ratio of deposits to reserves had already been declining and the changes in reserve
requirements had no clear short‐run impact on the ratio of deposits to reserves. It is not obvious from
any simple analysis of the aggregate data, therefore, that the doubling of reserve requirements caused
the ratio of deposits to reserves to fall more than it would have otherwise.

6
The significance of doubling reserve requirements in 1936‐37 remains an unsettled question.
According to Friedman and Schwartz (1963), banks built up substantial reserve balances in excess of
legal requirements during the Depression as a precaution against bank runs. After 1933, gold inflows
caused the monetary base to rise, which, according to Friedman and Schwartz (1963), enabled banks to
satisfy their increased precautionary demand for liquid assets.1 Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue
that the increases in reserve requirements in 1936‐37 raised the demand for high‐powered money
because they reduced the amount of reserve balances that were available to satisfy a conversion of
bank deposits into cash.
A number of economists have sided with Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and concluded that the
hikes slowed the growth of the money stock and contributed to the recession of 1937‐38. Chandler
(1971), for example, concludes that the August 1936 increase “had no visible effect on monetary and
credit conditions,” but that the subsequent hikes were “a mistake.” According to Chandler (1971, p.
316), Fed officials believed that the increases in reserve requirements would not induce banks to curtail
their lending or sell securities, or cause interest rates to rise, but “Their forecasts were wrong…. They
underestimated member bank demands for excess reserves as a source of liquidity.” Chandler (1971)
concludes that the recession of 1937‐38 probably would have occurred in the absence of the increases
in reserve requirements, and that the increases alone probably would not have caused a recession, but
that the increases did contribute to the decline in economic activity.
Meltzer (2003, p. 503) agrees with Chandler’s view that the increase in reserve requirements in
August 1936 “had no perceptible effect on the economy in 1936.” However, he notes that as a result of
the hike, the effective monetary base was 10 percent lower in the second half of 1936 than a year earlier

1

Morrison (1966) offers a similar interpretation of the accumulation of excess reserves during the 1930s.

7
and that the three hikes in reserve requirements locked up $3.1 billion of reserves that could have been
used as the basis for money creation (p. 504, 518).
Frost (1971) suggests a different interpretation than Friedman and Schwartz (1963) for the
accumulation of excess reserves during the 1930s. Frost (1971) contends that the large accumulation of
excess reserves in the 1930s reflected movement along a stable demand curve rather than shifts in
demand associated with banking panics or changes in reserve requirements. Banks held large amounts
of excess reserves, Frost (1971) argues, because at the very low interest rates that prevailed in the
1930s, the cost of adjusting reserve positions exceeded the marginal interest earned on other short‐
term assets.
Wilcox (1984) provides some empirical support for Frost’s (1971) hypothesis. Based on a three‐
variable VAR model of bank loan volume, investments and excess reserves, Wilcox (1984) finds that
financial shocks explain only 1 percent of the variation in excess reserves during the Depression,
whereas the decline in interest rates can account for 80 percent. Further, Wilcox finds that changes in
reserve requirements had only small and statistically insignificant impacts on bank loans and
investments, which he contends supports Tobin’s (1965) claim that “raising reserve requirements may
have been a mistake but it was probably a relatively harmless one.”2
Cargill and Mayer (2006) investigate the impact of the increases in reserve requirements in
1936‐37 by comparing changes in reserve and loan ratios of Federal Reserve member banks and
nonmember banks following changes in reserve requirements (which applied only to Fed member
banks). Non‐member banks accounted for a small share of total bank assets in the mid‐1930s. As of June
2

Calomiris and Wilson (2004) show that, for New York City banks, increases in reserves during the mid‐1930s
reflected banks’ desires to reduce their portfolio risk in response to losses of bank capital. They argue that contrary
to Friedman and Schwartz, increased reserve demand did not reflect growing risk aversion of banks in response to
the banking panics of 1931‐1933, but rather, loan losses that reduced capital. Mounts, Sowell and Saxena (2000)
and Lindley, Sowell and Mounts (2001) argue that the accumulation of excess reserves reflected high inventory‐
adjustment costs, rather than increased demand associated with banking panics.

8
1936, total assets of member and non‐member banks was $53.6 billion, of which $46.5 billion was held
in Fed member banks. Cargill and Mayer (2006) find that increases in reserve requirements were
followed by increases in the reserves/assets ratios of member banks relative to those of nonmember
banks, and decreases in the loans/assets ratios of member banks relative to those of nonmember banks.
The authors conclude, therefore, that the increases in reserve requirements reduced credit supply and
thereby likely contributed to the decline in economic activity during 1937‐38.
One potential problem with the Cargill and Mayer (2006) interpretation is that it implicitly
assumes that member and non‐member banks had similar intrinsic reserve demands, once one controls
for the effects of reserve requirements on Fed member banks. That assumption is unlikely to be true.
Non‐member banks were much smaller than member banks, on average. After 1934, in the presence of
federal deposit insurance, that size difference should have been an important source of difference in
reserve demand. Small banks tended to have small depositors, and since only deposits of under $5,000
were covered by deposit insurance, the effective protection offered by deposit insurance varied greatly
with bank size (Calomiris and White 1994, Calomiris and Wilson 2004). For example, if fundamental
changes increased the reserve demand associated with uninsured deposits (to mitigate increased
portfolio risk or depositor liquidity risk), banks that enjoyed deposit insurance protection on all or most
of their deposits may not have felt as great a need to increase their reserves. Thus, the lesser increase in
reserve ratios observed by Cargill and Mayer (2006) for non‐member banks may simply indicate that
non‐member banks’ fundamental demand for reserves (irrespective of reserve requirements) was less
sensitive to changes in portfolio risk or liquidity risk. As we show in Figure 4 below, like non‐member
banks, Fed member banks that were located outside of major cities did not exhibit a rise in reserve
demand from June 1936 to June 1937.

9
Hanes (2006) investigates the behavior of the yields on longer‐term Treasury securities during
the 1930s to determine how bond yields are influenced by changes in the supply of reserves in an
environment where the overnight interest rate is effectively at the zero lower bound. Hanes (2006)
presents a model of reserve demand in which the quantity of reserves demanded by a bank is
determined by its required minimum balance, the overnight interest rate, the cost of a reserve
deficiency and the degree of uncertainty about payment flows. The overnight interest rate falls to zero
when the supply of free reserves (i.e., excess less borrowed reserves) is sufficiently large to ensure that
a bank will always meet its reserve requirement. Hanes argues that this, in fact, was the case in the mid‐
1930s due to the large amount of excess reserves held by banks throughout the period. In that case,
changes in required minimum reserve balances have no impact on reserve demand (and neither do
changes in the discount rate or regulations affecting the cost of reserve deficiencies). However, bond
prices must rise (and yields fall) to induce banks to hold any additional increases in reserve supply, even
if the overnight rate is zero. Hanes estimates various regressions of weekly changes in bond yields on
various measures of reserve supply and changes in reserve requirements for April 1934‐August 1939.
Whereas he finds that yields fell in response to increases in total reserves, Hanes (2006) finds that the
impact of changes in required reserves was insignificantly different from zero. That finding suggests that
reserve requirements may not have been a binding constraint on reserve demand for most banks.
One challenge to identifying the effects of the increases in reserve requirements in 1936‐37 is
that they coincided with another monetary policy action—the sterilization of gold inflows which began
in December 1936 and continued until July 1937. Gold inflows, reflecting political and economic
disruptions in Europe and Asia, were the principal cause of the rapid growth in bank reserves and the
monetary base during 1934‐36. Treasury officials grew increasingly concerned that gold inflows were
fueling financial speculation and left the United States vulnerable to a sudden gold outflow (Meltzer,

10
2003, p. 504). In December 1936, President Roosevelt approved the Treasury’s plan to sterilize further
inflows, thereby preventing them from increasing aggregate bank reserves.
Between December 1936 and July 1937, the Treasury sterilized some $1.3 billion of gold inflows
and total member bank reserve balances rose by just $180 million (Meltzer, 2003, p. 506). The resulting
decline in the growth of the monetary base is apparent in Figure 1. Hanes’ (2006) evidence suggests that
the gold sterilization program, and the resulting decline in monetary base growth, was a more important
cause of higher bond yields and the slowing of economic activity in 1937‐38 than the hikes in reserve
requirements. Friedman and Schwartz (1963, p. 510, p. 544) also conclude that the sterilization program
“sharply reinforced” and “was no less important” than the hikes in reserve requirements in reducing
growth of the money stock and causing the recession of 1937‐38.
Hanes (2006) relies on regression identification to measure the effect of the reserve
requirement changes by examining the significance of time series residuals for a small number of
observations. Another way to approach identification, which has the benefit of relying on a larger
number of observations, is to focus on the microeconomics of individual bank reserve demand. If
changes in reserve requirements affected the supply of money and credit, it would have been by
increasing the demand for reserves at Fed member banks (the ratio of reserves to deposits). Our
empirical strategy is to disaggregate reserve demand and examine the behavior of individual banks and
groups of banks to determine whether and by how much the reserve requirement increases raised the
demand for reserves.
III. Theory and Empirical Methodology
Our empirical approach disaggregates the reserve holdings of the banking system to estimate
reserve demand at the individual bank level, using call report data on Fed member banks for 1934 and
1935. Our empirical model allows reserve demand to vary with a variety of bank‐specific characteristics.

11
We then simulate changes in reserve holdings of member banks for 1936‐38 to address a counterfactual
question: Did the level of total reserves held after 1935 vary as one would expect on the basis of the
estimated model of reserve demand, under the counterfactual assumption of no change in reserve
requirements? If the observed changes in the reserve holdings of member banks varied as one would
expect on the basis of fundamentals, unrelated to changes in reserve requirements, that would suggest
that the changes in reserve requirements had little or no effect on the demand for reserves.
More formally, we assume that reserve demand takes the form:
(R/A) unrestricted = Φ(fundamental characteristics)
(4)

(R/A) demand = Max
(rrD/A) + Є(fundamental characteristics)

In Equation (4) we express reserve requirements as rrD, where rr is the average reserve requirement
against a representative mix of deposits. We express reserve demand as the ratio of reserves to assets,
although in our empirical work we will also consider reserves expressed as a ratio of deposits. Reserves
can be defined using alternative measures of reserve assets, some defined narrowly and some more
broadly to include non‐cash liquid assets, and we will consider various definitions of reserves in our
empirical work. Fundamental characteristics that affect reserve demand include various characteristics
of the bank and the market environment that affect a bank’s decision about the proportion of assets to
hold in liquid form. These include various influences on the riskiness of loans, withdrawal risks on
various classes of deposits, and the costs of raising equity capital, which is an alternative way of
reducing risk of default on deposits (see Calomiris and Wilson 2004).
According to Equation (4), and as imagined by Friedman and Schwartz, reserve requirements
can be a binding constraint on reserve demand if the sum of required reserves and an exogenous

12
amount of excess reserves demanded (for simplicity, in the aggregate, assume a constant buffer to
ensure compliance with the requirement) is larger than the amount of reserves that would have been
demanded in the absence of reserve requirements. An increase in rr that makes [(rrD/A) + Є] binding on
reserve demand, therefore, will have a contractionary effect on the money multiplier. On the other
hand, if [(rrD/A) + Є] is always less than Φ, because the amount of reserves desired for fundamental
reasons unrelated to reserve requirements is relatively large, then changes in reserve requirements
have no effect on (R/A) and no effect on the money multiplier or the money supply.
Our main empirical strategy is to estimate Φ using bank‐level data for 1935 and use those
estimates to simulate the path of (R/A) for 1936‐1938. We then compare simulated reserves, actual
reserves, and required reserves over that time period. To the extent that actual reserves track simulated
reserves (based on a model of fundamentals) and are unrelated to changes in required reserves in 1936‐
1937, that would indicate little role for changes in reserve requirements in causing variation in actual
reserves. If, instead, actual reserves deviated from simulated reserves and tracked changes in required
reserves, that would suggest a potential role for changes in reserve requirements in driving reserve
demand.
Three fortuitous aspects of the period 1934‐1937 are noteworthy from the standpoint of our
use of regression results based on December 1934 and December 1935 data to simulate counterfactual
reserve demand for June 1936 ‐ June 1937. First, interest rates were quite stable throughout the period
December 1935‐June 1937. That is fortuitous because interest rates capture an opportunity cost to
holding cash reserves, and thus changes in interest rates could affect reserve demand. The Federal
Reserve Board index of Treasury bond yields (Board of Governors 1976, pp. 469‐71) reports the
following yields for the key call report dates used in this study: December 1935: 2.83 percent; June
1936: 2.66 percent; June 1937: 2.76 percent.

13
Second, the period December 1935‐June 1937 was one of stable economic and financial
conditions. Reserve demand can increase during times of heightened macroeconomic risk, but economic
growth was stable during this period and almost no banks failed.
Third, there were few new entrants into banking during this period. New entrants will tend to
exhibit higher initial reserve demand, as it takes time for them to develop lending relationships with
customers. A period of substantial bank entry, therefore, could exhibit significant shifts in reserve
demand. That potential problem, however, is not relevant during the period 1934‐1937. The number of
country banks that were Fed members was 5,999 in December 1935, and 5,970 in June 1937. The
number of central reserve city banks in New York City and Chicago was 52 in December 1935 and 50 in
June 1937. The number of reserve city banks was 336 in December 1935 and 337 in June 1937.
Before performing a regression analysis and simulation to compare actual and counterfactual
reserve holdings in 1936 and 1937 to see whether increases in reserve requirements affected reserve
demand, we first describe the path of actual, required, and excess reserves during the mid‐1930s, using
various alternative definitions of reserves (which exclude or include various components). These
comparisons offer useful preliminary insights from the perspective of Equation (4) about the extent to
which required reserves were a binding constraint on total reserve demand in 1936 and 1937.
IV. Bank Reserve Measures Disaggregated By Type and Location of Bank
As specified by the Banking Act of 1935, Federal Reserve member banks were required to hold
balances with Federal Reserve Banks to satisfy their legal reserve requirements. Vault cash and other
liquid assets could not be used to satisfy minimum reserve requirements.3 Nonetheless, banks did hold
substantial liquid assets as “secondary” reserves to meet unexpected payments flows and investment
opportunities, including not only vault cash, but also Treasury securities and other liquid assets.
3

Significant statutory changes to reserve requirements were last made under the Monetary Control Act of 1980.
Since then, banks have been able to use vault cash to satisfy their legal reserve requirements.

14
Moreover, most banks maintained correspondent balances with banks in other cities, especially in
central reserve city banks in New York City and Chicago, as well as in banks in other large cities, to
facilitate interregional payments and commercial transactions. The leading correspondent banks in New
York City and Chicago held substantial deposits for banks located throughout the country (indeed
throughout the world). Although such balances did not satisfy legal reserve requirements, they were
among the most liquid assets of commercial banks.
The Fed was aware of the substitutability among different categories of reserves. In considering
whether to increase reserve requirements, Fed officials estimated the number of banks that likely would
be unable to satisfy an increase in required reserves without selling securities or contracting their
deposit liabilities. The Fed estimated that as of January 1937, only 197 member banks (out of a total of
6,367 banks) could not satisfy an increase in reserve requirements by utilizing their excess reserve
balances or by decreasing their deposits with correspondents by less than 50 percent, and that their
aggregate reserve deficiency would be only $123 million. Of these banks, 13 were in New York City and
Chicago, and they accounted for $109 million of the aggregate $123 million estimated deficiency. Thus,
Fed officials were confident that an increase in reserve requirements would not cause most banks to sell
securities or reduce their lending, or have a significant impact on interest rates (Chandler, 1971, pp. 316‐
17). As Figure 2 shows, in the aggregate, excess reserves were still a significant fraction of bank assets
even after the increases in reserve requirements in 1936 and 1937; in June and December 1937, the
ratio of excess reserves to total assets for Fed member banks as a whole had fallen from pre‐June 1936
levels of 5 to 7 percent to levels of 1.8 and 2.6 percent for June 1936 and December 1937, respectively.
After 1937, excess reserves increased, rising to over 10 percent by 1940.
Figure 2 also shows semi‐annual data on the behavior of various other measures of reserves
(relative to total member bank assets). The measure required reserves/assets is the ratio of legally

15
required reserves (using the requirements shown in Table 1) relative to total assets. The measure Res2
equals balances with the Federal Reserve (i.e., balances that meet statutory reserve requirements) plus
vault cash, cash items in the process of collection, and balances due from other banks. The measure
Res3 equals Res2 minus net balances due to other banks. The measures Res6 and Res7 equal Res3 and
Res2, respectively, plus bank holdings of government securities. All four measures generally rose
between 1934 and 1940, except between December 1936 and June 1937, when all but Res3 fell. Thus,
the period encompassing the doubling of reserve requirements (shown by the vertical lines) appears to
have interrupted temporarily a secular increase in reserve ratios that had begun by 1934.
Figure 3 plots semi‐annual data for 1934‐41 on the various measures reserves to total assets for
central reserve city banks located in New York City. The data show clearly the doubling of the ratio of
required reserves to assets, and also show corresponding decreases in excess reserves to total assets
held by New York City banks. The total reserves of New York City banks with the Federal Reserve rose by
$643 million between June 1936 and June 1937, and their aggregate ratio of reserves at the Fed to total
assets increased from 0.16 to 0.21.
Figure 3 also shows the ratios of the four broader measures of reserves to total assets. Because
New York City banks lost some $220 million of correspondent deposits between June 1936 and June
1937, the increase in the ratio Res3/assets was larger (in percentage terms) than the increase in reserve
balances with the Fed to total assets.
The measures Res6 and Res7 equal Res3 and Res2, respectively, plus bank holdings of
government securities. New York City banks reduced their holdings of government securities by $1.1
billion, but increased their loans by $750 million between June 1936 and June 1937. Thus, the changes in
the balance sheets of New York City banks were consistent with the complaint expressed most strongly
by Treasury Secretary Morgenthau that banks had responded to the increases in reserve requirements

16
by selling government securities, which had driven up their market yields, rather than simply by having
their “excess” reserve balances converted into “required” reserve balances. However, the increase in
lending by New York City banks is not consistent with Friedman and Schwartz’s view that banks curtailed
the supply of credit to private‐sector borrowers in response to the increase in reserve requirements, at
least not immediately. New York central reserve city banks were a large part of the banking system; they
comprised 29 percent of total member assets as of June 1936. Lending by New York City banks did fall
after June 1937 but, of course, that could have reflected numerous influences, including a decline in
loan demand during the recession (which began in May 1937), as well as a curtailment of the supply of
base money as the result of the sterilization of gold inflows.
Because they held enormous correspondent deposits, the response of New York City banks to
the increases in reserve requirements may have differed from the response of member banks
elsewhere. Figure 4 plots the various reserve/assets measures for country member banks, i.e., Federal
Reserve member banks throughout the country, excluding the central reserve city banks of New York
and Chicago and the reserve city banks in other major cities. Country banks accounted for 29 percent of
the total assets of Fed member banks in June 1936. The reserve deposits of country banks with the Fed
rose 35 percent ($350 million) between June 1936 and June 1937, compared with a 31 percent increase
for New York’s central reserve city banks. The deposits of country banks with correspondents fell by
some $200 million. However, the ratios Res2/assets and Res3/assets were essentially flat over time;
they remained at the same levels in June 1937 as they had been in June 1936. Moreover, country banks
increased their holdings of government securities by $350 million and their loans by $305 million, and, in
contrast with New York City banks, the measures Res6/assets and Res7/assets for country banks were
higher in June 1937 than they had been in June 1936. These patterns are not consistent with the notion
that the increases in reserve requirements caused a reduction in the money multiplier for the country
bank component of the banking system.

17
There was also substantial heterogeneity in the behavior of bank balance sheets between June
1936 and June 1937 across Federal Reserve districts. For example, Figures 5 and 6 show reserve ratios
for reserve city banks located in the Boston and San Francisco districts, respectively. For Boston district
reserve city banks, which comprised 3 percent of total Fed member bank assets in June 1936, the
various reserves/assets measures exhibit substantial declines between June 1936 and June 1937
(especially between December 1936 and June 1937), particularly the Res2/assets and Res3/assets
measures. However, the changes in the reserve/assets measures for San Francisco district reserve city
banks, which accounted for 9 percent of Fed member bank assets in June 1936, are much smaller.
Moreover, except for the Res6/assets measure, they all increased between June 1936 and June 1937.
The data disaggregated by class of bank and Federal Reserve district, as well as for different
measures of liquid to total assets, reveal a more complex picture than is apparent from the aggregate
“money multiplier” analysis of Friedman and Schwartz (1963). These regional differences are not
surprising; regionally‐disaggregated measures of economic activity (e.g., the number of business
failures, the value of building permits, or Dun & Bradstreet’s index of economic activity) also reveal
substantial heterogeneity in economic conditions during the 1937‐38 recession.4 Next, we investigate
how well estimates of the demand for bank reserves for various classes of banks and Fed regions based
on micro data for 1934 and 1935 track actual reserves measures during 1936‐38.
V. Data
The data for this study are drawn from two sources. Aggregated data for 1934 through 1941 for
reserve city banks, by Federal Reserve District, for each of the twelve Fed Districts, and similar data for

4

In regression results not reported here, we replaced Fed district indicator variables (used in Tables 4 and 5) with
district‐level measures of business conditions, business failures, and building permits, and found them significant
in predicting reserve holdings of Fed member banks. For our simulation purposes, the district indicator variables
are the more appropriate way to capture cross‐sectional differences in the economic environment (as we discuss
further below), but that evidence suggests that district indicators reflect district‐specific macroeconomic factors.

18
central reserve city banks in New York City, central reserve city banks in Chicago, and non‐reserve city
“country” banks located throughout the United States, are all from the Federal Reserve’s Banking and
Monetary Statistics, Volume 2 (1943). Bank‐level data for all Fed member banks, from call reports for
December 1934 and December 1935, are from microfilm records of call reports, which were hand‐
collected as part of the Calomiris and Mason (2003a, 2003b) data collection effort.
The Calomiris and Mason (2003a, 2003b) data set of individual Fed member bank call reports
ends in 1935. We use individual bank‐level data for 1934 and 1935 to estimate reserve demand and
then apply the estimated coefficients from that model to 1936‐1938 data for the 15 mutually exclusive
aggregates of Fed member banks.
Our micro sample consists of data on 6,207 individual Federal Reserve member banks, 5,790 of
which are country banks, 362 are reserve city banks, and 49 are central reserve city banks. While just
over 9 percent of the sample consist of reserve city or central reserve city banks, those banks are much
larger than the country banks, averaging almost $17 million in assets versus just over $1 million in assets
for country banks. Reserve city and central reserve city banks represent only 9 percent of banks, but 55
percent of bank assets. The variables used in our regression analysis are defined in Table 2, and
summary statistics for those variables are given in Table 3. In our analysis, we estimate separate models
for country banks and for city banks (reserve city and central reserve city banks) since we find important
differences in the reserve demands of these two categories of banks. Thus, in Table 3, we report
summary statistics separately for those two groups. There are too few central reserve city banks to
perform regression analysis separately for that group, but we include two indicator variables to capture
any average differences in reserve demand for Chicago or New York City central reserve city banks.

19
VI. Estimation Results
Calomiris and Mason (2008) develop an empirical model of national bank reserve demand for
the pre‐World War I period, which shows that bank asset composition, liability mix, and bank location
are significant in predicting cross‐sectional variation in bank reserves relative to assets. Calomiris and
Mason (2003a) develop a model of survival duration for Fed member banks during the period 1929‐
1933, in which measures of bank asset and liability mix and risk, as well as conditions in the local
economic environment, play important roles in explaining the survival of Fed member banks during the
Great Depression. Calomiris and Wilson (2004) show that the high reserve demand of banks during the
Great Depression reflected the desire of banks to preserve low default risk on their deposits in the wake
of large loan losses during the Depression. Banks also cut dividends during the Depression to shore up
their capital ratios, but few banks raised new capital from external sources, since adverse‐selection
problems in the equity market implied high dilution costs on new offerings. Our model follows all three
of these studies by allowing the reserve demands of Fed member banks to vary according to their
location and their asset and liability mix, and conceives of cross‐sectional variation in reserve demand as
reflecting differences across banks in their risk, leverage and liquidity profiles.
Our goal is to model the fundamentals of reserve demand in the cross section. As of December
1935, reserve requirements likely were not binding for most banks. Referring to Equation (4), the
reserve ratios of the vast majority of banks were determined by fundamental demand (the top line in
the expression).5 Table 4 reports ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions for total reserves relative to

5

In results not reported here, we also ran regressions using excess reserve ratios as our dependent variables. Note
that because required reserves only vary in the cross‐section as a function of deposit mix, there will be no
substantial difference between an empirical model of the cross‐section that uses the ratio excess reserves to
assets as the dependent variable and a similar model that uses the total reserve ratio, if the explanatory model
includes measures of liability mix, as our model does. Thus, one cannot learn much about the degree to which
reserve requirements are binding (as described in Equation 4) by comparing the fit of these alternative models.
Nevertheless, under the assumption that reserve requirements are generally non‐binding in December 1935, one

20
assets for various reserve concepts. We also ran an analogous set of regressions defining reserve ratios
using total deposits in the denominator; the results were very similar, although adjusted R‐squared is
consistently higher when using assets as the scaling variable.
We consider three definitions of reserve ratios in our regressions: res2, res3, and res6. Res2 is a
narrow, gross concept of reserves (which excludes Treasury securities, but includes deposits at other
banks); res3 is the same as res2, but subtracts deposits due to other banks when measuring reserves,
and res6 is a broad, gross measure of the reserve ratio, which adds Treasuries to the res2 measure of
reserves. We ran but do not report other regression results (res1, res4, res5, and res7), which do not
differ qualitatively from the results reported here, which vary in which liquid assets are included in the
definition of reserves. Res1 excludes vault cash, res4 and res5 include Treasury bills but not bonds, and
res7 includes all Treasuries but excludes deposits held for other banks.
The financial ratios used in the regressions to capture bank‐specific characteristics obviously are
endogenous variables that reflect bank choices as well as exogenous circumstances. Our models are
intended to predict reserve demand, so that demand can be simulated for 1936‐1937; we do not claim
to identify the various exogenous structural influences on reserve demand. Our regression model can
only include measures of bank characteristics in December 1934 and December 1935 that are also
observed for the various member bank aggregates we analyze in 1936 and 1937. In particular, we
cannot include in the regression county‐level or state‐level characteristics that may be relevant for
reserve demand. The reason is simple: our aggregate measures do not capture shifts over time in the
relative importance of counties or states within each of those aggregates.
The regression models in Table 4 are linear, which allows us to map from bank‐specific data to
banking aggregates. As we will discuss, we also consider weighted least squares (WLS) estimated, in
would expect the fit of the total reserve specification to be superior, and we do find consistently higher adjusted R‐
squared for total reserve specifications, compared to analogous specifications explaining excess reserve ratios.

21
addition to ordinary least squares (OLS), to permit larger banks (which inherently have greater weight in
the 1936 and 1937 aggregate data) to also have greater weight when estimating the regression
coefficients.
When modeling bank‐specific characteristics that predict reserve demand, variables must be
defined carefully to avoid “mechanical” correlations that result from the structure of balance sheets. For
example, a model of reserves/assets that uses non‐reserves/assets as an explanatory variable would
achieve an R‐squared of 1, since the two concepts are perfectly negatively correlated, but one would
learn nothing from such a model. The financial ratios employed in the regressions in Table 4, therefore,
are constructed to avoid such mechanical correlations.
The current and lagged (December 1934) bank characteristics included as predictors of reserve
demand in Table 4 fall into three categories: a bank size indicator (the natural logarithm of total assets,
ln_ta), to capture influences related to size after controlling for other variables, five asset composition
variables that measure the riskiness and liquidity of assets, and four liability mix variables that capture
the liability structure of the bank (its leverage and its deposit mix), which are relevant for capturing both
default risk and liquidity risk.
Size has no significant effect within the sample of city banks (reserve city and central reserve city
banks), indicating little effect of economies of scale, per se, within that group. Size enters positively in
the country bank sample. Larger country banks may have experienced higher risks related either to their
business strategy or their locations that are otherwise unobservable.
The construction of the five asset composition variables begins by dividing assets into cash and
non‐cash categories. Cash assets include vault cash, reserves at the Fed, deposits at other banks,
Treasury securities, and cash items in process of collection. Non‐cash assets include everything else, and
mainly consist of loans and non‐Treasury securities.

22
The mix of cash assets should matter for reserve ratios, since some categories (e.g., reserves at
the Fed) are “better” as cash than others. Reserves at the Fed are more liquid than Treasury securities,
are immune from interest rate risk, and can satisfy the legal reserve requirement; thus, one would
expect that, ceteris paribus, banks that hold a higher proportion of Treasury securities relative to total
cash assets should have to hold more reserves, when reserves are defined broadly to include Treasuries,
and less reserves when reserves are defined narrowly to exclude Treasuries (since they are substitutes
for vault cash and reserves at the Fed). That is precisely what the regression results show. The
coefficient on USgovsec_cashass is negative in the res2 and res3 regressions, and positive in the res6
regressions. We also include the ratio of vault cash to total cash assets (vaultcash_cashass) to see
whether vault cash (which did not count toward the legal reserve requirement) and which is not easily
transferrable to other banks via the depository network, is less valuable as a reserve asset than reserves
at the Fed or deposits at other banks (the excluded category of cash assets), and we find that it
consistently enters with the expected negative sign.6
Loans are a relatively illiquid and risky asset compared with private bonds, and we expect
loan_noncash to enter positively in all the regressions, which it does. The composition of loans should
also matter for reserve demand. We lack detailed information about loan composition, but we are able
to distinguish real estate loans from other loans. The share of real estate loans in total loans
(realestateloan_loan) is positive and significant for country banks, but insignificant for reserve city and
central reserve city banks. That result is not surprising, since these likely reflect the larger exposure of
country banks to agricultural real estate lending. We also attempt to capture variation in the riskiness of
real estate loans through the ratio of “other real estate owned” (which generally represents foreclosed
6

These results have interesting implications for thinking about how to measure aggregate liquidity in the financial
system. An index of aggregate liquidity that would combine reserves at the Fed, vault cash, and Treasury securities
would give the greatest weight to reserves at the Fed, and less weight to the other components. Such an index
could be employed as an alternative to high‐powered money or M1 or M2 to measure changes in market liquidity
over time, an application of these regression results that we intend to pursue in subsequent work.

23
real estate) relative to total real estate lending (oreo_realestateloan). That variable is never highly
significant statistically, but given its potential relevance as a measure of risk, we include it as a predicting
variable.
Liability mix is captured by measuring the proportion of debt finance and its composition. We
capture leverage with net worth relative to total assets (nw_ta); the higher the net worth ratio, the
lower the leverage, and according to Calomiris and Wilson (2004), the lower should be the demand for
reserves. As predicted, nw_ta enters with the predicted negative sign. The mix of debt should also
matter; deposits entail withdrawal risk, especially demandable deposits. The ratio of total deposits
relative to debt (td_ta‐nw) should, and does, enter positively in the regressions, but more for the res2
and res3 regressions than for the res6 regressions, and more for country banks than reserve city banks.
Demand deposits due to the public as a proportion of total deposits (dd_td), and deposits due to banks
as a fraction of deposits (dtb_td), should, and do, enter positively in res2 and res6 regressions (although
the statistical significance is higher for country banks; for res3 regressions, the sign on dtb_td is
negative, as one would expect, given that deposits due to banks is subtracted from the numerator of
res2 to arrive at the res3 measure.
We also include indicator variables for bank location, which capture both the distinct long‐term
circumstances of different banks’ liquidity needs (e.g., a New York City, or a Chicago, location), as well as
divergent short‐term economic environmental circumstances, which are captured by the Federal
Reserve District indicator variables. In regression specifications not reported here, we substituted
measures of macroeconomic performance at the Fed District level (business conditions, business
failures, and building permits) for the District indicator variables, and we found these measures were
highly statistically significant. However, these variables also vary greatly over time, and given the cross‐
sectional nature of our 1935 model, for purposes of simulating fundamental reserve demand in 1936

24
and 1937, including these District‐level environmental measures would be problematic since we are
unable to capture dynamic adjustment to these macroeconomic variables from cross‐sectional
estimates.
In Section VII we will use estimated values from cross‐sectional regressions to simulate the path
of reserves for 15 mutually exclusive aggregates of Fed member banks (New York City central reserve
city banks, Chicago central reserve city banks, country banks, and reserve city banks in each of the 12
Fed districts). Because we will be simulating aggregates rather than individual bank behavior, it is
appropriate to use weighted least squares (WLS) estimates, which estimate coefficients by weighting
banks according to their size. Specifically, we experimented with three different weighting approaches.
First, we weighted banks according to their asset size relative to the total assets of member banks in
their Fed district. Second, we weighted banks according to their asset size relative to the mean asset size
of member banks in their Fed district. Third, we weighted banks according to the size of their deposits
relative to the mean deposit size of member banks in their Fed district. The WLS estimates are quite
similar in all three approaches, and none of our simulation results or conclusions differs across these
three different approaches to weighting. We report the WLS results using the second weighting scheme
in Table 5, and use them in the simulations, since those results exhibited slightly higher adjusted R‐
squareds than the other two weighting methods.
Overall, the results of the WLS results are similar to the OLS results, both for the city banks’
sample and the non‐city (country) banks, but the WLS and OLS results are more similar for the country
banks. Several effects for city banks are larger in absolute value and more statistically significant than in
the OLS specifications, including the coefficients on vaultcash_cashass, loan_noncash,
realestateloan_loan, dd_td, lag_vaultcash_cashass, lag_loan_noncash, and the indicator variables
frdist_dum2 and nycity (which switches sign). Several effects in the WLS results for city banks are

25
smaller in absolute value and statistical significance, including the coefficients on nw_ta, td_tanw,
lag_oreo_reloan_ratio, and the indicator variables frdist_dum9 and chicagocity. We conclude that for
the sample of city banks (which includes some of the largest banks in the country, as well as much
smaller banks) weighting by bank size affects the WLS results because the behavior of the largest banks
differs from that of other banks. The changes in the coefficients on nycity and chicagocity are consistent
with that interpretation. For example, once greater weight is given to larger banks in the sample (which
tend to be located in New York City and Chicago), larger banks have more influence on estimated
coefficients for financial ratios, and the changes in financial ratio coefficients eliminate the need for a
special indicator variable for Chicago.
Not surprisingly, there are far fewer differences between the OLS and WLS results for the
country banks sample (which is far more homogeneous in terms of the size and function of the included
banks). In that sample, the absolute magnitude of lag_USgovdep_td rises, and there is an offsetting
decline in the absolute value of USgovdep_td. Two other effects are also substantially reduced in the
WLS results: lag_USgovsec_cashass and frdist_dum3.
VII. Simulated Reserve Demand, 1936‐1937
Using the coefficients from our res3 WLS estimates in Table 5, along with data for the balance
sheet ratios and location characteristics of banks for June and December calls in 1936‐1938, we simulate
res3 demand for the 15 mutually exclusive aggregates of Fed member banks. We report results here
only for the res3 reserve measure, but the results for res2 and res6 simulations are broadly similar. We
report res3 results because these should be relatively favorable to the Friedman‐Schwartz hypothesis
because res3 is our narrowest measure of reserves.
For each of the 15 aggregates, Figure 7 plots simulated res3 (proj) and actual res3 (Res3_Ta) on
the left side of each panel, and compare the difference between them (diff=simulated minus actual

26
res3) against the path of the ratio of required reserves relative to total assets (Reqres_Ta) on the right
side of each panel. The plots show that, for the most part, proj tracks Res3_Ta well. And, more
importantly, the forecast errors are not consistent with a story in which increased reserve requirements
caused increases in reserve ratios that would not otherwise have happened. A model based entirely on
information about reserve demand fundamentals from December 1935 would have predicted the rising
demand for reserves that occurred in 1936‐1938, to the extent that there were increases.
Table 6 reports the relative size of each of the 15 aggregates plotted in Figure 7. The Figure
displays three sets of patterns over the key period of June 1936 to June 1937, during which the reserve
requirement increases took effect, none of which is consistent with the view that reserve requirement
increases caused increases in reserve ratios. In six of the 15 cases, representing 20.7% of the assets of
Fed member banks, from June 1936 to June 1937 res3 ratios actually fell (for New York District reserve
city banks, Boston District reserve city banks, Cleveland District reserve city banks, Chicago central
reserve city banks, Chicago District reserve city banks, and Minneapolis District reserve city banks).
Clearly, the declines in reserve ratios for these five aggregates are inconsistent with the Friedman‐
Schwartz view, since the actual change in the ratio of reserves to assets was negative. In another three
of the 15 cases, representing 33.0% of member bank assets (country banks, Dallas District reserve city
banks, and Kansas City District reserve city banks) the changes in actual reserve ratios were essentially
zero, and in all of those cases, projected increases exceeded actual increases. In the remaining six cases,
representing 46.3% of member bank assets (New York central reserve city banks, Philadelphia District
reserve city banks, Richmond District reserve city banks, Atlanta District reserve city banks, St. Louis
District reserve city banks, and San Francisco District reserve city banks) reserve ratios increased from
June 1936 to June 1937, but in each of those cases projected increases were always greater than actual.

27
In none of the 15 cases did we observe a rise in reserve ratios coinciding with a negative residual (a case
when projected increases under‐forecast actual).7
An important point that these diverse patterns of reserve demand demonstrate is that the
overall increase in aggregate reserve demand during the mid‐1930s was driven by a subset of city banks.
As our simulations show, country banks’ reserve demands remained flat because the fundamental
determinants of their reserve demands did not prompt them to increase their reserves. Indeed, Cargill
and Mayer’s (2006) findings that compared non‐member banks to Fed member banks are better
understood as a comparison between, on the one hand, smaller member and non‐member country
banks – which, as a group did not increase their reserve demand – and on the other hand, city banks –
which as a group, increased their reserve demand. The difference between city banks and country banks
reflected different fundamental influences on reserve demand and not increases in reserve
requirements, which is further illustrated by the fact that the increase in city banks’ reserve demands
did not occur for city banks in all locations.
VIII. Conclusion
The Federal Reserve doubled reserve requirements in three stages in 1936 and 1937 in an
attempt to remove “slack” from the banking system and to put itself in the position of being able to
tighten the money supply through open market sales or further reserve requirement increases if
deemed necessary. The Fed did not believe that the higher reserve requirements reduced the supply of
money or credit in 1936 and 1937. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) challenged that view and argued that
the higher reserve requirements raised reserve demand, thereby lowering the money multiplier and

7

Note that the starting points of the actual and projected res3_ta ratios in December 1935 are not the same. This
reflects the fact that in the individual bank regressions actual bank size is used, but in applying the estimated
coefficients to the aggregates, we cannot observe the distribution of banks’ size, and so use average bank size
instead. This introduces a difference between the level of projected and actual reserves, but should not have any
material effect on the differences between the two over time, which is the focus of our discussion.

28
contracting the supplies of money and credit. Subsequent studies have both supported and contested
that view.
Ours is the first study to examine reserve demand directly at a disaggregated level to see if Fed
member banks actually increased their reserve demands in response to the increases in reserve
requirements. We use microeconomic data on Fed member banks from 1934 and 1935 to model reserve
demand, and find that various alternative measures of demand are highly predictable as a function of
bank‐specific and location characteristics.
Based on the model estimated using data from the 1934 and 1935, when reserve requirements
clearly were not a binding constraint on bank reserve demand, we simulate reserve demand for 1936‐
1938 for 15 mutually exclusive aggregates of Fed member banks (New York City central reserve city
banks, Chicago central reserve city banks, reserve city banks in each of the 12 Fed Districts, and country
banks located in smaller cities and towns). We find that to the extent that banks increased their reserve
ratios during the period of reserve requirement increases, the increases in reserve demand between
June 1936 to June 1937 reflected predictable influences related to the structure of the banks, and not
increases in reserve requirements imposed by the Fed. This evidence lends support to the Fed’s
interpretation of the effects of the reserve requirement increases, and casts doubt on the view that the
doubling of reserve requirements caused the recession of 1937‐1938. Other policy actions, especially
reduced monetary base growth (due to the December 1936 sterilization of gold flows) and the 1936 tax
rate increases, seem more likely culprits in causing the recession.
There are important lessons from the experience of the mid‐1930s for monetary policy today.
U.S. banks now hold huge amounts of excess reserves. Total excess reserves in the banking system total
roughly a trillion dollars, and the largest four banks alone account for a quarter of that amount. As in the

29
1930s, these reserves are not “superfluous” balances; rather, they are held intentionally by banks as
ways of stabilizing their asset portfolios, reducing their risk and improving their liquidity.
As bank profits and loan opportunities increase, and as macroeconomic risks recede, banks will
reduce excess reserves to finance loan expansion. Still, the shedding of excess reserves is unlikely to be
uniform across the banking system; just as in the 1930s, changes in reserve preferences likely will
display substantial heterogeneity across banks. Without an understanding of the microeconomic
foundations of the shifting demand for reserves, policy makers may be caught flat‐footed when the
demand for reserves changes. A major reduction in reserve demand for even two of the largest banks in
the system could imply substantial expansion of money and credit.
Some Fed officials have advocated raising interest payments on excess reserves to prevent too
rapid a contraction of excess reserves and increase in lending as reserve‐demand preferences shift. That
approach may work, but its efficacy is limited by the ability of the Fed to gauge the interest elasticity of
reserve demand and raise interest rates accordingly. And, of course, the extent of feasible interest rate
increases on reserves may be limited by the Fed’s need to maintain its own solvency. Clearly, the ability
to understand and anticipate changes in reserve demand preferences will be key to the successful
implementation of monetary policy in the coming years.

1939 ‐ Oct

1939 ‐ Jul

1939 ‐ Apr

1939 ‐ Jan

Base (Left Axis)

1938 ‐ Oct

10

1938 ‐ Jul

1938 ‐ Apr

1938 ‐ Jan

1937 ‐ Oct

1937 ‐ Jul

1937 ‐ Apr

1937 ‐ Jan

1936 ‐ Oct

1936 ‐ Jul

1936 ‐ Apr

1936 ‐ Jan

1935 ‐ Oct

US$ (bil)
60

1935 ‐ Jul

1935 ‐ Apr

1935 ‐ Jan

1934 ‐ Oct

1934 ‐ Jul

1934 ‐ Apr

1934 ‐ Jan

30

Figure 1
Money Stock and Determinants, 1934‐39
Ratio
15

50
13

40
Money Stock (Left Axis)

11

30
9

Deposits/Currency (Right Axis)

20
7

Deposits/Reserves (Right Axis)

5

0
3

31

Figure 2
All Member Banks: Reserves Measures to Total Assets

Ratio
0.7

Res6/Assets

0.6

Res7/Assets

0.5

0.4
Res2/Assets

0.3
Res3/Assets

0.2
Required Reserve/Assets

0.1
Excess Reserve/Assets

0.0
Jun‐34

Dec‐34

Jun‐35

Dec‐35

Jun‐36

Dec‐36

Jun‐37

Dec‐37

Jun‐38

Dec‐38

Jun‐39

Dec‐39

Jun‐40

Dec‐40

Jun‐41

Dec‐41

32

Figure 3
New York Central Reserve City Banks: Reserves Measures to Total Assets

Ratio
0.8

Res6/Assets

0.7
0.6
Res7/Assets

0.5
0.4
Res2/Assets

0.3

Res3/Assets

Required Reserve/Assets

0.2
0.1

Excess Reserve/Assets

0.0
Jun‐34

Dec‐34

Jun‐35

Dec‐35

Jun‐36

Dec‐36

Jun‐37

Dec‐37

Jun‐38

Dec‐38

Jun‐39

Dec‐39

Jun‐40

Dec‐40

Jun‐41

Dec‐41

33

Figure 4
Country Member Banks: Reserve Measures to Total Assets

Ratio
0.6

Res6/Assets

0.5
Res7/Assets

0.4
Res2/Assets

0.3
Res3/Assets

0.2

0.1

Required Reserve/Assets
Excess Reserve/Assets

0.0
Jun‐34

Dec‐34

Jun‐35

Dec‐35

Jun‐36

Dec‐36

Jun‐37

Dec‐37

Jun‐38

Dec‐38

Jun‐39

Dec‐39

Jun‐40

Dec‐40

Jun‐41

Dec‐41

34

Figure 5
Boston District Reserve City Banks: Reserve Measures to Total Assets

Ratio
0.7

Res6/Assets

0.6
Res2/Assets

0.5

0.4
Res7/Assets

0.3

Res3/Assets

0.2
Required Reserve/Assets

0.1
Excess Reserve/Assets

0.0
Jun‐34

Dec‐34

Jun‐35

Dec‐35

Jun‐36

Dec‐36

Jun‐37

Dec‐37

Jun‐38

Dec‐38

Jun‐39

Dec‐39

Jun‐40

Dec‐40

Jun‐41

Dec‐41

35

Figure 6
San Francisco District Reserve City Banks: Reserve Measures to Total Assets
Ratio
0.6
Res6/Assets

0.5
Res7/Assets

0.4

0.3

Res2/Assets

0.2

Res3/Assets

Required Reserve/Assets

0.1

Excess Reserve/Assets

0.0
Jun‐34

Dec‐34

Jun‐35

Dec‐35

Jun‐36

Dec‐36

Jun‐37

Dec‐37

Jun‐38

Dec‐38

Jun‐39

Dec‐39

Jun‐40

Dec‐40

Jun‐41

Dec‐41

36

Figure 7: Actual and Projected Reserves Measures for Various Classes of Banks

NEW YORK CITY
0.30

NEW YORK CITY
res3_ta

0.25

0.15

proj

0.20

0.20
reqres_ta

0.10

diff

0.15
0.05

0.10
0.05

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

CITY OF CHICAGO

CITY OF CHICAGO

0.30

0.20

0.25

0.15

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

diff

res3_ta

0.05

proj

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

Country Banks

Country Banks

0.30

0.20

0.25

0.15

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

reqres_ta

0.10

0.10
res3_ta

0.05

proj

0.00
‐0.05

reqres_ta
diff

37

Figure 7: Actual and Projected Reserves Measures for Various Classes of Banks

NEW YORK

NEW YORK
0.20

0.30
res3_ta

0.25

proj

0.20

reqres_ta

0.15

diff

0.10

0.15
0.05

0.10
0.05

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

BOSTON

BOSTON

0.30

0.20

reqres_ta

0.25

0.15

diff

0.20

0.10

0.15
0.10
0.05

res3_ta

0.05

proj

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

CLEVELAND
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10

CLEVELAND
res3_ta
proj

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

reqres_ta
diff

38

Figure 7: Actual and Projected Reserves Measures for Various Classes of Banks

RICHMOND

RICHMOND
0.20

0.30

res3_ta

0.25

proj

0.20

reqres_ta

0.15

diff

0.10

0.15

0.05

0.10
0.05

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

ATLANTA

ATLANTA
0.30

res3_ta

0.25

proj

0.20

0.20

reqres_ta

0.15

diff

0.10

0.15
0.05

0.10
0.05

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

PHILADELPHIA

PHILADELPHIA
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

0.20
res3_ta
proj

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
‐0.05

reqres_ta
diff

39

Figure 7: Actual and Projected Reserves Measures for Various Classes of Banks

CHICAGO

CHICAGO
0.30

0.20

0.25

0.15

0.20

reqres_ta
diff

0.10

0.15
0.10
0.05

res3_ta

0.05

proj

0.00
‐0.05

0.00

ST LOUIS
0.30

ST LOUIS
res3_ta

0.25

proj

0.20

0.20

reqres_ta

0.15

diff

0.10

0.15
0.05

0.10
0.05

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

MINNEAPOLIS
0.30
0.25
0.20

MINNEAPOLIS
res3_ta
proj

0.20
0.15
0.10

0.15
0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

reqres_ta
diff

40

Figure 7: Actual and Projected Reserves Measures for Various Classes of Banks

SAN FRANCISCO

SAN FRANCISCO
0.20

0.30
res3_ta

0.25

proj

0.20

reqres_ta

0.15

diff

0.10

0.15
0.05

0.10
0.05

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

KANSAS CITY

KANSAS CITY

0.30

0.20

reqres_ta

0.15

diff

res3_ta

0.25

proj

0.20

0.10

0.15
0.05

0.10
0.05

0.00

0.00

‐0.05

DALLAS

DALLAS
0.30

0.20

0.25

0.15

0.20

0.10

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

0.05
res3_ta

0.00

proj
‐0.05

reqres_ta
diff

41

Table 1. Member Bank Reserve Requirements, June 21, 1917 ‐ December 31, 1941
(Percent of Deposits)
Class of Deposits and Bank June 21, 1917 ‐ Aug. 16, 1936 ‐ Mar. 1, 1937 ‐ May 1, 1937 ‐
Aug. 15, 1936 Feb. 28, 1937 Apr. 30, 1937 Apr. 15, 1938

Apr. 16, 1938 ‐ Nov. 1, 1941 ‐
Oct. 31, 1941 Dec. 31, 1941

On net demand deposits:
Central reserve city

13

19.50

22.75

26.00

22.75

26.00

Reserve city

10

15.00

17.50

20.00

17.50

20.00

Country

7

10.50

12.25

14.00

12.00

14.00

3

4.50

5.25

6.00

5.00

6.00

On time deposits:
All member banks

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1943). Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914‐41. Washington, DC.

42
Table 2. Variable Definitions
Variable
res2_ta

Definition

res3_ta

=( total cash reserve / total asset) = (reserve with FED + Cash and Due From Banks) / total asset
= (net total cash reserve / total asset) = (reserve with FED + Cash and Due From Banks ‐ Due to
Banks) / total asset

res6_ta

= (reserve with FED + Cash and Due From Banks + USGovernment Securities Owned) / total asset

ln_ta

= log (Total Asset)

USgovsec_cashass

= USGovernment Securities Owned / Cash Assetb

vaultcash_cashass

= Vault Cash / Cash Asset

loan_noncash

= Loans and Discounts / Non‐Cash Asset

realestateloan_loan

c

d
= Real Estate Loan / Loans and Discounts

oreo_reloan_ratio

= Real Estate Owned Other Than Banking House / Real Estate Loan

nw_ta

= Net Worthe / Total Asset

td_ta‐nw

= Total Deposits / (Total Asset ‐ Net Worth)

dd_td

= Demand Deposits / Total Deposits

dtb_td

= Due to Banks / Total Deposits

USgovdep_td

= US Government Deposits / Total Deposits

lag_ln_ta

= lag of ln_ta

lag_USgovsec_Cashass

= lag of USgovsec_cashass

lag_vaultcash_cashass

= lag of vaultcash_cashass

lag_loan_noncash

= lag of loan_noncash

lag_realestateloan_Loan

= lag of realestateloan_loan

lag_oreo_reloan_ratio

= lag of oreo_reloan_ratio

lag_nw_ta

= lag of nw_ta

lag_td_ta‐nw

= lag of td_tanw

lag_dd_td

= lag of dd_td

lag_dtb_td

= lag of Dtb_Td

lag_USgovdep_td

= lag of USgovdep_td

frdist_dum2

= 1 if the bank is located in New York, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum3

= 1 if the bank is located in Philadelphia, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum4

= 1 if the bank is located in Cleveland, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum5

= 1 if the bank is located in Richmond, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum6

= 1 if the bank is located in Atlanta, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum7

= 1 if the bank is located in Chicago, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum8

= 1 if the bank is located in St. Louis, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum9

= 1 if the bank is located in Minneapolis, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum10

= 1 if the bank is located in Kansas City, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum11

= 1 if the bank is located in Dallas, 0 otherwise

frdist_dum12

= 1 if the bank is located in San Francisco, 0 otherwise

nyCity

= 1 if the bank is located in New York City
= 1 if the bank is located in Chicago

chicagocity

43
Table 2. Variable definitions (Cont’d)
a

required reserve

= net demand depositf × 0.13 + time deposit × 0.03 for central reserve city banks
= net demand deposit × 0.1 + time deposit × 0.03 for reserve city banks
= net demand deposit × 0.07 + time deposit × 0.03 for country banks

b

cash asset

= USGovernment Securities Owned + Reserve with Fed + Cash and Due From Banks + Outside Checks
and Other Cash Items

c

non‐cash asset

= total asset ‐ cash asset

d

Real Estate Loan

= Real Estate Loans, Mtgs, Deeds of Trust, and Other Liens on Real Estate on Farm Land + Real Estate
Loans, Mtgs, Deeds of Trust, and Other Liens on Other Real Estate

e

Net Worth

= Capital + Surplus + Net Undivided Profits + Reserves for Dividends or Contingencies

f

net demand deposit

= Due to Banks + Demand Deposits + US Government Deposits ‐ Due from Banksg ‐ Outside Checks
and Other Cash Items

g

Due from Banks

= DFB and Trust Companies in New York City + Due from Member Banks and Trust Companies in
Chicago for 1934 + Due from Banks and Trust Companies Elsewhere in US + Due from Non‐member
Banks and Trust Companies in New York for 1934 + Due from Non‐member Banks and Trust
Companies in Chicago for 1934 + Due from Non‐member Banks and Trust Companies Elsewhere in US
for 1934

44
Table 3. Summary Statistics
Reserve-city Banks

Country banks

Variable

N

Min

Max

Med

Mean

Std

Variable

N

Min

Max

Med

Mean

Std

res2_ta

411

0.0341

0.7200

0.2944

0.3024

0.1156

res2_ta

5688

0.0418

0.9414

0.2383

0.2692

0.1408

res3_ta

411

‐0.4326

0.6017

0.1560

0.1571

0.1377

res3_ta

5688

‐0.4381

0.8758

0.2152

0.2478

0.1395

res6_ta

411

0.0341

0.9082

0.5571

0.5500

0.1523

res6_ta

5688

0.0604

0.9562

0.4248

0.4310

0.1599

ln_ta

411

12.7070

21.5447

16.4354

16.6356

1.6120

ln_ta

5688

11.2240

18.8303

13.7038

13.8245

1.0737

USgovsec_cashass

411

0.0000

0.8489

0.4526

0.4385

0.1707

USgovsec_cashass

5688

0.0000

0.8963

0.3740

0.3715

0.2079

vaultcash_cashass

411

‐1.7456

0.7974

0.1213

0.1374

0.1382

vaultcash_cashass

5688

‐2.7145

0.7371

0.0855

0.1040

0.0909

loan_noncash

411

0.0437

1.2151

0.6257

0.6113

0.1719

loan_noncash

5688

0.0299

1.8507

0.5715

0.5705

0.1859

realestateloan_loan

411

0.0000

1.0000

0.1006

0.1738

0.1971

realestateloan_loan

5688

0.0000

0.9366

0.1935

0.2277

0.1708

oreo_reloan_ratio

411

0.0000

1.0000

0.0801

0.1701

0.2322

oreo_reloan_ratio

5688

0.0000

1.0000

0.0730

0.1401

0.1923

nw_ta

411

0.0363

0.4950

0.1056

0.1180

0.0508

nw_ta

5688

0.0000

0.8159

0.1400

0.1517

0.0594

dd_td

411

0.0000

0.9707

0.4823

0.4876

0.1565

dd_td

5688

0.0000

1.0000

0.4467

0.4807

0.2278

USgovdep_td

411

0.0000

0.3156

0.0125

0.0335

0.0487

USgovdep_td

5688

0.0000

0.6625

0.0020

0.0274

0.0591

td_tanw

411

0.3891

1.0220

0.9495

0.9305

0.0758

td_tanw

5688

0.3284

1.0549

0.9131

0.8926

0.0848

dtb_td

411

0.0000

0.8274

0.1341

0.1745

0.1624

dtb_td

5688

0.0000

0.7812

0.0104

0.0284

0.0495

lag_ln_ta

411

12.6218

21.3728

16.3112

16.5120

1.6291

lag_ln_ta

5688

10.8553

18.7885

13.6431

13.7719

1.0693

lag_USgovsec_cashass

411

0.0000

0.8792

0.4606

0.4522

0.1728

lag_USgovsec_cashass

5688

0.0000

0.9173

0.4618

0.4509

0.1857

lag_vaultcash_cashass

411

‐1.7692

0.8007

0.1098

0.1326

0.1373

lag_vaultcash_cashass

5688

‐38.8341

0.7242

0.0798

0.0844

0.5466

lag_loan_noncash

411

0.0057

0.9986

0.6298

0.5987

0.1729

lag_loan_noncash

5688

0.0305

1.1077

0.5821

0.5752

0.1836

lag_realestateloan_loan

411

0.0000

0.9999

0.0968

0.1780

0.2059

lag_realestateloan_loan

5688

0.0000

0.9750

0.1829

0.2205

0.1694

lag_oreo_reloan_ratio

411

0.0000

1.0000

0.0684

0.1429

0.1969

lag_oreo_reloan_ratio

5688

0.0000

1.0000

0.0618

0.1327

0.1892

lag_nw_ta

411

0.0448

0.4984

0.1191

0.1303

0.0568

lag_nw_ta

5688

0.0000

0.7563

0.1430

0.1540

0.0591

lag_dd_td

411

0.0000

0.9359

0.4604

0.4726

0.1576

lag_dd_td

5688

0.0000

1.0000

0.4305

0.4654

0.2302

lag_USgovdep_td

411

0.0000

0.4785

0.0367

0.0585

0.0681

lag_USgovdep_td

5688

0.0000

0.6939

0.0058

0.0386

0.0686

lag_td_tanw

411

0.3602

1.0927

0.9295

0.9110

0.0831

lag_td_tanw

5688

0.2790

1.0000

0.8579

0.8425

0.0924

lag_dtb_td

411

0.0000

0.8018

0.1241

0.1601

0.1542

lag_dtb_td

5688

0.0000

0.7687

0.0095

0.0268

0.0477

45
Table 4. OLS regressions for individual banks in December 1935
Sample
Dependent Variable

res2_ta

Reserve City Banks
res3_ta
res6_ta

constant

0.2810***

0.3657***

0.2877**

0.1664***

0.1908***

0.0356

res2_ta

Non‐Reserve City Banks
res3_ta
res6_ta

(0.075)

(0.079)

(0.129)

(0.027)

(0.027)

(0.038)

ln_ta

‐0.0097

‐0.0076

‐0.0356

0.0533***

0.0530***

0.0898***

(0.043)

(0.046)

(0.064)

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.017)

USgovsec_cashass

‐0.4650***

‐0.4547***

0.1602***

‐0.2871***

‐0.2867***

0.2153***

(0.037)

(0.040)

(0.057)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.014)

vaultcash_cashass

‐0.0655**

‐0.0623**

‐0.0833**

‐0.1993***

‐0.1978***

‐0.2553***

(0.027)

(0.028)

(0.041)

(0.053)

(0.053)

(0.071)

loan_noncash

‐0.0297

‐0.0323

0.0391

0.0694***

0.0682***

0.1294***

(0.052)

(0.051)

(0.086)

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.023)

realestateloan_loan

‐0.0621

‐0.0552

‐0.1477*

0.1099***

0.1100***

0.1483***

(0.052)

(0.051)

(0.083)

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.030)

oreo_reloan_ratio

‐0.0130

‐0.0109

‐0.0052

0.0113

0.0105

0.0105

(0.023)

(0.023)

(0.036)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.016)

nw_ta

‐0.7655***

‐0.6894**

‐1.3170***

‐0.3685***

‐0.3310***

‐0.4743***

(0.263)

(0.276)

(0.379)

(0.058)

(0.058)

(0.077)

td_tanw

0.1607*

0.0460

0.0116

0.0961***

0.0722***

0.0706**

(0.086)

(0.090)

(0.138)

(0.024)

(0.024)

(0.033)

dd_td

0.1790

0.1761

0.1794

0.2173***

0.2192***

0.2957***

(0.126)

(0.130)

(0.201)

(0.028)

(0.028)

(0.037)

dtb_td

0.1732

‐0.6519***

0.2611

0.2130***

‐0.5417***

0.2689***

(0.151)

(0.158)

(0.240)

(0.054)

(0.054)

(0.074)

USgovdep_td

0.0833

0.0818

‐0.0251

‐0.0982***

‐0.0996***

‐0.1230***

(0.153)

(0.167)

(0.253)

(0.031)

(0.031)

(0.043)

lag_ln_ta

0.0074

0.0058

0.0345

‐0.0484***

‐0.0482***

‐0.0813***

(0.043)

(0.046)

(0.064)

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.017)

0.1224***

0.1109***

0.2108***

‐0.0398***

‐0.0399***

‐0.0231

(0.038)

(0.039)

(0.063)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.014)

0.0006

‐0.0023

0.0072

‐0.0001

‐0.0002

0.0002

lag_USgovsec_cashass
lag_vaultcash_cashass

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.039)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

lag_loan_noncash

0.0286

0.0299

‐0.0302

‐0.0557***

‐0.0557***

‐0.1058***

(0.052)

(0.052)

(0.086)

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.023)

lag_realestateloan_loan

0.0735

0.0651

0.0802

‐0.0827***

‐0.0827***

‐0.1222***

(0.049)

(0.049)

(0.074)

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.030)

0.0402*

0.0470*

0.0527

‐0.0153

‐0.0152

‐0.0196

(0.024)

(0.025)

(0.040)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.015)

lag_oreo_reloan_ratio

46
Table 4. OLS regressions for individual banks in December 1935 (Cont’d)
Sample
Dependent Variable

res2_ta

lag_nw_ta

0.2004

0.1932

0.4958

0.0685

0.0663

0.0390

(0.243)

(0.253)

(0.352)

(0.053)

(0.053)

(0.071)

‐0.0467

‐0.0428

‐0.0158

‐0.0217

‐0.0255

0.0050

(0.082)

(0.083)

(0.133)

(0.023)

(0.023)

(0.031)

0.0165

0.0332

0.0617

0.0075

0.0066

0.0349

(0.124)

(0.128)

(0.195)

(0.028)

(0.028)

(0.037)

0.0562

0.0291

0.0485

‐0.0354

‐0.0424

0.0341

(0.149)

(0.154)

(0.231)

(0.052)

(0.053)

(0.075)

‐0.0458

‐0.0339

‐0.1216

0.0404

0.0412

0.0607

(0.127)

(0.141)

(0.198)

(0.028)

(0.028)

(0.040)

‐0.0247

‐0.0307

‐0.0706*

0.0076*

0.0055

0.0029

lag_td_tanw
lag_dd_td
lag_dtb_td
lag_USgovdep_td
frdist_dum2
frdist_dum3

Reserve City Banks
res3_ta
res6_ta

res2_ta

Non‐Reserve City Banks
res3_ta
res6_ta

(0.027)

(0.029)

(0.039)

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.007)

0.0045

0.0050

‐0.0017

‐0.0096**

‐0.0125***

‐0.0298***

(0.023)

(0.024)

(0.034)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.007)

frdist_dum4

0.0237

0.0239

0.0349

0.0179***

0.0152***

0.0367***

(0.024)

(0.025)

(0.036)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.008)

frdist_dum5

0.0330

0.0312

0.0679*

0.0247***

0.0216***

0.0389***

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.037)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.008)

frdist_dum6

0.0261

0.0308

0.0550

0.0793***

0.0755***

0.1224***

(0.027)

(0.027)

(0.037)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.010)

frdist_dum7

0.0598**

0.0606**

0.1140***

0.0380***

0.0352***

0.0758***

(0.025)

(0.026)

(0.037)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.009)

frdist_dum8

0.0112

0.0097

0.0077

0.0307***

0.0268***

0.0527***

(0.024)

(0.025)

(0.036)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.010)

frdist_dum9

0.0854**

0.0939**

0.1109**

0.0352***

0.0317***

0.0616***

(0.036)

(0.037)

(0.052)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.010)

0.0574**

0.0545**

0.0900***

0.0621***

0.0589***

0.0888***

(0.024)

(0.025)

(0.035)

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.011)

0.0616**

0.0615**

0.1196***

0.0522***

0.0483***

0.0711***

frdist_dum10
frdist_dum11

(0.024)

(0.025)

(0.035)

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.011)

frdist_dum12

0.0264

0.0281

0.0207

0.0303***

0.0279***

0.0502***

(0.026)

(0.027)

(0.038)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.010)

nycity

0.0228

0.0178

0.0429

(0.025)

(0.026)

(0.035)

0.0486*

0.0409

0.1290***

chicagocity

(0.027)

(0.028)

(0.038)

N

411

411

411

5688

5688

5688

adj. R‐sq

0.683

0.769

0.517

0.659

0.653

0.481

47
Table 5. WLS regressions for individual banks in December 1935
Sample
Dependent Variable

res2_ta

constant

0.2734***

0.4326***

0.0961

0.2603***

0.3256***

0.1697**

(0.069)

(0.077)

(0.119)

(0.045)

(0.050)

(0.074)

0.0278

0.0261

0.0308

0.0622***

0.0531***

0.0990***

(0.042)

(0.044)

(0.066)

(0.015)

(0.017)

(0.026)

‐0.5599***

‐0.5597***

0.1113**

‐0.3291***

‐0.3328***

0.1865***

(0.038)

(0.042)

(0.055)

(0.015)

(0.016)

(0.024)

‐0.2054***

‐0.2004**

‐0.3112***

‐0.2949***

‐0.3034***

‐0.4174***

(0.077)

(0.079)

(0.113)

(0.040)

(0.041)

(0.059)

0.0639

0.0527

0.2192***

0.0835***

0.0811***

0.1527***

(0.055)

(0.051)

(0.081)

(0.023)

(0.026)

(0.037)

‐0.1125*

‐0.1183**

‐0.2344***

0.0929***

0.0888***

0.1346***

(0.059)

(0.059)

(0.090)

(0.023)

(0.024)

(0.043)

‐0.0090

‐0.0060

‐0.0083

0.0018

‐0.0039

‐0.0046

ln_ta
USgovsec_cashass
vaultcash_cashass
loan_noncash
realestateloan_loan
oreo_reloan_ratio

Reserve City Banks
res3_ta
res6_ta

Non‐Reserve City Banks
res2_ta
res3_ta
res6_ta

(0.015)

(0.016)

(0.030)

(0.017)

(0.017)

(0.028)

nw_ta

‐0.3603

‐0.2576

‐0.8955**

‐0.3983***

‐0.3458***

‐0.6541***

(0.251)

(0.233)

(0.363)

(0.075)

(0.076)

(0.144)

td_tanw

0.0628

‐0.1296

‐0.1058

0.0125

‐0.0579

‐0.0319

(0.094)

(0.096)

(0.154)

(0.031)

(0.040)

(0.050)

0.2202*

0.2492*

0.2437

0.1655***

0.1596***

0.2499***

(0.131)

(0.131)

(0.225)

(0.042)

(0.042)

(0.065)

0.0684

‐0.7348***

0.0510

0.2490***

‐0.5952***

0.4425***

dd_td
dtb_td

(0.163)

(0.169)

(0.282)

(0.068)

(0.077)

(0.113)

USgovdep_td

‐0.0429

‐0.0080

‐0.2158

0.0105

0.0022

0.0639

(0.151)

(0.158)

(0.293)

(0.040)

(0.040)

(0.072)

lag_ln_ta

‐0.0232

‐0.0215

‐0.0212

‐0.0560***

‐0.0459***

‐0.0887***

(0.042)

(0.044)

(0.066)

(0.015)

(0.017)

(0.026)

0.1514***

0.1432***

0.3016***

‐0.0137

‐0.0140

0.0155

(0.039)

(0.042)

(0.063)

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.026)

0.0228

0.0219

0.0110

‐0.0005

‐0.0007

‐0.0009

lag_USgovsec_cashass
lag_vaultcash_cashass

(0.015)

(0.016)

(0.024)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

lag_loan_noncash

‐0.0719

‐0.0681

‐0.2329***

‐0.0773***

‐0.0788***

‐0.1471***

(0.052)

(0.049)

(0.083)

(0.025)

(0.028)

(0.040)

lag_realestateloan_loan

0.0743

0.0688

0.0981

‐0.1133***

‐0.1133***

‐0.1885***

(0.054)

(0.055)

(0.084)

(0.023)

(0.024)

(0.044)

0.0096

0.0087

0.0127

‐0.0110

‐0.0080

‐0.0240

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.031)

(0.016)

(0.015)

(0.026)

lag_oreo_reloan_ratio

48
Table 5. WLS Regressions for Individual Banks in December 1935 (Cont’d)
Sample
Dependent Variable

res2_ta

lag_nw_ta

‐0.1740

‐0.1167

‐0.0782

0.0047

0.0036

‐0.0255

(0.239)

(0.221)

(0.349)

(0.071)

(0.073)

(0.125)

0.0230

0.0381

0.1490

0.0001

‐0.0147

0.0173

(0.081)

(0.077)

(0.137)

(0.031)

(0.033)

(0.052)

0.0062

‐0.0191

0.1295

0.0314

0.0368

0.0772

(0.126)

(0.124)

(0.216)

(0.039)

(0.040)

(0.062)

0.0892

0.0234

0.2266

‐0.0316

0.0031

‐0.0681

(0.165)

(0.171)

(0.281)

(0.070)

(0.085)

(0.121)

‐0.0229

‐0.0436

0.0198

‐0.0800**

‐0.0815**

‐0.1474**

(0.127)

(0.135)

(0.219)

(0.039)

(0.039)

(0.066)

‐0.0330

‐0.0415*

‐0.1119***

0.0067

0.0070

0.0009

(0.026)

(0.024)

(0.042)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.012)

‐0.0207

‐0.0213

‐0.0347

0.0060

0.0028

‐0.0023

lag_td_tanw
lag_dd_td
lag_dtb_td
lag_USgovdep_td
frdist_dum2
frdist_dum3

Reserve City Banks
res3_ta
res6_ta

res2_ta

Non‐Reserve City Banks
res3_ta
res6_ta

(0.022)

(0.022)

(0.037)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.011)

frdist_dum4

0.0091

0.0069

0.0358

0.0210***

0.0198***

0.0391***

(0.022)

(0.021)

(0.039)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.010)

frdist_dum5

0.0253

0.0225

0.0753**

0.0292***

0.0275***

0.0432***

(0.023)

(0.023)

(0.038)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.013)

0.0262

0.0272

0.0534

0.0565***

0.0540***

0.1017***

(0.023)

(0.024)

(0.040)

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.014)

0.0524***

0.0533***

0.1008***

0.0407***

0.0390***

0.0840***

frdist_dum6
frdist_dum7

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.037)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.013)

frdist_dum8

0.0002

‐0.0052

‐0.0045

0.0298***

0.0214**

0.0445***

(0.021)

(0.021)

(0.039)

(0.008)

(0.010)

(0.012)

frdist_dum9

‐0.0103

‐0.0041

‐0.0409

0.0465***

0.0435***

0.0739***

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.049)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.016)

0.0394*

0.0338

0.0534

0.0611***

0.0584***

0.0767***

(0.023)

(0.022)

(0.040)

(0.009)

(0.010)

(0.014)

0.0385*

0.0401*

0.0813*

0.0572***

0.0545***

0.0675***

(0.023)

(0.023)

(0.041)

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.016)

‐0.0265

‐0.0246

‐0.0722*

0.0318***

0.0310***

0.0487***

(0.022)

(0.021)

(0.039)

(0.009)

(0.009)

(0.013)

‐0.0286

‐0.0293

‐0.0703**

(0.019)

(0.019)

(0.035)

0.0131

0.0127

0.0315

frdist_dum10
frdist_dum11
frdist_dum12
nycity
chicagocity

(0.023)

(0.023)

(0.041)

N

411

411

411

5688

5688

5688

adj. R‐sq

0.810

0.862

0.708

0.718

0.696

0.573

49

Table 6. Relative Size of Fifteen Districts
Regional district
Country Member Banks
Dallas reserve district
San Francisco reserve district
Minneapolis reserve district
Kansas City reserve district
Chicago reserve district
St. Louis reserve district
Richmond reserve district
Atlanta reserve district
Philadelphia reserve district
Cleveland reserve district
Boston reserve district
New York reserve district
Chicago central reserve city
New York central reserve city
sum

total asset

relative size
13389
757
4028
515
1201
1698
926
894
808
1563
2516
1319
424
3162
13324
46524

0.2878
0.0163
0.0866
0.0111
0.0258
0.0365
0.0199
0.0192
0.0174
0.0336
0.0541
0.0284
0.0091
0.0680
0.2864
1

50

References
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1976). Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914‐1941.
Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors.
Calomiris, Charles W., and R. Glenn Hubbard (1995). "Internal Finance and Investment: Evidence from
the Undistributed Profits Tax of 1936‐1937,” Journal of Business , October 1995, 443‐482.
Calomiris, Charles W. (2011). Volatile Times and Persistent Conceptual Errors: U.S. Monetary Policy
1914‐1951,” Return to Jekyll Island: The Origins, History, and Future of the Federal Reserve, Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta, forthcoming.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph R. Mason (2003a). “Fundamentals, Panics and Bank Distress During
the Depression,” (with Joseph Mason) American Economic Review 93, 1615‐47.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph R. Mason (2003b). “Consequences of Bank Distress During the Great
Depression,” American Economic Review 93, 937‐47.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph R. Mason (2008). “Resolving the Puzzle of the Underissue of National
Bank Notes,” Explorations in Economic History 45, pp. 327‐355.
Calomiris, Charles W., and David C. Wheelock (1998). “Was the Great Depression a Watershed for
American Monetary Policy?” in M.D. Bordo, C. Goldin, and E.N. White, editors, The Defining Moment:
The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 23‐66.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Eugene N. White (1994). “The Origins of Federal Deposit Insurance,” in
Claudia Goldin and Gary Libecap, eds., The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political
Economy, University of Chicago, pp. 145‐88.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Berry Wilson (2004). “Bank Capital and Portfolio Management: The 1930s
‘Capital Crunch’ and Scramble to Shed Risk,” Journal of Business 77, pp. 421‐55.
Cargill, Thomas F. and Thomas Mayer (2006). “The Effect of Changes in Reserve Requirements During
the 1930s: The Evidence from Nonmember Banks.” Journal of Economic History 66 (2), June, pp. 417‐32.
Chandler, Lester V. (1971). American Monetary Policy 1928‐1941. New York: Harper and Row.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United States, 1867‐1960.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

51
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1970). Monetary Statistics of the United States: Estimates,
Sources, Methods. Columbia University Press.
Frost, Peter A. (1971). “Banks’ Demand for Excess Reserves.” Journal of Political Economy 79, July, pp.
805‐25.
Hanes, Christopher (2006). “The Liquidity Trap and U.S. Interest Rates in the 1930s.” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 38 (1), February, pp. 165‐94.
Lindley, James T., Sowell, Clifford B., and Wm. Stewart Mounts, Jr. (2001). “Excess Reserves during the
1930s: Empirical Estimates of the Costs of Converting Unintended Cash Inventory into Income‐Producing
Assets.” Journal of Economics and Finance 25 (2), Summer, pp. 135‐48.
Meltzer, Allan H. (2003). A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913‐1951. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1989). The Economics of Money, Banking, and Financial Markets. Second edition.
Glenview, IL.
Morrison, George R. (1966). Liquidity Preferences of Commercial Banks. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Mounts, Jr., Wm. Stewart, Sowell, Clifford B., and Atul K. Saxena (2000). “An Examination of Country
Member Bank Cash Balances of the 1930s: A Test of Alternative Explanations.” Southern Economic
Journal 66 (4), pp. 923‐41.
Romer, Christina (1992). “What Ended the Great Depression?” Journal of Economic History 52,
December, pp. 757‐84.
Romer, Christina (2009). “The Lessons of 1937,” The Economist, June 18.
Tobin, James (1965). "The Monetary Interpretation of History: A Review Article." American Economic
Review 55 (3), pp. 464‐85.
Wilcox, James A. (1984). “Excess Reserves in the Great Depression.” NBER working paper no. 1374.

