NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DIFFUSION OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE ACROSS TIME AND SPACE:
EVIDENCE FROM PROFESSIONAL TRANSITIONS FOR THE SUPERSTARS OF MEDICINE
Pierre Azoulay
Joshua S. Graff Zivin
Bhaven N. Sampat
Working Paper 16683
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16683

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the National Science Foundation through its SciSIP
Program (Award SBE-0738142). We thank the conference audience, our discussant Adam Jaffe, as
well as Scott Stern and Manuel Trajtenberg for useful comments and suggestions. The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Pierre Azoulay, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Bhaven N. Sampat. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Diffusion of Scientific Knowledge Across Time and Space: Evidence from Professional
Transitions for the Superstars of Medicine
Pierre Azoulay, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Bhaven N. Sampat
NBER Working Paper No. 16683
January 2011
JEL No. O33
ABSTRACT
Are scientific knowledge flows embodied in individuals, or "in the air"? To answer this question, we
measure the effect of labor mobility in a sample of 9,483 elite academic life scientists on the citation
trajectories associated with individual articles (resp. patents) published (resp. granted) before the scientist
moved to a new institution. We find that article-to-article citations from the scientific community at
the superstar's origin location are barely affected by their departure. In contrast, article-to-patent citations,
and especially patent-to-patent citations, decline at the origin location following a star's departure,
suggesting that spillovers from academia to industry are not completely disembodied. We also find
that article-to-article citations at the superstar's destination location markedly increase after they move.
Our results suggest that, to be realized, knowledge flows to industry may require more face-to-face
interaction than those to academics. Moreover, to the extent that academic scientists do not internalize
the effect of their location decisions on the circulation of ideas, our results raise the intriguing possibility
that barriers to labor mobility in academic science limit the recombination of individual bits of knowledge,
resulting in a suboptimal rate of scientific exploration.

Pierre Azoulay
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-482
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
pazoulay@mit.edu
Joshua S. Graff Zivin
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
jgraffzivin@ucsd.edu

Bhaven N. Sampat
CROXPELD UQLYHUVLW\
SFKRRORIPXEOLF HHDOWK
600 WHVW 168WK SWUHHW
6th Floor
NEW YORK, NY 1003
bns3@columbia.edu

If Whitehead’s characterization of modern philosophy as “a series of footnotes to Plato”
is perhaps a slight exaggeration, the claim that contemporary scholarship on the economics
of innovation is largely an extension of themes laid out in the 1962 Rate and Direction volume
is no more of one. The contributors’ prescience about the potential economic importance
of academic science is particularly impressive, since at the time the conference was held
(in 1960) the post-Sputnik transformation of the academic enterprise into the behemoth we
know today had only just begun. The volume laid out a belief that “basic” research was
important for innovation, marshalling theory, case studies, and data to support the assertions
about the economic payoffs from basic research made in Vannevar Bush’s “Science: the
Endless Frontier” just fifteen years before. However, the conference volume was very much
a call for more research, emphasizing the need for more data, and deeper understanding.
In this paper we attempt to rise to this challenge, by examining the diffusion of knowledge
across time and space within the life sciences. This endeavor remains as important at the
beginning of this century as it was in the middle of the last one, given perennial calls for
justification of substantial public funds for biomedical research (especially during periods
of fiscal austerity) and current attempts to ground “science of science policy” on sounder
theoretical and empirical footings (Marburger 2005).
Our analyses share a main motivation with the original conference, to understand how
“nonmarket controls and incentives” at universities operate, and affect innovation. (The
subtitle of the Rate and Direction volume is, after all, “Economic and Social Factors.”)
Over the past five decades, a voluminous literature on the workings of academic science has
emerged in economics, sociology, and other disciplines (Stephan 2010; Dasgupta and David
1994; Merton 1973). Similarly, the rise of endogenous growth theory (Romer 1990; Aghion
and Howitt 1992) and its emphasis on spillovers has focused attention on how knowledge
flows across individuals, locations, and institutional settings. A particular focus has been
on the extent to which knowledge flows are geographically localized (see, inter alia, Jaffe et
al. [1993], Thompson and Fox-Kean [2005], and the response by Henderson et al. [2005]).
Location was not a central concern in the 1962 volume (with the exception of the chapter by
Wilbur Thompson). However, it has become an important policy issue since. The extent to

1

which knowledge flows are geographically mediated is relevant to local and national policymakers, in deciding whether the benefits of the research they fund will accrue to those that
fund it, or diffuse more generally.
A second theme in the volume is the difficulty in measuring economic activity. Several
chapters explored the utility of patent data as indicators of innovation, and also emphasized
that patent data alone may paint a distorted picture of the rate and direction of innovation
(Kuznets 1962). Measuring knowledge flows is perhaps even more difficult than measuring innovation, since these flows leave few footprints (Krugman 1991). Nonetheless, a long
literature in sociology and bibliometrics has attempted to measure knowledge flows among
academics, using publication-to-publication citations. More recently, economists have employed patent-to-patent citations to examine knowledge flows from academics to industry
(Jaffe and Trajtenberg 1999). A few papers (Branstetter 2005; Belenzon and Schankerman
2010) also use patent-publication citations.
Our study joins a small but distinguished literature relating patterns of citations to
individual mobility. Almeida and Kogut (1999) use a sample of highly cited semiconductor
patents, and information on citations to these patents (and a control sample of other patents
in the same class as citing patents) to examine the extent and determinants of citation
localization in this industry. They also identify the set of inventors on these patents who
had moved previously, constructing career paths using patent records. The authors use these
data to distinguish between regions with high intra- and inter-regional mobility, and find that
patents from regions with high intra-regional mobility are more likely to have citations that
are local, and patents from regions with high inter-regional mobility are less likely to have
local citations.1
Using a similar research design, but one more closely related to our own, Cockburn et
al. (2006) examine all US patents applied for in 1989 and 1990 by movers, operationalized
as individuals with the same names who had previously patented in the same patent class.
Their analysis shows that the citations to post-move patents emanating from the inventors’
1

In some analyses, Almeida and Kogut also explore individual (rather than regional) level mobility, finding
that inventors who move within a region tend to have citations that are geographically local.

2

prior location are disproportionately high, estimating that 50 percent more of the citations
to post move patents come from the prior location than would have if the inventor had
not previously lived there. Since this citation premium to post-move patents is unlikely to
reflect low communication costs or direct interaction (variables often invoked in explaining
why geography matters) they interpret these results as evidence of the enduring importance
of social relationships.
Our analysis also departs from these previous analyses in important ways: we identify
movers from scientists’ vitae (rather than patent data); we examine cited and citing knowledge longitudinally, exploiting detailed information on the timing of the move; and we look
at three distinct measures of knowledge flows. The use of multiple indicators allows us to
assess not only whether knowledge flows from academe are geographically mediated, but
also to probe some of the mechanisms that might underlie this relationship — in short, to
deepen our understanding of knowledge diffusion and its implications for the level and rate
of technological innovation within the economy.
We examine these issues using a novel identification strategy that exploits labor mobility
in a sample of 9,483 elite academic life scientists to examine impacts on the citation trajectories associated with individual articles (resp. patents) published (resp. granted) before the
scientist moved to a new institution. This longitudinal contrast purges our estimates of most
sources of omitted variable bias that can plague cross-sectional comparisons. However, the
timing of mobility itself could be endogenous. To address this concern, we pair each moving
scientist/article dyad (resp. scientist/patent dyad) with a carefully chosen control article or
patent associated with a scientist who does not transition to a new position. In addition
to providing a very close match based on time-invariant characteristics, these controls also
share very similar citation trends prior to the mobility event. By analyzing the data at the
matched-pair level of analysis, this simple difference-in-difference framework provides a flexible and non-parametric methodology to evaluate the effects of labor mobility on knowledge
flows. Indeed, conditional on the assumption that the matching algorithm we employ successfully pairs articles and patents of comparable quality, we are able to present the findings
in a straightforward, graphical form.
3

The results reveal a nuanced story. We find that article-to-article citations from a scientist’s origin location are barely affected by their departure. In contrast, article-to-patent
citations, and especially patent-to-patent citations, decline at the origin location following a superstar’s departure, suggesting that spillovers from academia to industry are not
completely disembodied. We also find that article-to-article citations from a scientist’s destination location markedly increase after they move. To the extent that academic scientists
do not internalize the effect of their location decisions on the circulation of ideas, our results
raise the intriguing possibility that barriers to labor mobility in academic science limit the
recombination of individual bits of knowledge, resulting in a suboptimal rate of scientific
exploration
The chapter proceeds as follows. The next section discusses the construction of our
multilevel panel dataset and presents relevant descriptive statistics. Section 2 discusses
our econometric approach and identification strategy. Section 3 reports the results. The
final section includes a discussion of policy implications, caveats, and directions for future
research.

1

Data and Sample Characteristics

The setting for our empirical work is the academic life sciences. This sector is an important
one to study for several reasons. First, there are large public subsidies for biomedical research
in the United States. With an annual budget of $29.5 billion in 2008, support for the NIH
dwarfs that of other national funding agencies in developed countries (Cech 2005). Deepening
our understanding of how the knowledge generated by these expenditures diffuses across
time, space, and institutional settings will allow us to better assess the return to these
public investments.
Second, technological change has been enormously important in the growth of the health
care economy, which accounts for roughly 15 percent of US GDP. Much biomedical innovation
is science-based (Henderson et al. 1999), and interactions between academic researchers and

4

their counterparts in industry appear to be an important determinant of research productivity in the pharmaceutical industry (Cockburn and Henderson 1998; Zucker et al. 1998).
Lastly, the existence of geographic research clusters in the life sciences has been extensively documented, raising the possibility that scientific knowledge diffuses only slowly and
with a lag from areas richly endowed with academic research institutions to others. To the
extent that scientist labor mobility is needed to support the circulation of ideas to the periphery, a dearth of mobility events might be one of the centripetal forces leading to the
persistence of such clusters.
In the next section, we provide a detailed description of the process through which the
matched scientist/article (resp. scientist/patent) dataset used in the econometric analysis
was assembled. We begin by describing the criteria used to select our sample of superstar life
scientists, along with basic demographic information. Next, we explore the prevalence and
characteristics of mobility events; the set of “products” (i.e., journal articles and patents)
generated by these elite scientists along with the citations they accrue. Finally, we discuss
the matching procedure implemented to identify control articles and patents associated with
scientists who do not change their location.

1.1

Superstar Sample

Our basic approach is to rely on professional transitions in a sample of “superstar” scientists
in the U.S. to estimate the extent to which citation flows to individual pieces of knowledge
are constrained by their producers’ geographic location.
The study’s focus on the scientific elite can be justified both on substantive and pragmatic
grounds. The distribution of publications, funding, and citations at the individual level is
extremely skewed (Lotka 1926; de Solla Price 1963) and only a tiny minority of scientists
contribute through their published research to the advancement of science (Cole and Cole
1972). Furthermore, analyzing the determinants of citations flowing to the ideas of elite
scientists is arguably more interesting than conducting the same exercise for a sample of

5

less distinguished scientists, since superstars presumably produce knowledge that is more
important to diffuse.
From a practical standpoint, it is also more feasible to trace back the careers of eminent
scientists than to perform a similar exercise for less eminent ones. We began by delineating
a set of 10,450 “elite” life scientists (roughly 5 percent of the entire relevant labor market)
who are so classified if they satisfy at least one of the following criteria for cumulative
scientific achievement: they are (1) highly funded scientists; (2) highly cited scientists; (3)
top patenters; or (4) members of the National Academy of Sciences.
These four criteria naturally select seasoned scientists, since they correspond to extraordinary achievement over an entire scientific career. We combine these measures with three
others that capture individuals who show great promise at the early and middle stages of
their scientific careers, whether or not these episodes of productivity endure for long periods
of time: scientists who are (5) NIH MERIT awardees; (6) Howard Hughes Medical Investigators; or (7) early career prize winners. Appendix I provides additional details regarding
these seven indices of “superstardom.”
We trace back these scientists’ careers from the time they obtained their first position
as independent investigators (typically after a postdoctoral fellowship) until 2006. We do
so through a combination of curriculum vitæ, NIH biosketches, Who’s Who profiles, accolades/obituaries in medical journals, National Academy of Sciences biographical memoirs,
and Google searches. For each one of these individuals, we record employment history,
degree held, date of degree, gender, and up to three departmental affiliations. We also crossreference the list with alternative measures of scientific eminence. For example, the elite
subsample contains every U.S.-based Nobel Prize winner in Medicine and Physiology since
1975, and a plurality of the Nobel Prize winners in Chemistry over the same time period.2
The 9,483 scientists who are the focus of this paper constitute a subset of this larger pool
of 10,450. We impose several additional criteria to derive the final list. First, we eliminate
from the sample scientists who transition from academic positions to jobs in industry; second,
2
Though we apply the term of “superstar” to the entire group, there is substantial heterogeneity in
intellectual stature within the elite sample (see Table 1).

6

we eliminate scientists who move to foreign institutions, since we have less ability to track
knowledge flows to these locations; third, we eliminate scientists who move twice in quick
succession, since these cases make it difficult to assign to these individuals unique origin and
destination locations. Finally, we eliminate scientists who moved to new institutions prior
to 1975, the beginning of our observation window.
Turning to patterns of labor mobility, we find that 2,894 scientists (30 percent) in the
sample transition between two academic institutions between 1975 and 2004. Our mobility
data is tabulated precisely from biographical records, rather than inferred from affiliation
information in papers or patents (cf., Almeida and Kogut 1989; Fallick et al. 2006; Marx
et al. 2009). In particular, we observe the exact timing of professional transitions even
in the cases in which a scientist has ceased to be active in research, for example because
s/he has moved into an administrative position. Because the overwhelming majority of
mobility events take place in the summer, we adopt the following convention: a scientist
is said to move from institution A to institution B in year t whenever the actual timing of
his or her move coincided with the summer of year t − 1. Incorporating a lag is necessary,
since life scientists need to move entire laboratories rather than simply books and computer
equipment. Anecdotal evidence suggests that mobility disrupts the pace of these scientists’
research activities, if only temporarily.
We focus on transitions between distant institutions, i.e., those separated by at least 50
miles. This limitation can be justified on both substantive and pragmatic grounds. First,
many of the social impediments to labor mobility (such as dual-career concerns or disruption
in the lives of these scientists’ children) are less salient for professional transitions that do not
compel an individual to change his place of residence. Second, our ability to assign precisely
the institutional affiliation of citing authors and inventors is limited. Therefore, we define an
elite scientist’s location by drawing a 25-mile radius circle centered around the middle of the
zip code in which his employer is located. Combined with our emphasis on moves between
institutions separated by at least 50 miles, this ensures that origin and destination locations
never overlap in the subsample of scientists that move.

7

Tables 1 and 2 provide descriptive statistics for the superstar sample. The gender composition of the sample is heavily skewed, no doubt because our metrics of superstardom
favor more seasoned scientists, who came of age before female scientists had made significant
inroads in the professoriate. The average degree year is 1971, and MDs account for a third
of the sample. On the output side, the stars received an average of roughly 17 million dollars
in NIH grants, published 172 papers that garnered close to 11,000 citations as of early 2008.
The number of patents per scientist is considerably smaller, and close to 40 percent of the
sample scientists have no patent at all. While the work of patenters and non-patenters alike
can appear as prior art cited in subsequent patents, the number of such citations is quite modest compared to the number of article-to-article citations.3 Achievement and demographic
characteristics appear broadly similar between “moving” (i.e., treated) and “staying” (i.e.,
control) stars.
Figure 1 displays the distribution of career age at the time of move in the subsample of
movers. The likelihood of a mobility event peaks at about 12 years (career age is measured
as the number of years that elapsed since the receipt of one’s highest degree). Figure 2
displays the distribution of distance moved, conditional on a move. That the shape of this
distribution is strongly bimodal is not surprising, given the existence of life sciences research
clusters on both coasts of the United States. Finally, Figure 3 examines whether our elite
scientists systematically drift from areas rich in the relevant type of intellectual capital to
areas less well endowed (or vice versa). We compute total NIH funding flowing to scientists’
origin and destination areas (Panel A) and repeat the same exercise with the number of
patents issued to inventors located in these same areas (Panel B). While not symmetric in a
strict statistical sense, these histograms make clear that most of the transitions in the sample
involve relatively little difference in the resource endowments of the relevant locations, while
a few are “big moves” in the sense of taking a scientist away from a less prestigious institution
into a more intellectually vibrant climate (or vice versa).
3

Nonetheless, it is striking that the mean number of citations to these scientists’ papers is larger than
those to their patents. This difference (even more pronounced when considering the medians) is consistent
with the results of Cohen et al. (2002), who find that the bulk of knowledge flows from academe to industry
occur via “open science” channels.

8

1.2

Matching Scientists with their Output

The second step in the construction of our dataset is to link scientists with the knowledge
they generate in tangible form, namely journal articles and patents. A useful metaphor for
this exercise is that of linking producers with their products. Past scholarship in the field
of the economics of science has generated numerous studies that rely on variation between
individual producers, either cross-sectionally (Zucker et al. 1998), or over time (Azoulay et
al. 2009, 2010a) while paying scant attention to the detailed characteristics of the products
involved. Conversely, a more recent and vibrant strand of the literature has exploited the
availability of citations to individual products over time, for the most part abstracting away
from the characteristics of their producers (Furman and Stern, forthcoming; Aghion et al.,
2010).4
A major innovation in our study is to link detailed producer and product characteristics to
create a multilevel panel dataset.5 Social scientists face difficult practical constraints when
attempting to attribute individual products to particular producers. When the products
involved are journal articles, there are thorny issues of name uniqueness: common names
make it difficult to distinguish between scientists, and scientists with relatively rare names
sometimes are inconsistent in their use of publication names. By adopting the labor-intensive
practice of designing customized search queries for each scientist in the sample, we ensured
the accuracy of their bibliomes. Further details on the linking process are provided in
Appendix II. Linking scientists with their inventions encoded in patents is considerably
easier, since the USPTO data records inventors’ full names (as opposed to first and middle
initials), and we can further make use of assignee information to distinguish between the
patents of inventors with frequent names. Further details on the linking process are provided
in Appendix III.
4

In what follows, the use of the word “product” will also be useful whenever we want to refer to the
output of our elite scientists in a generic way so that our statements apply equally well to journal articles
and to patented inventions.
5
Recent efforts along the same line include Agarwal and Singh (forthcoming) and Azoulay et al. (2010b).

9

We select from these publication and patent data to construct the final sample. For
journal articles, we eliminate from the consideration set letters, comments, and editorials.
Second, we eliminate all articles published 11 or more years prior to the date of the earliest
move in the sample (1976); similarly, we eliminate all articles published in 2004 (the latest
move year we observe) or in subsequent years. Third, we delete from the sample all articles
published by moving scientists after they moved. We proceed similarly for patents. To
account for potential truncation, we assume an average grant lag of three years, and we
ignore all patents applied for after the year 2001.

1.3

Three Measures of Knowledge Flows

As noted by many authors, beginning with the seminal work of Jaffe et al. (1993), knowledge
flows sometimes leave a paper trail, in the form of citations in either patents, or journal
articles. In this paper as in many others, we take advantage of this fundamental feature of
the academic incentive system where, by citing an antecedent piece of knowledge, producers
inscribe into their own products esteem for their peers. The innovation in the present
study is that we present evidence pertaining to three distinct measures of knowledge flows:
citations to articles authored by our elite scientists in the open science literature; citations
to articles authored by our elite scientists listed in the prior art section of patents issued by
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO); and citations to patents granted to our
elite scientists in patents subsequently granted to other inventors by the USPTO. Each of
these measures exhibits a particular set of strengths and weaknesses. We describe them in
turn.
Patent-to-Patent Citations. The bulk of the voluminous research on knowledge spillovers
has relied on patent citations in other patents to infer patterns of knowledge diffusion (cf.,
Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002). The difficulties involved in interpreting these citations as evidence of knowledge flows — mostly because of the high share of citations added by examiners,
rather than assignees — have been explored in detail (Alcácer and Gittelman 2006; Alcácer
et al. 2009) and need not be repeated here. Despite these acknowledged problems, survey

10

results confirm that roughly 50 percent of patent-to-patent citations represent some sort of
knowledge flow (Jaffe et al. 2002). Moreover, the prevalence of examiner-added citations is
much smaller in the life sciences than in other fields (Sampat 2010)
Article-to-Article Citations. Beyond the low “signal-to-noise” ratio associated with
patent citations, a more serious limitation for our purposes is that the bulk of the output of the academics we study is in publications, rather than patents. Fully 60 percent of
the scientists in our superstar sample never apply for a patent, and the great majority of
those who do patent have only one or two inventions to their credit. Therefore, we also
collect the number of citations in subsequent journal articles that flow to each of the papers
generated by our superstars, over time. A great advantage of these citations is that they
are numerous, making it possible to parse these data in ever finer slices to tease out the
underlying mechanisms that support the diffusion of scientific knowledge. Their main drawback is that 95 percent of citations flowing to the articles in our sample come from other
academics. These data are therefore less useful to track the slow percolation of ideas across
the boundary between academia and for-profit firms.
Patent-to-Article Citations. These limitations lead us to introduce a novel measure of
knowledge flows, namely, references to the open science literature found in the non-patent
prior art section of patents granted by the USPTO. This is appealing both because publications rather than patents are the main output of scientific researchers (Agrawal and
Henderson 2001), but also because the vast majority of patent-to-paper citations, over 90
percent, come from applicants rather than examiners, and are thus more plausible indicators
of real knowledge flows than patent-to-patent citations (Lemley and Sampat 2010). Another
advantage of these data comes from the greater diversity of citing institution types, relative
to the patterns exhibited by the more traditional data sources mentioned above. In previous
work, systematic analyses of these non-patent references has been limited, since they are
free-form text and difficult to link to other data. Our work relies on a novel match between
non-patent references and biomedical articles indexed in PubMed, described in detail in Appendix IV. While programming improvements and computing speed have enabled us to mine

11

this source of data, only 12 percent of the published output of the scientists in our sample
is ever cited in patents. For this reason, the bulk of our analyses will focus on citation flows
inferred from article-to-article citations, which are in some sense “internal” to the academy.
After collecting the citation data, we further process it in order to make it amenable to
statistical analysis. First, we eliminate all self-citations since these do not correspond to
knowledge flows in the traditional sense.6 Second, we parse the address fields in both the
citing patents and citing publications to associate each citing product with a set of zip codes
(for US addresses) or country names (for foreign addresses). Third, we parse the citing
assignee names and citing institution names and tag these fields with an indicator variable
denoting an industrial affiliation, making use of suffixes such as Inc., Corp., Ltd. (or their
international variants). In a final step, we aggregate the data from the cited product-citing
product pair level up to the cited product-year level of analysis. In other words, we can track
the flow of citations from birth to 2006 for each producer/product tuple in the sample.7
We can further separate those citations that accrue to a scientist’s origin location, to
his/her destination, or to all other locations. A complication arises because it is not clear
what destination means for the sample of superstars who do not transition to a new location.
Ideally, we would select as a counterfactual location the institution which provides the highest
degree of fit for these scientists outside of their actual home institution. In practice, it is
very difficult to model the determinants of fit, and we select a location at random from the
set of locations that moving scientists transition to, provided they are separated by at least
50 miles from the stayers’ actual locations.
6

In the case of patents, we infer self-citation from overlap between the names of inventors in the cited
and citing patents, rather than overlap in assignee names.
7
Since the latest year in which a scientist move is 2004, and the latest product vintage we include in the
sample is 2003, the post-move observation period will always extend for a minimum of three years.

12

1.4

From Control Producers to Control Products:
A Non-Parametric Matching Procedure

A perennial challenge in the literature on the localization of knowledge flows is whether
citing and cited producers’ locations can be credibly assumed to be exogenous. Jaffe et al.
(2005) decribe this thorny issue best in the following parable:
“Professor Robert Langer of MIT, for example, is one of the world’s leading experts in
tissue engineering, and is the author of over 120 patents in the area. A large fraction
of the citations to these patents are geographically localized. Are they local just because
the authors of the citing patents lived in the same city and hence were more likely
to learn about Langer’s work (i.e., knowledge spillovers)? Or because Boston is one
of the world’s centers for tissue engineering, and so people working in the area are
disproportionately likely to live in Boston (i.e., geographic collocation due to other
common factors)? Or perhaps it is the case that Boston is one of the world’s centers
for tissue engineering precisely because firms locate in the area in order to be able to
take advantage of spillovers from people like Robert Langer?”

Previous scholars faced severe data constraints in their reasoned attempts to divine whether
a particular citation would have taken place, if contrary to the fact, either the citing or the
cited producer had been located elsewhere (Jaffe et al. 1993; Jaffe and Trajtenberg 1999).
In this study, we can relax these constraints and design more credible counterfactuals, since
we can “unbundle” producers from their products, and we are able to observe two different
locations for a significant subset of the producers in the sample.
Yet, relying on labor mobility to generate variation in the geographic distance separating
the source and potential recipients of knowledge is not a panacea for two reasons. First, producer mobility might influence the quality of the underlying products, for instance because
the scientist finds him/herself located in an institution for which s/he is a better match.
We deal with the threat of unobserved heterogeneity of this type by narrowing our focus to
products generated by scientists prior to their move. It is difficult to imagine a mechanism
through which the quality of these products could have been affected by the characteristics
of the destination location.
Second, it is possible that job transitions for academic scientists are partly driven by
expectations of interactions with academic peers in their home institution, or with the local
13

industrial base. To generate a set of estimates that can be given a causal interpretation, we
create the matched sample of “staying” producers described above, which we link to their
products following the exact same techniques.
Coarse exact matching procedure. We design a procedure to cull from the universe of
products associated with “control” producers (i.e., scientists who do not change locations)
a subset that provide a very close match with the products of “treated” producers (i.e.,
those scientists who do move to another institution at some point during the observation
period). The goal of the construction of this matched sample is to create a counterfactual set
of products that mimic the citation trajectories associated with mover’s papers and patents
had they, contrary to the fact, not experienced a mobility event.
What makes a good control? Control and treated products should be well-matched on
time-invariant characteristics that have an important impact on the magnitude of citation
flows. For journal articles, such characteristics might include the journal in which the article
appeared, the exact time of publication, the number of scientists on the article’s authorship
list, etc. For patents, finding a control such that application year, issue year, number of
inventors, assignee type, and patent classes/subclasses coincide would be valuable. More
importantly, there should be no differential citation trends that affect treated products,
relative to control products, in the period that precedes the move. Finally, in an ideal
world, the match would operate at the producer/product pair level, such that focal producer
characteristics (age, gender, and eminence) would also be comparable between treated and
control observations.
In practice, identifying “close matches” is difficult. Because we are interested in the fate
of individual products, but the shock we observe (mobility) operates at the scientist-level of
analysis, semi-parametric matching techniques (such as the propensity score and its variants)
are of limited use in our context. We propose instead a non-parametric matching approach,
a so-called “Coarse Exact Matching” (CEM) procedure (Blackwell et al. 2009).
The selection of controls proceeds in a series of sequential steps. The first task is to select
a relatively small set of covariates on which we would like to guarantee balance between the

14

treatment and control group. The second step is to create a large number of strata to
cover the entire support of the joint distribution of the covariates selected in the previous
step. Next, each observation is allocated to a unique strata; any strata that either has no
product associated with a mover, or that has less than five potential control products, is
then dropped from the data. In a fourth and final step, we select in each strata a unique
control product such that the sum of squared differences in citation flows between the treated
and control product from the year of publication/issue up to the year preceding the move
year is minimized. We break ties at random when there are several candidate products that
minimize this distance metric.
Internal vs. external validity. The procedure is coarse because we do not attempt to
precisely match on covariate values; rather, we coarsen the support of the joint distribution of
the covariates into a finite number of strata, and we match a treated observation if and only
if a control observation can be recruited from this strata. An important advantage of CEM
is that the analyst can guarantee the degree of covariate balance ex ante, but this comes at
a cost: the more fine-grained the partition of the support for the joint distribution (i.e., the
higher the number of strata), the larger the number of unmatched treated observations. In
general, the analyst must trade off the quality of the matches with external validity: the
longer the list of matching covariates, the more difficult it is to identify an “identical twin”
for each article or patent in the treatment group.
We distill the essence of the matching procedure in Figures 4A (for articles) and 4B (for
patents). Implementation details can be found in Appendix V. In the case of article-toarticle citations, we start from a universe of 40,023 papers corresponding to the published
output of movers in the 10 years that precede their change in location. We match 10,249
out of these 40,023 tuples (25.61 percent). This relatively low match rate is not surprising.
Non-parametric matching procedures such as CEM are prone to a version of the “curse of
dimensionality” whereby the proportion of matched units decreases rapidly with the number
of strata. For instance, requiring a match on an additional indicator variable (e.g., matching
on focal scientist gender in addition to the covariates mentioned above) would result in a

15

match rate of about 10 percent. Conversely, failing to impose that control and treated articles
are drawn from the same scientific journal would increase the match rate to 70 percent, but
doing so might threaten the internal validity of our empirical exercise. In the case of articleto-patent citations, we match 2,435 articles out of a potential 6,492 (37.51 percent). In
the case of patent-to-patent citations, the match rate is higher still: 41.36 percent (1,417
matched patents out of a potential 3,426 matches).
Descriptive statistics. We present univariate statistics at baseline — i.e., in the year
preceding the (possibly counterfactual) move year — for the matched product dataset in
Tables 4A, 4B, and 4C. Examining the raw data across these three panel dataset, a number
of stylized facts emerge.
First, in all three cases, the match is “product-centric” rather than “producer-centric.”
That is, product-level attributes exhibit a high level of covariate balance between treated
and control products, whether these characteristics are time-invariant (such as number of
authors or focal scientist position on the authorship roster) or time-varying (such as the stock
of overall citations, whose distributions we display graphically in Figure 5). In contrast,
producer characteristics do not match as well, as can be seen by examining the distribution
of covariates such as degree year or gender.
Second, most citations do not accrue in the areas corresponding to these scientists’ location. As an example, only 6.82 percent of citations up to the baseline year have accrued at
the origin location; the figure is 1.77 percent in the destination location.
Third, whereas citations at the origin location are well matched at baseline, this is not
the case for citations at destination. In all cases, movers have accrued many more citations
in the area they will soon transition to, relative to the citations that have accrued to the
products of stayers in a location picked at random. This is consistent with the view that
mobility events are jointly determined with expected spillovers of knowledge, for instance
because scientists who know your work are more likely to win the competition to lure you
away. These baseline differences further justify our emphasis on identifying a closely matched
set of control products.

16

Finally, the salience of industrial citers varies greatly across our measures of knowledge
flows, accounting for only 3.61 percent of article-to-article cites, but 80.72 percent of articleto-patent cites, and 83.04 percent of patent-to-patent citations.

2

Econometric Considerations

A natural starting point for a difference-in-difference (DD) analysis of the causal effect of
labor mobility on knowledge flows is to conduct the statistical analysis using all productyear observations (treated and control) as the estimation sample. Since the mobility effect
is mechanically correlated with the passage of time, as well as with an article’s age, it
is necessary to include life cycle and period effects, as is the norm in studies of scientific
productivity (Levin and Stephan 1991).
In this framework, the control group that pins down the counterfactual vintage and calendar time effects for the products that were generated by scientists currently transitioning
to new positions contains three categories of products: (1) those generated by movers who
transitioned in earlier periods; (2) those generated by scientists who will move in the future;
and (3) those generated by stayers. This approach is problematic insofar as products that
appeared after a scientist has moved are not appropriate controls if the mobility event negatively affects the trend in their citations. If this is the case, fixed effects may underestimate
the true effect of mobility.
To produce an analysis in which the control group consists solely of products associated
with stayers, we instead perform the statistical analysis at the product-pair level. Specifically,
the outcome variable is the difference between the citations received in a given year by a
treated product and its associated control identified in the matching procedure described
0

above. Let i denote an article associated with a mover and let i index the corresponding
control product. Then our estimating equation relates ∆CIT ESii0 t = CIT ESit − CIT ESi0 t
with the timing of mobility in the following way:
E [∆CIT ESii0 t |Xijt ] = β0 + β1 AF T ER M OV Ejt + f (AGEjt ) + γii0

17

(1)

where AF T ER M OV E denotes an indicator variable that switches to one in the year focal
scientist j moves, f (AGE) corresponds to a flexible function of the scientist’s age, and the
γii0 correspond to product-pair fixed effects, consistent with our approach to analyze changes
in the pair’s citation rate following the move of investigator j.8 We also run slight variations
of this specification in which the dependent variable has been parsed so that we can break
down citation flows by location or by citer type (i.e., industrial vs. academic citers).
There is another benefit to conducting the analysis at the product-pair level: since treated
and control products always originate in the same year, experimental time and calendar time
coincide, making it simple to display the results of the analysis graphically. The graphical
approach is advantageous because it makes the essence of the empirical exercise transparent.
The regression analysis, however, will prove useful when exploring interactions between the
treatment effect and various star or product characteristics.

3

Results

3.1

Effect of Mobility on Citation Rates to Articles Published
After the Move

As explained above, the bulk of our analysis focuses on citation flows to articles (resp. to
patents) published (resp. issued) before the move so that we can separately identify the effect
of mobility from that of correlated influences that might have an impact on the quality of
the research itself. For example, mobility events such as those analyzed in this paper might
be driven by the availability of resources in the destination location, including laboratory
equipment, trainees, or potential collaborators. From a descriptive standpoint, it is still
interesting to examine the geographic spread of citations that accrue to products that postdate the mobility event, and these results are reported in Figure 6. For the sake of brevity,
we examine this for article-to-article citation flows only.9
8

We do not need to include product vintage or year effects in the specification, since both products in
the pair appeared in the same year, by construction.
9
Our discussant Adam Jaffe uses the metaphor of carefully examining the dirty bath water before throwing
it out to focus on the (hopefully clean) baby.

18

We pair articles written by superstar movers with articles written by superstar stayers
who are observationally quite similar at the time of the mobility event, so that the match is
both “article-centric” and “scientist-centric.” The scientist-level covariates used to create the
match are (i) year of highest degree (coarsened in three-year intervals); (ii) gender; (iii) NIH
funding status (funded vs. not funded at the time of the move); and (iv) the total number of
citations having accrued by 2006 to all pre-move publications. This ensures that the scientists
being compared are not only demographically similar, but also of comparable renown at the
time of the (possibly counterfactual) move. In addition, we match on article characteristics,
including the journal, the length of the authorship roster, the focal author’s position, and
the publication year. Descriptive statistics for the resulting sample of 2 × 26, 254 = 52, 508
articles are displayed in Table 3.
In the three panels of Figure 6, we display the difference in average citation trends for
the article pairs in the sample (the solid red line), along with a 95th confidence interval (the
dashed blue lines). Panel A focuses on differential citation patterns at the origin location.
Relative to articles by stayers, it appears that post-move research is cited less in the area
the moving scientist departed from; this citation discount is small (less than one citation per
year on average), but it is enduring. Panel B repeats the same analysis for the destination
location; we find the opposite pattern, in that post-move articles benefit from a lasting
citation premium equal to less than one citation per year in the new location, relative to
the number of citations accruing to the matched articles of stayers in a random location.
Finally, Panel C examines citation outcomes in all other locations. Though the articles of
movers appear to benefit from more “buzz” than those of stayers, this effect is both very
small and imprecisely estimated.
From these results, it would appear that scientist mobility shifts slightly the allocation
of citations across scientific areas without much of an impact on the diffusion process in
the aggregate. Of course, because our controls for scientist-level and article-level quality
are imperfect, we should resist the temptation to overinterpret these patterns. For instance,
a citation discount at origin could mean that the superstar’s former colleagues are quick
to forget his/her research after the mobility event. But s/he may have moved to a new
19

location precisely because his/her research was delving into areas that appealed less to
his/her old peers. In this case, the causality would flow from (expected) impact to job
mobility, rather than in the direction we hypothesize. Similarly, at destination, the citation
premium might reflect the interest of colleagues who extended an offer to the mover precisely
in the expectation of deeper intellectual connections.
For these reasons, the rest of the paper will focus on changes in citation rates following
mobility events (and their allocation across geographic areas) for articles published before
the move. This research design will enables us to better isolate the effect of mobility per se
from that of correlated and competing influences.

3.2

Effect of Mobility on Citation Rates to Articles and Patents
Published Before the Move

Our primary results are presented in Figures 7 through 12. Table 5 presents estimates
from simple OLS regressions with article-pair fixed effects, corresponding to the estimating
equation above. Robust standard errors, clustered at the scientist level appear below the
coefficient estimates in brackets.
Article-to-Article citation flows. Panel A of Figure 7 display the citation dynamics
corresponding to article-to-article flows, without disaggregating these flows by citer location
or institutional type. It is clear from the picture that our matching procedure succeeded in
identifying good control articles, since there is no evidence of deviation from zero in the years
preceding the move. Moreover, there is a clear uptick in the rate of citations after the move,
though it is modest in magnitude and relatively short-lived, fading out completely seven
years later. Panel B examines whether the same patterns can be observed when restricting
the outcome variable to article citations from industrial firms. The scale of the vertical axis
is different, since these industrial cites account for a relatively tiny fraction of the total. Due
to the paucity of the industrial citations, the results are very imprecise, though there is a
very modest upward deviation from trend one year after the move.

20

Figure 8 display the results for citation flows disaggregated by citer location. Perhaps
surprisingly, citations at the origin location do not appear to decline upon a star’s departure
(Panel A). This lack of forgetting on the part of academics points to a capacity to absorb
scientific knowledge which is disembodied from the producer of a particular idea. However,
this view needs to be tempered in light of the results displayed in Panel B, which focuses on
citations accruing at the destination location. Relative to the flows in a random — but distant
— location for the stayer, the level of flows is higher for movers at destination even before the
move, with an upward trend starting two years before the move is effective. This provides
strong evidence that academic superstars are, at least in part, “recruited for ideas” (Agarwal
and Singh, forthcoming). Furthermore, this upward trend becomes more pronounced after
the move, peaking two years later, but fading out only slowly over time. In other words,
there is clear evidence that itinerant scientists circulate their old ideas in their new locations.
The magnitude of this effect is not trivial: by the end of the observation period, movers have
accrued more than twice as many citations to their old ideas at destination than stayers have
in their counterfactual, random location.
Panel C examines citation dynamics in all locations, save for the origin and destination.
One can discern a slight increase in citations after the move, though it is neither large nor
precisely estimated. Yet, this should not be surprising if we think that mobility events give
scientists looking for a new position an opportunity to give their ideas — old and new — a
boost in exposure.
The asymmetry between the citation dynamics at location and origin strikes us as noteworthy, since it provides clear evidence that labor mobility increases the circulation of scientific ideas. If one espouses the view that knowledge flows are economically and socially
valuable, then our results raise the intriguing possibility that scientists move too little, relative to what would lead to an optimal rate of scientific exploration. We return to this point
in the discussion.
Table 6A and 6B explore whether the magnitude of the treatment effect is affected by a
number of article and scientist characteristics, at the origin and destination locations respec-

21

tively.10 We do not discuss these in detail, since they tend to be quite noisy. Furthermore,
with an unlimited number of potential contingencies, pure luck would dictate that at least
some interaction effects would be statistically significant. In Table 6A, we find almost all
interaction effects to be imprecisely estimated zeros.
New results, some reassuring, other more puzzling, emerge when focusing on citation
flows at destination (Table 6B). We examine whether the mobility premium at destination
varies with authorship credit for the focal scientists. For this purpose, we exploit a robust
social norm in the natural and physical sciences, whereby last authorship is systematically
assigned to the principal investigator of a laboratory, first authorship is generally assigned
to the junior author who was responsible for the actual conduct of the investigation (or,
more rarely, to the PI of a collaborating lab), and the remaining credit is apportioned to
authors in the middle of the authorship list, generally as a decreasing function of the distance
from the extremities (Riesenberg and Lundberg 1990). We split the cited-article sample in
two by consolidating the first and last authorship categories, and contrasting it with those
article-pairs in which the focal scientists appear in the middle of the authorship list. We find
clear evidence of a more pronounced mobility effect for article pairs in which the departing
scientist is either first or last author. The evidence for middle-position authors is much
smaller in magnitude. This is reassuring because the level of contribution of middle authors
is often sufficiently small that one would not expect these old, marginal articles (from the
point of view of the mover’s overall corpus of work) to gain significant exposure at the new
destination.
Second, we fail to detect a mobility premium of larger magnitude for the citations to the
papers of superstars who shine particularly bright, regardless of the ways in which we seek
to distinguish the elite from others who might be less accomplished (Models 7a through 9b
of Table 6B).
The anomalous result that bears mention pertains to the sample split corresponding to
articles of recent versus older vintage. We separate the analysis for papers that appeared
10

We do not repeat these analyses for patent-to-patent and patent-to-article citations, since they are sparse
as is, and analyses that separate them into bins would be very noisy.

22

prior and after 1995, a date which we pick as a marker for the internet becoming ubiquitous
in academia. We find that the mobility premium is four times higher for papers written
in the internet era than for papers published in the pre-internet times. These results are
inconsistent with the widespread belief that the diffusion of the Internet led to the “death
of distance,” though they should be interpreted cautiously since they may also reflect other
changes over time.
Patent-to-Article citation flows. Figure 9 and 10 present the evidence on the second
measure of knowledge flows, citations made to articles published in the open science literature
in patents granted by the USPTO. In Panel A or Figure 9, we cannot detect any differential
citation trend for the overall citations flowing to treated, rather than control articles. In
fact, there is only the faintest evidence of a decline after the move. Panel B, which focuses
on citations from industrial assignees alone, similarly shows no clear result.
The evidence on localization, presented in Figure 10, is also relatively weak. This time,
we observe a meaningful decline of citations at the origin location following the departure
of a superstar, but this temporary dip is not pinned down precisely. Table 5, column (2a)
presents the same analysis in regression form, but uses a longer post-move observation period,
and constrains the mobility effect to be constant over time. In this case, we can detect a
statistically significant decline equal to a quarter of a citation per year on average. Similarly,
we observe a small increase in citations for treated articles at destination, relative to controls,
but we cannot reject the hypothesis of a mobility premium equal to zero.
Patent-to-Patent citation flows. We employ the more traditional measure of knowledge
flows — patent-to-patent citations — in the next batch of analyses, presented in Figures 11
and 12. Once again, pre-move citation dynamics appear very similar up until the year
of the move, which is expected given the extensive efforts we deployed in our search for
appropriate control patents. There is no evidence that mobility increases citation flows
overall (Figure 11).

23

The localization effects presented in Figure 12 are much more dramatic. First, there is
a decline in the rate of citations in the location of origin, which becomes more pronounced
over time and shows no sign of abating even 10 years after the scientist has departed (Panel
A). This may reflect the importance of physical proximity to university laboratories for
helping industrial firms develop the inventions of academic entrepreneurs (Zucker et al.
1994; Audretsch and Stephan 1996; Zucker and Darby 2008). However, this interpretation is
undermined by evidence that the onset of this decline precedes the move by almost 4 years
(though this pre-existing downward trend is small in magnitude and imprecisely estimated).
The upward trend at destination (Panel B) is not quite as dramatic, but clear. Here
again, there is some weak evidence of anticipation, with citations being slightly higher for
movers in the baseline year at destination, relative to stayers. It is therefore difficult to
distinguish between the view that physical proximity to academic entrepreneurs begets absorptive capacity, from the alternative perspective that a scientist’s assessment that the local
industrial base has grown stale (or at least less receptive to his/her ideas) triggers mobility.

4

Discussion

In this paper, we examine the impact of geography on knowledge transfer by exploiting professional transitions within the academic life sciences coupled with publication and patent
citation data over time. The results reveal a rather nuanced story. Consistent with models of
localized knowledge diffusion, we find strong evidence that publication-to-publication citations (to papers published before the move) rise at destination locations after the move takes
place. We also find, however, persuasive evidence of a legacy effect at the origin institution
— citation rates do not decline after the scientist departs. While the findings on the patent
side are less conclusive than those on publications alone, they reveal a slightly different role
for geography. Here again citations at the destination location rise (or at least remain the
same) after the move, while citations at the origin location appear to fall, particularly for
patent-to-patent citations.

24

The normative implications of our findings are not straightforward, especially since there
may be first-order effects of job mobility we do not observed. Nonetheless, we offer some
broader speculations here. Let’s begin with a deeper look at the publication-to-publication
citation results. A surge in citations at the new location with little drop off at the old
location underscores the importance of scientist interactions, but also makes clear that these
interactions are not easily forgotten. Since the sharing and re-combining of existing ideas is
viewed as an essential component in the innovation process (Weitzman, 1998; Burt, 2004;
Simonton, 2004), might our evidence suggest that scientists are moving too little?
The answer to this will, of course, depend upon the degree to which scientists internalize
the impacts of their location decisions, but suboptimal mobility seems likely. Nearly all
of the costs of moving are borne privately, yet much of the credit associated with new
scientific discoveries is apportioned out narrowly to the lead scientists on that project, leaving
researchers with incentives that appear too weak from a societal perspective. While the
best way to address this limited mobility is unclear, it has potentially large and important
implications for the rate, and especially the direction of technological innovation within the
economy, and eventually for economic growth.
The analysis of patent citations — most of which are generated by biomedical firms —
suggests a distinct knowledge production process within industry. The output of local talent
is most influential when it remains local. That ideas are quickly forgotten after a scientist
departs suggests an important role for face-to-face interactions. One possible explanation for
this finding is that the limited absorptive capacity within most firms necessitates a substantive dialogue with academic scientists in order to translate scientific output into something
more useful for organizations concerned with its translation into marketable products. Such
dialogues are clearly less costly with local talent, especially if the fruitful search for ideas
is not one that is narrowly circumscribed around a well-defined issue. The opportunities
that are lost when a scientist departs, however, are not entirely clear. Even if firms are
abandoning science that the academy believes is still useful, what is the proper benchmark
here? The academy and industry may simply value different types of ideas. Even still, some
ideas that firms should value are likely to fall off the radar screen when scientists depart,
25

offering at least some temperance to the idea that the innovative costs of scientist mobility
are negligible.
These conjectures assume the construct validity of our measures: that publicationpublication citations actually measure knowledge flows among academics, and that patentpatent and patent-publication citations actually measure academic industry spillovers. In
the spirit of recognizing measurement difficulties (see e.g., Kuznets and Schmookler in the
1962 volume) we acknowledge these are assumptions. For example, numerous scholars of
bibliometrics have noted the ceremonial function of publication citations (Merton 1968; MacRoberts and MacRoberts 1989). While we have interpreted the finding that there is little
forgetting of superstars research after a move as evidence that face-to-face interaction may
not be so necessary for knowledge flows, it could instead reflect that the scientists continue to
be cited for ceremonial reasons. A related explanation: if citations are less about intellectual
influence than just knowing “about” research (MacRoberts and MacRoberts 1989), we may
not expect any decay after professional transitions.
Similar concerns could be raised about citations in patents. As Jaffe and Trajtenberg
and others have emphasized, the assumption that these citations reflect real knowledge
flows, or spillovers, is only an assumption. Survey work (Jaffe et al. 2002) suggests they
are noisy measures. Recent analyses (Alcácer et al. 2009; Sampat 2010; Hegde and Sampat
2009) on the importance of patent examiners in generating these citations may undermine
the notion that they are true knowledge flows. One of the reasons for using patent-topublication citations is that these are less affected by examiner influence (Lemley and Sampat
2010) and potentially better measures of knowledge flows (Roach and Cohen 2010), though
here too there are questions of whether applicants have incentives to disclose all relevant
knowledge, and only relevant knowledge (Cotropia et al. 2010). All this granted, it is difficult
to construct an explanation of our “forgetting” result for patent-to-patent and patent-topublication citations that is driven only by incentives to cite (or citation practices).

26

References
Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont, Fiona Murray, Julian Kolev, and Scott Stern. 2009. “Of Mice and
Academics: Examining the Effect of Openness on Innovation.” NBER Working Paper #14819.
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1992. “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction.”
Econometrica 60(2): 323-351.
Agrawal, Ajay, and Rebecca Henderson. 2002. “Putting Patents in Context: Exploring Knowledge
Transfer from MIT.” Management Science 48(1): 44-60.
Agrawal, Ajay, Iain Cockburn, and John McHale. 2006. “Gone But Not Forgotten: Labor Flows,
Knowledge Spillovers and Enduring Social Capital.” Journal of Economic Geography 6(5): 571-591.
Agrawal, Ajay, and Jasjit Singh. Forthcoming. “Recruiting for Ideas: How Firms Exploit the Prior
Inventions of New Hires.” Management Science.
Alcácer, Juan, and Michelle Gittelman. 2006. “How Do I Know What You Know? Patent Examiners and
the Generation of Patent Citations.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88(4): 774-779.
Alcácer, Juan, Michelle Gittelman, and Bhaven Sampat. 2009. “Applicant and Examiner Citations in U.S.
Patents: An Overview and Analysis.” Research Policy 38(2): 415-427.
Almeida, Paul, and Bruce Kogut. 1999. “Localization of Knowledge and the Mobility of Engineers in
Regional Networks.” Management Science 45(7): 905-917.
Audretsch, David B., and Paula E. Stephan. 1996. “Company-Scientist Locational Links: The Case of
Biotechnology.” American Economic Review 86(3): 641-652.
Azoulay, Pierre, Waverly Ding, and Toby Stuart. 2009. “The Effect of Academic Patenting on the Rate,
Quality, and Direction of (Public) Research Output.” Journal of Industrial Economics 57(4): 637-676.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang. 2010a. “Superstar Extinction.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 125(2): 549-589.
Azoulay, Pierre, Andrew Stellman, and Joshua Graff Zivin. 2006. “PublicationHarvester: An Open-source
Software Tool for Science Policy Research.” Research Policy 35(7): 970-974.
Azoulay, Pierre, Toby Stuart, and Yanbo Wang. 2010b. “Matthew: Effect or Fable?” Working Paper,
MIT.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Gustavo Manso. 2009. “Incentives and Creativity: Evidence from
the Academic Life Sciences.” NBER Working Paper #15466.
Belenzon, Sharon, and Mark Schankerman. 2010. “Spreading the Word: Geography, Policy and University
Knowledge Diffusion.” CEPR Discussion Paper #8002.
Blackwell, Matthew, Stefano Iacus, Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro. 2009. “cem: Coarsened Exact
Mzatching in Stata.” The Stata Journal 9(4): 524-546.
Branstetter, Lee. 2005. “Exploring the Link Between Academic Science and Industrial Innovation.”
Annales d'Economie et de Statistique 79-80(Suppl): 119-142.
Burt, Ronald S. 2004. “Structural Holes and Good Ideas.” American Journal of Sociology 110(2): 349–
399.
Callaert, Julie, Bart Van Looy, Arnold Verbeek, Koenraad Debackere, and Bart Thijs. 2006. “Traces of
Prior Art: An Analysis of Non-Patent References Found in Patent Documents.” Scientometrics 69(1):
3-20.
Cech, Thomas R. 2005. “Fostering Innovation and Discovery in Biomedical Research.” Journal of the
American Medical Association 294(11): 1390-1393.
Cockburn, Iain M., and Rebecca M. Henderson. 1998. “Absorptive Capacity, Coauthoring Behavior, and
the Organization of Research in Drug Discovery.” Journal of Industrial Economics 46(2): 157-182.

27

Cohen , Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh. 2002. “Links and Impacts: The Influence of
Public Research on Industrial R&D.” Management Science 48(1): 1-23.
Cole, Jonathan R., and Stephen Cole, “The Ortega Hypothesis,” Science, 178 (1972), 368-375.
Cotropia, Christopher A., Mark Lemley, and Bhaven Sampat. 2010. “Do Applicant Citations Matter?
Implications for the Presumption of Validity.” Working Paper, Columbia University.
Dasgupta, Partha, and David. Paul. 1994. “Towards a New Economics of Science.” Research Policy 23(5):
487-521.
de Solla Price, Derek J., Little Science, Big Science (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1963).
Fallick, Bruce, Charles A. Fleischmann, and James B. Rebitzer. 2006. “Job Hopping in Silicon Valley:
Some Evidence Concerning the Micro-foundations of a High Technology Cluster.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 88(3): 472-481.
Furman, Jeffrey, and Scott Stern. Forthcoming. “Climbing Atop the Shoulders of Giants: The Impact of
Institutions on Cumulative Knowledge Production.” American Economic Review.
Hegde, Deepak, and Bhaven Sampat. 2009. “Applicant Citations, Examiner Citations, and the Private
Value of Patents.” Economics Letters 5(3): 287-9.
Henderson, Rebecca, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2005. “Geographic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations: A Reassessment: Comment.” American Economic
Review 95(1): 461-464.
Henderson, Rebecca, Luigi Orsenigo, and Gary P. Pisano. 1999. “The Pharmaceutical Industry and the
Revolution in Molecular Biology: Interactions Among Scientific, Institutional, and Organizational
Change.” In David C. Mowery, and Richard R. Nelson (Eds.), Sources of Industrial Leadership, pp.
267-311. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg. 1999. “International Knowledge Flows: Evidence from Patent
Citations.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology 8(1): 105-136.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Michael S. Fogarty. 2002. “The Meaning of Patent Citations:
Report on the NBER/Case-Western Reserve Survey of Patentees.” In Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel
Trajtenberg (Eds.), Patents, Citations, and Innovations, pp. 379-401. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. “Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3):
577-598.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2005. Patents, Citations, and Innovations: MIT Press.
Lotka, Alfred J., “The Frequency Distribution of Scientific Productivity,” Journal of the Washington
Academy of Sciences, 16 (1926), 317-323.
Krugman, Paul. 1991. “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography.” Journal of Political Economy
99(3): 483-499.
Kuznets, Simon. 1962. “Inventive Activity: Problems of Definition and Measurement.” In Richard R.
Nelson (Ed.), The Rate and Direction of Economic Activity: Economic and Social Factors, pp. 19-52.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lemley, Mark, and Bhaven Sampat. 2010. “Examiner Experience and Patent Office Outcomes.” Working
Paper, Columbia University.
MacRoberts, M.H., and Barbara MacRoberts. 1996. “Problems of Citation Analysis.” Scientometrics
36(3): 435-444.
Marburger, John H. 2005. “Wanted: Better Benchmarks.” Science 308(5725): 1087.
Marx, Matthew, Debbie Strumsky, and Lee Fleming. 2009. “Mobility, Skills, and the Michigan Noncompete Experiment.” Management Science 55(6): 875-899.
Merton, Robert K. 1968. “The Matthew Effect in Science.” Science 159(3810): 56-63.

28

Merton, Robert K. 1973. The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigation. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Riesenberg, Don, and George D. Lundberg. 1990. “The Order of Authorship: Who's on First?” JAMA
264(14): 1857.
Roach, Michael, and Wesley M. Cohen. 2010. “Patent Citations as Measures of Knowledge Flows from
Public Research.” Working Paper, University of North Carolina.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political Economy 98(5): S71S102.
Sampat, Bhaven. 2010. “When Do Applicants Search for Prior Art?” Journal of Law and Economics
53(2): 399-416.
Simonton, Dean Keith. 2004. Creativity in Science: Chance, Logic, Genius, and Zeitgeist. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Stephan, Paula E. 2010. “The Economics of Science.” In Bronwyn H. Hall, and Nathan Rosenberg (Eds.),
Handbook of The Economics of Innovation, pp. 217-273. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Thompson, Peter, and Melanie Fox-Kean. 2005. “Patent Citations and the Geography of Knowledge
Spillovers: A Reassessment.” American Economic Review 95(1): 450-460.
Thursby, Jerry, Anne W. Fuller, and Marie Thursby. 2009. “US Faculty Patenting: Inside and Outside
the University.” Research Policy 38(1): 14-25.
Trajtenberg, Manuel, Gil Shiff, and Ran Melamed. 2006. “The ‘Names Game’: Harnessing Inventors’
Patent Data for Economic Research.” NBER Working Paper #12497.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1998. “Recombinant Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2): 331-360.
Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby. 2008. “Defacto and Deeded Intellectual Property Rights.”
NBER Working Paper #14544.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Jeff Armstrong. 1999. “Intellectual Capital and the Firm: The
Technology of Geographically Localized Knowledge Spillovers.” NBER Working Paper #4946.
Zucker, Lynne G., Michael R. Darby, and Marilynn B. Brewer. 1998. “Intellectual Human Capital and the
Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises.” American Economic Review 88(1): 290-306.

29

Table 1: Superstar Scientists’ Cumulative Output by 2006 or Career End
Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

Min.

Max.

$17,491,538
171
3.29
10,639
117
91

$11,261,535
142
0
7,332
67
19

$25,598,484
125
9.79
11,248
166
240

$0
2
0
15
0
0

$588,753,152
1,167
258
139,872
1,728
5,596

$16,256,723
174
3.15
10,878
120
67

$12,373,582
144
0
7,455
69
15

$16,243,082
121
8.30
10,533
159
164

$0
1
0
2
0
0

$195,611,552
1,631
117
83,301
1,821
2,079

Stayers (N=6,589)
NIH Funding
Publications
Patents
Paper Cites [to Papers]
Patent Cites [to Papers]
Patent Cites [to Patents]

Movers (N=2,894)
NIH Funding
Publications
Patents
Paper Cites [to Papers]
Patent Cites [to Papers]
Patent Cites [to Patents]

Notes: Sample consists of 9,483 elite academic life scientists. Movement is defined by a change in academic institution with at least 50
miles separating origin and destination.

Table 2: Demographic Characteristics
Stayers
Movers
Total

(N=6,589)
(N=2,894)
(N=9,483)

Degree Year

Female

MD

PhD

MD/PhD

1970.3
1972.7
1971.0

0.14
0.14
0.14

0.33
0.30
0.32

0.58
0.61
0.59

0.10
0.10
0.10

30

Table 3:

Article-to-Article Citation Flows: Descriptive Statistics (n=2×26,254)
Articles Published After the Move
Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

4.915
0.661
273.818
1992.271
1986.912
1970.270
0.023
5,283
$3,828,267

4
1
133
1992
1987
1970
0
3,623
$2,412,251

4.077
0.473
542.514
6.208
6.212
8.198
0.149
5,215
$5,297,164

1
0
1
1977
1976
1931
0
0
$0

255
1
22,336
2003
2002
1996
1
60,496
$101,678,352

4.887
0.661
279.845
1992.271
1986.912
1970.422
0.023
5,248
$3,563,252

4
1
134
1992
1987
1970
0
3,584
$2,306,315

3.843
0.473
576.462
6.208
6.212
7.990
0.149
5,157
$4,381,859

1
0
0
1977
1976
1940
0
0
$0

255
1
22,298
2003
2002
1996
1
51,174
$118,257,904

Journal Articles by Stayers
Number of Authors
Focal Author is Last
Article Stock of Citations up to 2006
Article Publication Year
Move Year
Focal Author Graduation Year
Focal Author Gender
Scientist Citations at Baseline
Scientist NIH Funding at Baseline

Journal Articles by Movers
Number of Authors
Focal Author is Last
Article Stock of Citations up to 2006
Article Publication Year
Move Year
Focal Author Graduation Year
Focal Author Gender
Scientist Citations at Baseline
Scientist NIH Funding at Baseline

Note: The match is both “scientist-centric” and “article-centric.” The control article is always chosen from the same journal in the same publication year. The
control article is coarsely matched on the number of authors (exact match for one, two, and three authors; four or five authors; between six and nine authors;
and more than nine authors). We also match on focal scientist’s position in the authorship roster (first author; last author; middle author). In addition, the
following individual covariates for the noving and staying stars match: gender, year of highest degree (in three year bins), NIH funding status as of the
moving year (funded vs. not); and total number of citations having accrued by 2006 to all pre-move publications (below the 10th percentile; between the 10th
and 25th percentile; between the 25th percentile and the median; between the median and the 75th percentile, between the 75th and 95th percentile, between the
95th and 99th percentile; and above the 99th percentile).

31

Table 4A: Article-to-Article Citation Flows: Descriptive Statistics (n=2×10,249)
Articles Published Before the Move
Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Citations
Citations from Industry
Citations at Origin
Citations at Destination

4.463
0.653
2.483
0.098
1967.491
27.666
1.023
1.952
0.355

4
1
2
0
1968
3
0
0
0

2.980
0.476
2.055
0.297
10.893
66.750
3.731
6.550
2.210

1
0
1
0
1931
0
0
0
0

129
1
10
1
2001
2399
135
135
80

Number of Authors
Focal Author is Last
Article Age at Baseline
Focal Author Gender
Focal Author Graduation Year
Article Baseline Stock of Citations
Article Baseline Stock of Article Citations from Industry
Article Baseline Stock of Article Citations at Origin
Article Baseline Stock of Article Citations at Destination

4.489
0.653
2.483
0.084
1972.603
27.824
1.036
1.834
0.624

4
1
2
0
1973
3
0
0
0

3.238
0.476
2.055
0.277
9.289
63.855
3.477
6.284
3.249

1
0
1
0
1940
0
0
0
0

180
1
10
1
1997
1226
103
149
131

Journal Articles by Stayers
Number of Authors
Focal Author is Last
Article Age at Baseline
Focal Author Gender
Focal Author Graduation Year
Article Baseline Stock of Article
Article Baseline Stock of Article
Article Baseline Stock of Article
Article Baseline Stock of Article

Journal Articles by Movers

Note: The match is “article-centric,” i.e., the control article is always chosen from the same journal in the same publication year. The control article is coarsely
matched on the number of authors (exact match for one, two, and three authors; four or five authors; between six and nine authors; and more than nine
authors). We also match on focal scientist’s position in the authorship roster (first author; last author; middle author). For articles published one year before
appointment, we also match on the month of publication. For articles published two years before appointment, we also match on the quarter of publication.
In addition, the articles in the control and treatment groups are matched on article citation dynamics up to the year before the (possibly counterfactual)
transition year. The cost of a very close, non-parametric match on article characteristics is that author characteristics do not match closely. Imposing a close
match on focal scientist age, gender, and overall productivity at baseline would result in a match rate which is unacceptably low.

32

Table 4B: Patent-to-Article Citation Flows: Descriptive Statistics (n=2×2,435)
Articles Published Before the Move
Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Citations
Citations from Industry
Citations at Origin
Citations at Destination

5.062
0.598
3.118
0.083
1965.539
0.499
0.352
0.040
0.012

5
1
2
0
1967
0
0
0
0

2.596
0.490
2.333
0.276
12.022
1.649
1.375
0.449
0.306

1
0
1
0
1931
0
0
0
0

38
1
10
1
1999
29
24
16
14

Citations
Citations from Industry
Citations at Origin
Citations at Destination

5.049
0.598
3.118
0.086
1974.161
0.540
0.367
0.029
0.019

5
1
2
0
1975
0
0
0
0

2.433
0.490
2.333
0.281
8.709
1.889
1.652
0.284
0.236

1
0
1
0
1940
0
0
0
0

26
1
10
1
1995
46
46
6
7

Journal Articles by Stayers
Number of Authors
Focal Author is Last
Article Age at Baseline
Focal Author Gender
Focal Author Graduation Year
Article Baseline Stock of Patent
Article Baseline Stock of Patent
Article Baseline Stock of Patent
Article Baseline Stock of Patent

Journal Articles by Movers
Number of Authors
Focal Author is Last
Article Age at Baseline
Focal Author Gender
Focal Author Graduation Year
Article Baseline Stock of Patent
Article Baseline Stock of Patent
Article Baseline Stock of Patent
Article Baseline Stock of Patent

Note: The match is “article-centric,” i.e., the control article is always chosen from the same journal in the same publication year. The control article is coarsely
matched on the number of authors (exact match for one, two, and three authors; four or five authors; between six and nine authors; and more than nine
authors). We also match on focal scientist’s position in the authorship roster (first author; last author; middle author). For articles published one year before
appointment, we also match on the month of publication. For articles published two years before appointment, we also match on the quarter of publication.
In addition, the articles in the control and treatment groups are matched on patent citation dynamics up to the year before the (possibly counterfactual)
transition year. The cost of a very close, non-parametric match on article characteristics is that author characteristics do not match closely. Imposing a close
match on focal scientist age, gender, and overall productivity at baseline would result in a match rate which is unacceptably low.

33

Table 4C: Patent-to-Patent Citation Flows: Descriptive Statistics (n=2×1,417)
Patents Issued Before the Move
Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Citations
Citations from Industry
Citations at Origin
Citations at Destination

4.579
0.056
1969.762
7.076
5.880
0.563
0.167

4
0
1970
1
0
0
0

2.610
0.231
10.806
14.770
12.830
2.899
1.439

1
0
1932
0
0
0
0

10
1
1996
135
98
48
37

Citations
Citations from Industry
Citations at Origin
Citations at Destination

4.579
0.047
1976.711
7.198
5.787
0.370
0.231

4
0
1978
1
0
0
0

2.610
0.212
8.678
15.608
13.239
1.714
1.966

1
0
1950
0
0
0
0

10
1
1996
148
137
34
53

Patents by Stayers
Patent Age at Baseline
Focal Author Gender
Focal Author Graduation Year
Patent Baseline Stock of Patent
Patent Baseline Stock of Patent
Patent Baseline Stock of Patent
Patent Baseline Stock of Patent

Patents by Movers
Patent Age at Baseline
Focal Author Gender
Focal Author Graduation Year
Patent Baseline Stock of Patent
Patent Baseline Stock of Patent
Patent Baseline Stock of Patent
Patent Baseline Stock of Patent

Note: The match is “patent-centric,” i.e., the control patent is always chosen from the same application year and the same issue year. In addition, control and
treatment patents are matched on patent citation dynamics up to the year before the (possibly counterfactual) transition year. The cost of a very close, nonparametric match on patent characteristics is that author characteristics do not match closely. Imposing a close match on focal scientist age, gender, and
overall productivity at baseline would result in a match rate which is unacceptably low.

34

Table 5: Effects of Professional Move on Citation Rates, by Location
(1a)

(1b)

Article-to-Article
Citations

After Appointment
Nb. of Observations
Nb. of Article Pairs
Nb. of Scientists
Adjusted R2

Origin
0.026
(0.026)
175,715
10,249
2,106
0.295

Destination
0.069**
(0.015)
175,715
10,249
2,106
0.323

(2a)

(2b)

Patent-to-Article
Citations
Origin
-0.026*
(0.012)
41,114
2,435
928
0.157

Destination
0.007
(0.006)
41,114
2,435
928
0.125

(3a)

(3b)

Patent-to-Patent
Citations
Origin
-0.121**
(0.036)
21,221
1,417
426
0.215

Destination
0.041*
(0.017)
21,221
1,417
426
0.214

Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by scientists. All specifications are estimated by OLS; the models include article-pair fixed
effects. †p <0.10, *p <0.05, **p <0.01

35

Table 6A: Effects of Professional Move on Article-to-Article Citation Rates
at Origin Location
(1a)

(1b)

Novel vs. Not

After Appointment
Nb. of Observations
Nb. of Article Pairs
Nb. of Scientists
Adjusted R2

Novel
-0.054
(0.039)
80,165
3,713
1,273
0.243
(4a)

Not
0.083*
(0.034)
95,550
6,536
1,648
0.320
(4b)

Pre vs. Post Internet

After Appointment
Nb. of Observations
Nb. of Article Pairs
Nb. of Scientists
Adjusted R2

Nb. of Observations
Nb. of Article Pairs
Nb. of Scientists
Adjusted R2

(2b)

Young vs. Old
Young
-0.000
(0.041)
82,580
4,524
1,192
0.290
(5a)

Old
0.045
(0.033)
93,135
5,725
914
0.299
(5b)

Big vs. Small
Status Change

1975-1994

1995-2003

Big

Small

0.023
(0.028)
150,880
7,456
1,782
0.251
(7a)

0.038
(0.067)
24,835
2,793
564
0.361
(7b)

-0.014
(0.057)
34,414
2,049
417
0.322
(8a)

0.037
(0.029)
141,301
8,200
1,689
0.289
(8b)

Well-Cited
at Baseline

After Appointment

(2a)

No
0.011
(0.032)
88,823
5,240
1,406
0.276

Yes
0.043
(0.040)
86,892
5,009
700
0.306

Well-Funded
at Baseline
No
0.021
(0.030)
131,548
7,787
1,708
0.285

Yes
0.044
(0.052)
44,167
2,462
398
0.322

(3a)

(3b)

Journal Prestige
Low JIF
0.032
(0.028)
84,114
4,884
1,698
0.269
(6a)

High JIF
0.022
(0.040)
91,601
5,365
1,489
0.305
(6b)

PI vs. Non-PI Pubs
First or Last
Position
0.045†
(0.025)
130,230
7,315
1,872
0.253
(9a)

Middle
Position
-0.026
(0.066)
45,485
2,934
1,200
0.334
(9b)

Prolific Patenter
at Baseline
No
0.016
(0.028)
135,818
7,477
1,732
0.275

Yes
0.054
(0.057)
39,897
2,772
374
0.328

Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by scientists. All specifications are estimated by OLS; the models include article-pair fixed
effects. †p <0.10, *p <0.05, **p <0.01

36

Table 6B: Effects of Professional Move on Article-to-Article Citation Rates
at Destination Location
(1a)

(1b)

(2a)

Novel vs. Not

After Appointment
Nb. of Observations
Nb. of Article Pairs
Nb. of Scientists
Adjusted R2

Novel
0.036†
(0.021)
80,165
3,713
1,273
0.237
(4a)

Not
0.093**
(0.020)
95,550
6,536
1,648
0.360
(4b)

Young vs. Old
Young
0.035
(0.025)
82,580
4,524
1,192
0.343
(5a)

Nb. of Observations
Nb. of Article Pairs
Nb. of Scientists
Adjusted R2

1975-1994

1995-2003

Big

Small

0.046**
(0.015)
150,880
7,456
1,782
0.295
(7a)

0.164**
(0.043)
24,835
2,793
564
0.361
(7b)

0.039
(0.038)
34,414
2,049
417
0.355
(8a)

0.077**
(0.016)
141,301
8,200
1,689
0.315
(8b)

Well-Cited
at Baseline

After Appointment
Nb. of Observations
Nb. of Article Pairs
Nb. of Scientists
Adjusted R2

Old
0.094**
(0.018)
93,135
5,725
914
0.305
(5b)

Big vs. Small
Status Change

Pre vs. Post Internet

After Appointment

(2b)

No
0.077**
(0.016)
88,823
5,240
1,406
0.253

Yes
0.061*
(0.025)
86,892
5,009
700
0.350

Well-Funded
at Baseline
No
0.078**
(0.018)
131,548
7,787
1,708
0.331

Yes
0.043†
(0.026)
44,167
2,462
398
0.297

(3a)

Journal Prestige
Low JIF
0.078**
(0.014)
84,114
4,884
1,698
0.256
(6a)

High JIF
0.063**
(0.024)
91,601
5,365
1,489
0.345
(6b)

PI vs. Non-PI Pubs
First or Last
Position
0.077**
(0.016)
130,230
7,315
1,872
0.313
(9a)

Middle
Position
0.047
(0.030)
45,485
2,934
1,200
0.342
(9b)

Prolific Patenter
at Baseline
No
0.066**
(0.016)
135,818
7,477
1,732
0.309

Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by scientists. All specifications are estimated by OLS; the models include article-pair fixed
effects. †p <0.10, *p <0.05, **p <0.01

37

(3b)

Yes
0.078*
(0.034)
39,897
2,772
374
0.340

Figure 1: Career Age at Time of Move

Number of Movers (N=2894)

200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

Career Age
9 observations between 46 and 54 years omitted

Figure 2: Distance Moved

Number of Movers (N=2894)

200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0
50

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

Distance between origin and destination in miles
5 observations between 2,500 and 4,500 miles omitted

38

2,500

Figure 3
Similarity between Origin and Destination Locations

A. NIH Funding

B. Patents
250

200

Number of Movers (N=2894)

Number of Movers (N=2894)

175
150
125
100
75
50

200

150

100

50

25
0

0
-1,500

-1,000

-500

0

500

1,000

1,500

-10,000

-5,000

0

5,000

10,000

Difference in number of patents between origin and destination

Difference of NIH funding (in $ millions) between origin and destination

Note: The above histograms map the extent to which professional transitions in our sample take elite scientists to destinations that differ from, or are similar to, the
areas from which they originate, along two dimensions: NIH funding accruing to institutions located in 25-miles radius circle centered on the origin and
destination institution, respectively (Panel A); and the number of patents applied for by inventors located in 25-miles radius circle centered on the origin and
destination institution, respectively (Panel B).

39

Figure 4A: Article-Level Match

Note: The two articles above illustrate the essence of the Coarse Exact Matching procedure. These two articles appeared in the journal Cell in 1981. They received
a very similar number of citations up to 1985: 73 citations for Mather et al.; 67 citations for Miura et al. Masayasu Nomura, the PI on the article on the
right-hand side, moved from the University of Wisconsin to UC Irvine in 1986.

40

Figure 4B: Patent-Level Match

Note: The two patents above illustrate the essence of the Coarse Exact Matching procedure. These two patents were issued in 1999, and applied for in 1996. They
both belong to patent class 435 (Molecular Biology & Microbiology). They received a very similar number of citations up to 2003: 27 citations for Fischetti’s
(Richa et al.); 26 citations for Roninson’s (Mechetner et al.) Igor Roninson—the focal inventor on patent 5,994,088—moved from the University of Illinois at
Chicago to the Ordway Cancer Center in Albany, NY in 2004.

41

Figure 5
Covariate Balance at Baseline

A. Article-to-Article Citations
6,000

Stayers

B. Patent-to-Article Citations
2,000

Movers

Stayers

C. Patent-to-Patent Citations
700

Movers

5,000

4,000

3,000

2,000

Number of Patents

Number of Articles

1,500
Number of Articles

Stayers

Movers

600

1,000

500
400
300
200

500
1,000

100

0

0
1

2

5

10

25

50

100

Stock of Article Citations up to the Year of Move

250

0
1

2

5

10

Stock of Patent Citations up to the Year of Move

25

1

2

5

10

25

50

Stock of Patent Citations up to the Year of Move

Note: We compute the cumulative number of citations for treatment and control articles/patents, respectively, up to the year that immediately precedes that of the
professional transition for the superstar.

42

Figure 6
Effect of Professional Transitions
on Article-to-Article Citation Rates, by Location
Articles Published After the Move

A. Citations Accruing
at Origin Location

B. Citations Accruing
at Destination Location

C. Citations Accruing
at All Other Locations

2.50

2.50

2.50

2.00

2.00

2.00

1.50

1.50

1.50

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.50

0.50

0.50

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.50

-0.50

-0.50

-1.00

-1.00

-1.00

-1.50

-1.50

-1.50

-2.00

-2.00

-2.00

-2.50

-2.50
1

2

3

4

5

6

Time since Publication

7

8

9

10

-2.50
1

2

3

4

5

6

Time since Publication

7

8

9

10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time since Publication

Note: Dynamics for the difference in yearly citations between movers and stayers matched articles written in the post-move period. Articles in each pair appeared in
the same year and journal, and are also matched on focal scientist position on the authorship list, as well as overall number of authors. Further, the superstars
authors are matched on gender, year of highest degree (in three year bins), NIH funding at the time of the (possibly counterfactual) move, and cumulative
number of citations for all articles published up until (and including) the year of the move.
In Panel A, only citations accruing at the origin location are tallied. In Panel B, only citations accruing at the destination location are tallied. For stayers, the
destination location is chosen at random from among the set of locations that movers move to and that are separated by at least 50 miles from the staying
star’s actual location. In Panel C, only citations accruing at all other locations are tallied.

43

Figure 7
Effect of Professional Transitions
on Article-to-Article Citation Rates, by Citing Institution Type
Articles Published Before the Move

A. All Citers

B. Industrial Citers Only

5.00

0.25

4.00

0.20

3.00

0.15

2.00

0.10

1.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

-1.00

-0.05

-2.00

-0.10

-3.00

-0.15

-4.00

-0.20
-0.25

-5.00
-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

-10 -9

10

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time to/since Move

Time to/since Move

Notes: Dynamics for the difference in yearly citations between movers and stayers matched articles written in the pre-move period. Articles in each pair
appeared in the same year and journal, and are also matched on focal scientist position on the authorship list, as well as overall number of authors.
Further, control articles are selected such that the sum of squared differences in citations between control and treated article up to year t0-1 is minimized
— where t0 is the year of (possibly counterfactual) move. In addition, when the year of publication is in the year prior to the move, the articles in each
pair appeared not only in the same year, but also in the same month. Similarly, when the year of publication is in penultimate year prior to the move, the
articles in each pair appeared not only in the same year, but also in the same quarter.

44

Figure 8
Effect of Professional Transitions
on Article-to-Article Citation Rates, by Location
Articles Published Before the Move

A. Citations Accruing
at Origin Location

B. Citations Accruing
at Destination Location

1.00

1.00

0.75

0.75

0.50

0.50

0.25

0.25

0.00

0.00

C. Citations Accruing
at All Other Locations
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00

-0.25

-0.25

-0.50

-0.50

-0.75

-0.75

-1.00

-1.00

1.00
0.00
-1.00
-2.00
-3.00

-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Time to/since Move

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-4.00
-5.00
-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Time to/since Move

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time to/since Move

Note: Dynamics for the difference in yearly citations between movers and stayers matched articles written in the pre-move period. Articles in each pair appeared in
the same year and journal, and are also matched on focal scientist position on the authorship list, as well as overall number of authors. Further, control
articles are selected such that the sum of squared differences in citations between control and treated article up to year t0-1 is minimized — where t0 is the
year of (possibly counterfactual) move. In addition, when the year of publication is in the year prior to the move, the articles in each pair appeared not only in
the same year, but also in the same month. Similarly, when the year of publication is in penultimate year prior to the move, the articles in each pair appeared
not only in the same year, but also in the same quarter.
In Panel A, only citations accruing at the origin location are tallied. In Panel B, only citations accruing at the destination location are tallied. For stayers, the
destination location is chosen at random from among the set of locations that movers move to and that are separated by at least 50 miles from the staying
star’s actual location. In Panel C, only citations accruing at all other locations are tallied.

45

Figure 9
Effect of Professional Transitions
on Patent-to-Article Citation Rates, by Citing Institution Type
Articles Published Before the Move

A. All Citers

B. Industrial Citers Only

0.50

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00

-0.10

-0.10

-0.20

-0.20

-0.30

-0.30

-0.40

-0.40

-0.50

-0.50

-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

-10 -9

10

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time to/since Move

Time to/since Move

Notes: Dynamics for the difference in yearly citations between movers and stayers matched articles written in the pre-move period. Articles in each pair
appeared in the same year and journal, and are also matched on focal scientist position on the authorship list, as well as overall number of authors.
Further, control articles are selected such that the sum of squared differences in citations between control and treated article up to year t0-1 is minimized
— where t0 is the year of (possibly counterfactual) move. In addition, when the year of publication is in the year prior to the move, the articles in each
pair appeared not only in the same year, but also in the same month. Similarly, when the year of publication is in penultimate year prior to the move, the
articles in each pair appeared not only in the same year, but also in the same quarter.

46

Figure 10
Effect of Professional Transitions
on Patentto-Article Citation Rates, by Location
Articles Published Before the Move

A. Citations Accruing
at Origin Location

B. Citations Accruing
at Destination Location

C. Citations Accruing
at All Other Locations

0.25

0.25

0.50

0.20

0.20

0.40

0.15

0.15

0.30

0.10

0.10

0.20

0.05

0.05

0.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.05

-0.05

-0.10

-0.10

-0.10

-0.20

-0.15

-0.15

-0.30

-0.20

-0.20

-0.40

-0.25

-0.25

-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Time to/since Move

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-0.50

-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Time to/since Move

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time to/since Move

Note: Dynamics for the difference in yearly citations between movers and stayers matched articles written in the pre-move period. Articles in each pair appeared in
the same year and journal, and are also matched on focal scientist position on the authorship list, as well as overall number of authors. Further, control
articles are selected such that the sum of squared differences in citations between control and treated article up to year t0-1 is minimized — where t0 is the
year of (possibly counterfactual) move. In addition, when the year of publication is in the year prior to the move, the articles in each pair appeared not only in
the same year, but also in the same month. Similarly, when the year of publication is in penultimate year prior to the move, the articles in each pair appeared
not only in the same year, but also in the same quarter.
In Panel A, only citations accruing at the origin location are tallied. In Panel B, only citations accruing at the destination location are tallied. For stayers, the
destination location is chosen at random from among the set of locations that movers move to and that are separated by at least 50 miles from the staying
star’s actual location. In Panel C, only citations accruing at all other locations are tallied.

47

Figure 11
Effect of Professional Transitions
on Patent-to-Patent Citation Rates, by Citing Assignee Type
Patents Issued Before the Move
A. All Citing Assignees

B. Industrial Citing Assignees Only

2.00

2.00

1.50

1.50

1.00

1.00

0.50

0.50

0.00

0.00

-0.50

-0.50

-1.00

-1.00

-1.50

-1.50

-2.00

-2.00
-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-10 -9

Time to/since Move

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time to/since Move

Notes: Dynamics for the difference in yearly citations between movers and stayers matched patents issued in the pre-move period. Patents in each pair share the
same application and issue years. Further, control patents are selected such that the sum of squared differences in citations between control and treated
patents up to year t0-1 is minimized — where t0 is the year of (possibly counterfactual) move.

48

Figure 12
Effect of Professional Transitions
on Patent-to-Patent Citation Rates, by Location
Patents Issued Before the Move

A. Citations Accruing
at Origin Location

B. Citations Accruing
at Destination Location

0.50

0.50

0.40

0.40

0.30

0.30

0.20

0.20

0.10

0.10

C. Citations Accruing
at All Other Locations
2.00

1.50

1.00

0.00

0.00

-0.10

-0.10

-0.20

-0.20

-0.30

-0.30

-0.40

-0.40

0.50

0.00

-0.50

-1.00

-1.50

-0.50

-0.50
-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Time to/since Move

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-2.00
-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Time to/since Move

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

-10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Time to/since Move

Note: Dynamics for the difference in yearly citations between movers and stayers matched patents patents in the pre-move period. Patents in each pair share the
same application and issue years. Further, control patents are selected such that the sum of squared differences in citations between control and treated
patents up to year t0-1 is minimized — where t0 is the year of (possibly counterfactual) move.
In Panel A, only citations accruing at the origin location are tallied. In Panel B, only citations accruing at the destination location are tallied. For stayers, the
destination location is chosen at random from among the set of locations that movers move to and that are separated by at least 50 miles from the staying
star’s actual location. In Panel C, only citations accruing at all other locations are tallied.

49

Appendix I:
Criteria for Delineating the Set of 10,450 “Superstars”
We present additional details regarding the criteria used to construct the sample of 10,450 superstars.
Highly Funded Scientists. Our first data source is the Consolidated Grant/Applicant File (CGAF) from
the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH). This dataset records information about grants awarded to
extramural researchers funded by the NIH since 1938. Using the CGAF and focusing only on direct costs
associated with research grants, we compute individual cumulative totals for the decades 1977-1986, 19871996, and 1997-2006, deflating the earlier years by the Biomedical Research Producer Price Index.i We also
recompute these totals excluding large center grants that usually fund groups of investigators (M01 and P01
grants). Scientists whose totals lie in the top ventile (i.e., above the 95th percentile) of either distribution
constitute our first group of superstars. In this group, the least well-funded investigator garnered $10.5
million in career NIH funding, and the most well-funded $462.6 million.ii
Highly Cited Scientists. Despite the preeminent role of the NIH in the funding of public biomedical
research, the above indicator of “superstardom” biases the sample towards scientists conducting relatively
expensive research. We complement this first group with a second composed of highly cited scientists
identified by the Institute for Scientific Information. A Highly Cited listing means that an individual was
among the 250 most cited researchers for their published articles between 1981 and 1999, within a broad
scientific field.iii
Top Patenters. We add to these groups academic life scientists who belong in the top percentile of the
patent distribution among academics — those who were granted 17 patents or more between 1976 and 2004.
Members of the National Academy of Sciences. We add to these groups academic life scientists who
were elected to the National Academy of Science between 1975 and 2007.
MERIT Awardees of the NIH. Initiated in the mid-1980s, the MERIT Award program extends funding for up to 5 years (but typically 3 years) to a select number of NIH-funded investigators “who have
demonstrated superior competence, outstanding productivity during their previous research endeavors and
are leaders in their field with paradigm-shifting ideas.” The specific details governing selection vary across
the component institutes of the NIH, but the essential feature of the program is that only researchers holding
an R01 grant in its second or later cycle are eligible. Further, the application must be scored in the top
percentile in a given funding cycle.
Former and current Howard Hughes Medical Investigators. Every three years, the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute selects a small cohort of mid-career biomedical scientists with the potential to revolutionize
their respective subfields. Once selected, HHMIs continue to be based at their institutions, typically leading
a research group of 10 to 25 students, postdoctoral associates and technicians. Their appointment is reviewed
every five years, based solely on their most important contributions during the cycle.iv
Early career prize winners. We also included winners of the Pew, Searle, Beckman, Rita Allen, and
Packard scholarships for the years 1981 through 2000. Every year, these charitable foundations provide seed
funding to between 20 and 40 young academic life scientists. These scholarships are the most prestigious
accolades that young researchers can receive in the first two years of their careers as independent investigators.
i

http://officeofbudget.od.nih.gov/UI/GDPFromGenBudget.htm
We perform a similar exercise for scientists employed by the intramural campus of the NIH. These scientists are not eligible
for extramural funding, but the NIH keeps records of the number of “internal projects” each intramural scientist leads. We
include in the elite sample the top ventile of intramural scientists according to this metric.
iii
The relevant scientific fields in the life sciences are microbiology, biochemistry, psychiatry/psychology, neuroscience, molecular biology & genetics, immunology, pharmacology, and clinical medicine.
iv
See Azoulay et al. (2009) for more details and an evaluation of this program.
ii

50

Appendix II: Linking Scientists with their Journal Articles
The source of our publication data is PubMed, a bibliographic database maintained by the U.S. National
Library of Medicine that is searchable on the web at no cost.v PubMed contains over 14 million citations
from 4,800 journals published in the United States and more than 70 other countries from 1950 to the present.
The subject scope of this database is biomedicine and health, broadly defined to encompass those areas of
the life sciences, behavioral sciences, chemical sciences, and bioengineering that inform research in healthrelated fields. In order to effectively mine this publicly-available data source, we designed PubHarvester,
an open-source software tool that automates the process of gathering publication information for individual
life scientists (see Azoulay et al. 2006 for a complete description of the software). PubHarvester is fast,
simple to use, and reliable. Its output consists of a series of reports that can be easily imported by statistical
software packages.
This software tool does not obviate the two challenges faced by empirical researchers when attempting to link
accurately individual scientists with their published output. The first relates to what one might term “Type
I Error,” whereby we mistakenly attribute to a scientist a journal article actually authored by a namesake;
The second relates to “Type II error,” whereby we conservatively exclude from a scientist’s publication roster
legitimate articles:
Namesakes and popular names. PubMed does not assign unique identifiers to the authors of the
publications they index. They identify authors simply by their last name, up to two initials, and an optional
suffix. This makes it difficult to unambiguously assign publication output to individual scientists, especially
when their last name is relatively common.
Inconsistent publication names. The opposite danger, that of recording too few publications, also looms
large, since scientists are often inconsistent in the choice of names they choose to publish under. By far the
most common source of error is the haphazard use of a middle initial. Other errors stem from inconsistent
use of suffixes (Jr., Sr., 2nd, etc.), or from multiple patronyms due to changes in spousal status.
To deal with these serious measurement problems, we opted for a labor-intensive approach: the design of
individual search queries that relies on relevant scientific keywords, the names of frequent collaborators,
journal names, as well as institutional affiliations. We are aided in the time-consuming process of query
design by the availability of a reliable archival data source, namely, these scientists’ CVs and biosketches.
PubHarvester provides the option to use such custom queries in lieu of a completely generic query (e.g,
"azoulay p"[au] or "sampat bn"[au]). As an example, one can examine the publications of Scott A.
Waldman, an eminent pharmacologist located in Philadelphia, PA at Thomas Jefferson University. Waldman
is a relatively frequent name in the United States (with 208 researchers with an identical patronym in the
AAMC faculty roster); the combination "waldman s" is common to 3 researchers in the same database.
A simple search query for "waldman sa"[au] OR "waldman s"[au] returns 302 publications at the time
of this writing. However, a more refined query, based on Professor Waldman’s biosketch returns only 210
publications.vi
The above example also makes clear how we deal with the issue of inconsistent publication names. PubHarvester gives the end-user the option to choose up to four PubMed-formatted names under which
publications can be found for a given researcher. For example, Louis J. Tobian, Jr. publishes under "tobian
l", "tobian l jr", and "tobian lj", and all three names need to be provided as inputs to generate a
complete publication listing. Furthermore, even though Tobian is a relatively rare name, the search query
needs to be modified to account for these name variations, as in ("tobian l"[au] OR "tobian lj"[au])
We are confident that this labor-intensive customization ensures the accuracy of our superstar scientists’
bibliomes.
v

http://www.pubmed.gov/
(((("waldman sa"[au] NOT (ether OR anesthesia)) OR ("waldman s"[au] AND (murad OR philadelphia[ad] OR west
point[ad] OR wong p[au] OR lasseter kc[au] OR colorectal))) AND 1980:2010[dp])
vi

51

Appendix III: Linking Scientists with their Patents
A number of recent efforts have been devoted to assigning unique identifiers to inventors in the US Patent
Data (Trajtenberg et al. 2006; Marx et al. 2009). Rather than relying on recursive algorithms that help
group together patents issued to the same inventors, we make use of the richness of our data to improve the
quality of the matched inventor/invention links.
In a first step, we eliminate from the set of potential patents all patents issued in classes that appear unrelated
to the life sciences, writ large. Second, we focus on the set of superstars with relatively rare names, and
automate the match with the patent data by declaring as valid any link in which (i) the inventor’s full name
matches, and (ii) at least one patent assignee matches with one of the scientist’s employer, past or present.
We then relax these constraints one at a time, examining potential matches by hand. Using knowledge
about the research of these scientists stemming from their biographical records, we then pass judgement
on the validity of these more uncertain matches. The same procedure is repeated for the set of inventors
with common names, though these records often require the inspection of each potential patent to ascertain
whether they correspond to legitimate or spurious matches.
Following Thursby et al. (2009), we find that many patents associated with the elite scientists in our sample
are not assigned to their employer, but rather unassigned, or assigned solely to an industrial firm. As a
result, we are very careful to inspect manually records for which the inventor name matches that of one of
our superstars, but there is no assignee information to match with the available biographical record for this
individual.
One objection to this linking procedure is that it is ad hoc, and difficult to replicate across different empirical
contexts. Moreover, it is very labor-intensive, and therefore would not scale up to a much larger sample of
inventors. Yet, we suspect that using prior knowledge about the direction of an inventor’s research to link
them precisely with their patented inventions results in higher-quality matches.

52

Appendix IV: Linking PubMed References to USPTO Patents
Determining whether patents cite publications is more difficult than tracing patent citations: while the
cited patents are unique seven-digit numbers, cited publications are free-form text (Callaert et al. 2006).
Moreover, the USPTO does not require that applicants submit references to literature in a standard format.
For example, Harold Varmus’s 1988 Science article “Retroviruses” is cited in 29 distinct patents, but in
numerous different formats, including Varmus. “Retroviruses” Science 240:1427-1435 (1988) (in patent
6794141) and Varmus et al., 1988, Science 240:1427-1439 (in patent 6805882). As this example illustrates,
there can be errors in author lists and page numbers. Even more problematic, in some cases certain fields
(e.g. author name) are included, in others they are not. Journal names may be abbreviated in some patents,
but not in others.
To address these difficulties, we developed a matching algorithm that compared each of several PubMed fields
— first author, page numbers, volume, and the beginning of the title, publication year, or journal name —
to all references in all biomedical and chemical patents issued by the USPTO since 1976. Biomedical patents
are identified by technology class, using the patent class-field concordance developed by the National Bureau
of Economic Research (Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002). We considered a dyad to be a match if four of the fields
from PubMed were listed in a USPTO reference.
Overall, the algorithm returned 558,982 distinct PMIDs cited in distinct 172, 815 patents. Since it necessarily
relied on probabilistic rather than exact matches, we also tested it across a sample of references where we
were confident the match to the PubMed data was accurate. Specifically, we sampled 200 references from
the biomedical/chemical patents, and two research assistants and one of the authors (Sampat) manually
investigated whether the references had associated PMIDs. Sampat carefully reviewed and adjudicated any
cases where there was disagreement among the three coders.
Manual matching, while cumbersome, provides an extremely reliable match, a “gold-standard” against which
we can gauge the algorithm. The algorithm returned the correct PMID information for 86 percent of the
references. There were no false positives: if our manual match returned no PMID, neither did our algorithm.
And in almost all cases, if the algorithm generated a PMID, it was the correct one. But for 14 percent of
the references there were false negatives, i.e., a PMID was found via the manual match, but none was found
via the algorithm. While these errors are unlikely to be related to any variables of interest, we can also
test robustness of any results obtained using these data using matches from a more liberal implementation
of the algorithm (based on matching three rather than four elements of the PubMed record to the patent
references), which returns fewer false negatives but more false positives.
Choosing between the loose and strict algorithms involves making tradeoffs between the Type I and Type II
errors. In the analyses below, we rely primarily on the strict algorithm, erring on the side of understating
the extent to which patents cite the biomedical literature.

53

Appendix V: Construction of the Product Control Group
We detail the “Coarse Exact Matching” (CEM) procedure implemented to identify the sample of control
products from among the universe of products associated with stayers. As opposed to methods that rely on
the estimation of a propensity score, CEM is a non-parametric procedure.vii
In its basic outline, the matching procedure is very similar across the three measures of knowledge flows;
Whether we are focused on journal articles or patents, the sample of control products is constructed such
that the following two conditions are met:
1. treated products exhibit no differential citation trends relative to control products up to the time of
appointment;
2. treated and control products match on a number of time-invariant article characteristics;
However, implementation details vary with cited and citing product type, as explained below.
Journal Articles. We identify controls based on the following set of covariates: (1) year of publication; (2)
specific journal (e.g. Cell or the New England Journal of Medicine); (3) number of authors (the distribution
is coarsened into six bins: one, two, three, four or five, between six and nine, and ten or more authors); (4)
focal-scientist position on the authorship list (first author, middle author, or last author). In the case of
articles published in the year immediately preceding appointment, the list of matching covariates is expanded
to also include the month of publication. In the case of articles published two years before appointment, the
list of matching covariates is expanded to also include the quarter of publication. To ensure that pre-move
citation trends are similar, we proceed in two steps. First, we also match on cumulative number of citations
at baseline, coarsened into 7 strata (0 to 10th ; 10th to 25th ; 25th to 50th ; 50th to 75th ; 75th to 95th ; 95th to
99th ; and above the 99th percentile). However, we have found that this is not enough to eliminate pre-move
citation trends. As a result, we select all control articles that match according to the covariates above, and
pick among those potential matches a single article that further minimizes the sum of squared differences in
the number of citations up until the year before the year of move.
Patents. We identify controls based on the following set of time-invariant covariates: (1) year of issue; (2)
year of application; (3) main patent class. To ensure that pre-move citation trends are similar, we match
on cumulative number of citations at baseline, coarsened into 4 strata (0 to 50th ; 50th to 95th ; 95th to 99th ;
and above the 99th percentile).
Coarse Exact Matching. We create a large number of strata to cover the entire support of the joint
distribution of the covariates mentioned above. Each observation is allocated to a unique strata. We then
drop from the data all observations corresponding to strata in which there is no treated article and all
observations corresponding to strata in which there are less than 5 potential controls.
The procedure is coarse because we do not attempt to precisely match on covariate values; rather, we coarsen
the support of the joint distribution of the covariates into a finite number of strata, and we match a treated
observation if and only if a control observation can be recruited from this strata. An important advantage
of CEM is that the analyst can guarantee the degree of covariate balance ex ante, but this comes at a cost:
the more fine-grained the partition of the support for the joint distribution (i.e., the higher the number of
strata), the larger the number of unmatched treated observations.
We implement the CEM procedure year by year, without replacement. Specifically, in move year t, 1976 ≤
t ≤ 2004, we:
vii
A propensity score approach would entail estimating the probability that the scientists in the data move in a given year,
and then using the inverse of this estimated probability to weight the data in a second stage analysis of the effect of mobility
on subsequent citation rates. However, because citations occur at the product level, achieving covariate balance by weighting
the data by the producer-level likelihood of moving, even if the determinants of mobility were observable, would not resolve the
problem of controlling for product-level quality.

54

1. eliminate from the set of potential controls all products published by stayers who have collaborated
with movers prior to year t;
2. for each year of publication/issue t − k, 1 ≤ k ≤ 10;
(a) create the strata;
(b) identify within strata a control for each treated unit; break ties at random;
(c) repeat these steps for year of publication/issue t − (k + 1).
3. repeat these steps for year of appointment t + 1.
Sensitivity Analyses. The analyst’s judgement matters for the outcome of the CEM procedure insofar as
he must draw a list of “reasonable” covariates to match on, as well as decide on the degree of coarsening to
impose. Therefore, it is reasonable to ask whether seemingly small changes in the details have consequences
for how one should interpret our results.
Non-parametric matching procedures such as CEM are prone to a version of the “curse of dimensionality”
whereby the proportion of matched units decreases rapidly with the number of strata. For instance, requiring
producer-level characteristics to match in addition to product-level characteristics would result in a match
rate below 10 percent, which seems to us unacceptably low.
However, we have verified that slight variations in the details of the implementation (e.g., varying slightly
the number of cutoff points for the stock of citations) have little impact on the basic results we present. To
conclude, we feel that CEM enables us to identify a population of control products appropriate to guard
against the specific threats to identification mentioned in section 1.4.

55

