NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEETING THE MANDATE FOR BIOFUELS:
IMPLICATIONS FOR LAND USE, FOOD AND FUEL PRICES
Xiaoguang Chen
Haixiao Huang
Madhu Khanna
Hayri Önal
Working Paper 16697
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16697

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

Funding from the Energy Biosciences Institute, University of California, Berkeley, the U.S. Department
of Energy and NIFA, USDA is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Xiaoguang Chen, Haixiao Huang, Madhu Khanna, and Hayri Önal. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Meeting the Mandate for Biofuels: Implications for Land Use, Food and Fuel Prices
Xiaoguang Chen, Haixiao Huang, Madhu Khanna, and Hayri Önal
NBER Working Paper No. 16697
January 2011
JEL No. C6,Q4,Q5
ABSTRACT
Biofuel production is being promoted through various policies such as mandates and tax credits. This
paper uses a dynamic, spatial, multi-market equilibrium model, Biofuel and Environmental Policy
Analysis Model (BEPAM), to estimate the effects of these policies on cropland allocation, food and
fuel prices, and the mix of biofuels from corn and cellulosic feedstocks over the 2007-2022 period.
We find that the biofuel mandate will increase corn price by 24%, reduce the price of gasoline by 8%
in 2022, and increase social welfare by $122 B (0.7%) relative to Business As Usual scenario. The
provision of volumetric tax credits that accompany the mandate significantly changes the mix of biofuels
produced in favor of cellulosic biofuels and reduces the share of corn ethanol in the cumulative volume
of biofuels produced from 50% to 10%. The tax credits reduce the adverse impact of the mandate alone
on crop prices and decrease the price of biofuels. However, they impose a welfare cost of $79 B compared
to the mandate alone. These results are found to be sensitive to the rate of growth of crop productivity,
the costs of production of bioenergy crops, and the availability of marginal land for producing bioenergy
crops.

Xiaoguang Chen
Institute for Genomic Biology
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
1206 West Gregory Dr
Urbana, IL 61801
xchen29@illinois.edu
Haixiao Huang
Institute for Genomic Biology
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
1206 West Gregory Dr
Urbana, IL 61801
hxhuang@illinois.edu

Madhu Khanna
Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
326 Mumford Hall
1301 Gregory Dr
Urbana, IL 61801
khanna1@illinois.edu
Hayri Önal
Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
326 Mumford Hall
1301 Gregory Dr
Urbana, IL 61801
h-onal@illinois.edu

Meeting the Mandate for Biofuels: Implications for Land Use, Food and Fuel Prices
Concerns about energy security, high oil prices and climate change mitigation have led to
increasing policy support for the production of biofuels in the U.S. In 2008, the production of
U.S. corn ethanol more than tripled relative to 2001 with the production of 9 billion gallons using
one-third of U.S. corn production (USDA 2010). Prices of agricultural commodities doubled
between 2001 and 2008, leading to a debate about the extent to which the price increase was
caused by biofuels and the competition for land induced by them (USDA/ERS 2010). A number
of studies have analyzed the impact of biofuel demand on the price of crops and obtained widely
varying estimates depending on the choice of price index, the baseline and the other contributing
factors considered. Reviews of these studies by Pfuderer, Davies and Mitchell (2010), and
Abbott, Hurt and Tyner (2008) shows that biofuels did contribute to the spike in crop prices in
2008 but with the current relatively low levels of diversion of global corn production to biofuels,
they were not the key drivers of the price increase. The trade-offs between food and fuel
production could, however, intensify in the future as the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS)
established by the Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) of 2007 seeks a six-fold
increase in biofuel production by 2022.
Recognition of these trade-offs and the limits to relying on corn-based ethanol to
meaningfully reduce dependence on oil, has led to growing interest in developing advanced
biofuels from feedstocks other than corn starch. A commercial technology to produce cellulosic
biofuels is yet to be developed but efforts are underway to produce them from several different
feedstocks such as crop and forest residues and perennial grasses (such as, miscanthus and
switchgrass). The use of residues does not require diversion of land from food production while
perennial grasses are not only likely to be more productive in their biofuel yields per unit of land

1

than corn ethanol but can also be grown on marginal lands. Cellulosic biofuels are expensive
compared to corn ethanol and unlikely to be viable without biofuel support policies. The RFS
mandates an increasing share of biofuel production from non-corn starch feedstocks; this
increases to 58% in 2022. The Food, Conservation, Energy Act (FCEA) of 2008 also provides a
variety of volumetric tax credits for blending biofuels with gasoline with higher tax credits for
advanced biofuels ($0.27 per liter) than for corn ethanol ($0.12 per liter) with the intent of
making them competitive with corn ethanol. These tax credits lower fuel prices and to the extent
that they shift the mix of biofuels towards cellulosic feedstocks relative to the mandate alone,
they could also lower crop prices. The decrease in fuel prices could however lead to an increase
in fuel consumption relative to the RFS alone.
This paper examines the effects of the RFS and accompanying volumetric subsidies for
land use, food and fuel production and prices in the US. We analyze the extent to which these
policies lead to changes in cropping patterns on the intensive margin and to an expansion of
cropland acreage. We also analyze the tradeoff they pose between fuel and food production and
the mix of cellulosic feedstocks that are economically viable under alternative policy scenarios.
Furthermore, we examine the welfare costs of these policies and the costs of these tax
credits for domestic taxpayers. A recent report by the CBO (2010) estimates that the volumetric
tax credit costs tax payers $0.47 per liter of (gasoline energy equivalent) corn ethanol and $0.79
per liter of (gasoline energy equivalent) cellulosic biofuels. The study assumes that these tax
credits lead to a 32% increase in corn ethanol production and a 47% increase in cellulosic biofuel
production, over and above that otherwise. Metcalf (2008) attributes all of the corn ethanol
consumption above the mandate in 2005 to the corn ethanol tax credits and estimates that tax
credits increased consumption by 25%. McPhail and Babcock (2008) find a much smaller role

2

for the effect of the corn ethanol tax credit in 2008/2009; they estimate that it increased domestic
supply by about 3% compared to the mandate alone. With two types of biofuels, corn ethanol
and cellulosic biofuels, receiving tax credits at differential rates, determining the incremental
effect of these tax credits in the future is more challenging, since they could affect not only the
total volume of biofuels but could create incentives to increase one type of biofuel at the expense
of another. Moreover, the cost of these tax credits should include not only the direct effect on
tax payers but also the indirect effect on consumers and producers of agricultural and fuel
products. These policies will differ in their impacts on food and fuel consumers and producers
and are likely to benefit agricultural producers and fuel consumers while adversely affecting
gasoline producers and agricultural consumers. In an open economy with trade in agricultural
products and gasoline, some of these costs are passed on to foreign producers and consumers.
We use the framework developed here to jointly determine the economic costs (in terms of
domestic social welfare) of these tax credits as well as the extent to which they lead to
incremental biofuel production above the mandated level and change the mix of biofuels.
Finally, we analyze the sensitivity of the impact of the these biofuel policies on the mix of
feedstocks used and on food and fuel prices to several supply-side factors, such as the costs of
various feedstocks and biofuels, the growth in productivity of conventional crops and the
availability of land.
We develop a dynamic, multi-market equilibrium model, Biofuel and Environmental
Policy Analysis Model (BEPAM), which analyzes the markets for fuel, biofuel, food/feed crops
and livestock for the period 2007-2022. We consider biofuels produced not only from corn but
also from several cellulosic feedstocks and imported sugarcane ethanol while distinguishing
between domestic gasoline supply and gasoline supply from the rest of the world. BEPAM treats

3

each Crop Reporting District (CRD) as a decision making unit where crop yields, costs of crop
and livestock production and land availability differ across CRDs. Food and fuel prices are
endogenously determined annually and used to update price expectations, cropland acreage and
land use choices. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we review the
existing literature and the key contributions of our research. In Section III we briefly describe the
current legislations whose effects are being analyzed here. Section IV describes the simulation
model. Data used for the simulation model is described in Section V followed by the results and
conclusions in Sections VI and VII.

II. Previous Literature
A number of studies have examined the implications of biofuel production and policies
for food/feed prices and land use in the long run. Using the partial equilibrium FAPRI model,
Elobeid et al. (2007) analyze the long run effects of crude oil price changes on demand for
ethanol and corn while Elobeid and Tokgoz (2008) expand that analysis to show the extent to
which the effects of expansion in corn ethanol production on food/feed prices can be mitigated
by liberalizing import of biofuels from Brazil. More recently, Fabiosa et al. (2009) use the model
to obtain acreage multiplier effects of corn ethanol expansion. These studies (like Tyner and
Taheripour 2008) consider an exogenously given price of gasoline and assume that ethanol and
gasoline are perfectly substitutable. As a result, the price of ethanol is determined by the price of
gasoline (based on its energy content relative to gasoline) and there is a one-directional link
between gasoline prices and corn prices, resulting in a perfectly elastic demand for corn at the
break-even price at which ethanol refineries can make normal profits. These studies also assume
that crop yields are constant over time.

4

Ferris and Joshi (2009) use AGMOD to examine the implications of the RFS for ethanol
and biodiesel production (2008-2017), assuming perfect substitutability between gasoline and
ethanol and no cellulosic biofuel production. They find that the mandate could be met by
potential crop yield increases and a decline in land under the Conservation Reserve Program and
cropland pasture.
Unlike the models used in above studies which focus only on corn ethanol, the
POLYSYS model includes various bioenergy crops and investigates land use impacts of biofuel
and climate policies (Ugarte et al. 2003). Walsh et al. (2003) apply POLYSYS to examine the
potential for producing bioenergy crops at various exogenously set bioenergy prices. English et
al. (2008) analyze the effects of the corn ethanol mandate (assuming that cellulosic biofuels are
not feasible) and show that it will lead to major increases in corn production in the Corn Belt and
in fertilizer use and soil erosion over the period 2007-2016. Most recently, Ugarte et al. (2009)
apply POLYSYS to analyze the implications on agricultural income, over the 2010-2025 period,
of various carbon prices and carbon offset scenarios under a GHG cap and trade policy assuming
the RFS exists.
The impact of climate change policies on the agricultural sector and biofuel production
has been examined by McCarl and Schneider (2001) using FASOM, a multi-period, price
endogenous spatial market equilibrium model, with a focus on land allocation between
agricultural crops and forests. Like the above studies, FASOM also assumes that gasoline and
ethanol are perfectly substitutable, but determines the price of gasoline endogenously using an
upward sloping supply curve for gasoline. The model includes an autonomous time trend in crop
yields and considers various bioenergy feedstocks, such as crop and forest residues, switchgrass,
and short-rotation woody crops. FASOM is used by EPA to simulate the impacts of

5

implementing the RFS relative to 2007 Annual Energy Outlook (EIA 2007) reference case (EIA
2010). Results show that the RFS would increase corn and soybeans prices in 2022 by 8% and
10%, respectively, and decrease gasoline price by 0.006 cents per liter relative to the AEO 2007
Reference Case. Total social welfare in 2022 is $13-26 B higher than the reference level.
In addition to these partial equilibrium studies, the general equilibrium GTAP model has
been used to examine the global land use effect of corn ethanol mandate in the U.S. and a biofuel
blend mandate in European Union in 2015, assuming no cellulosic biofuel production (Hertel,
Tyner and Birur 2010) and imperfect substitutability between gasoline and ethanol (Birur, Hertel
and Tyner 2008). Reilly et al. (2009) use the general equilibrium EPPA model to examine the
implications of greenhouse gas reduction targets over the 2015-2100 period for second
generation biomass production and changes in land use. Their simulations suggest that it is
possible for significant biofuel production to be integrated with agricultural production in the
long run without having dramatic effects on food and crop prices.
The model developed in this paper differs from the existing models in the literature in
several aspects. First, we allow imperfect substitutability between gasoline and ethanol.
Bottlenecks within the ethanol distribution infrastructure, the existing stock of vehicles and
constraints on the rate of turnover in vehicle fleet limit the substitutability between biofuels and
gasoline. Empirical evidence shows that biofuel prices are not simply demand driven (based on
energy equivalent gasoline prices and perfect substitutability); instead they have been observed
to be correlated with their costs of production as well.1 It is difficult to estimate and predict the
substitution possibility between these fuels in the near future as it is directly related to the vehicle
fleet structure. Therefore, we examine the implications of a range of substitutability between
gasoline and ethanol and implicitly derive the demand for the two fuels. Hayes et al. (2009) show

6

that incorporating imperfect substitutability between ethanol and gasoline in the FAPRI model
results in a substantially smaller impact of a change in crude oil prices on demand for ethanol
and land use than in Tokgoz et al. (2007). Additionally, we assume two upward sloping supply
functions of gasoline and allow biofuel production to have a feedback effect on gasoline prices
and thus on the demand for biofuels (as in Hayes et al. 2009). The U.S. accounts for 23% of
world petroleum consumption, and about 57% of the consumption is imported from the rest of
the world (EIA 2010); thus the change in U.S. oil demand can significantly affect world oil
prices. To capture the effect of biofuel policy on gasoline prices, this study considers gasoline
supply from domestic producers and the rest of world.
Crop yield changes over time influence the land needed to meet food and fuel needs to
meet biofuel mandates. Dumortier et al. (2009) show that introduction of even a 1% increasing
trend in corn yield in the FAPRI model can substantially reduce the corn acreage in response to
changes in gasoline and biofuel prices We allow for changes in crop yields over time from two
sources, an endogenous price effect and an autonomous technology effect, using econometrically
estimated elasticities and time trend .
Existing models such as FASOM rely on historically observed crop mixes to constrain
the outcomes of linear programming models and generate results which are consistent with
farmers’ planting history. To accommodate new bioenergy crops and unprecedented changes in
crop prices in the future FASOM allow crop acreage to deviate 10% from observed historical
mixes. In BEPAM, we use the estimated own and cross price crop elasticities to limit the
flexibility of crop acreage changes, instead of an arbitrary level of flexibility.

7

III. Policy Background
The EISA established the RFS in 2007 to provide an assurance of demand for biofuels
beyond levels that might otherwise be supported by the market. It establishes a goal of 136
billion liters of biofuel production in 2022 that includes four separate categories of renewable
fuels, each with a separate volume mandate. Of the 136 B liters of the renewable fuel, the
RFS requires that at least 80 B liters should be advanced biofuels. Advanced biofuel specifically
excludes ethanol derived from corn starch. It includes ethanol made from cellulose, hemicelluloses, lignin, sugar or any starch other than corn starch as long as it achieves a GHG
reduction of 50% compared to gasoline and is obtained from ‘renewable biomass’. Renewable
biomass limits the crops and crop residues used to produce renewable fuel to those grown on
land cleared or cultivated at any time prior to enactment of EISA in December 2007. Crops used
to produce renewable fuels that can meet the mandate must be harvested from agricultural land
cleared or cultivated prior to December 2007. Land enrolled in the Conservation Reserve
Program (CRP) is not allowed to be converted for the production of miscanthus and swithchgrass
(EIA 2010).
Of the 80 B liters of the advanced biofuels, at least 60 B liters should be cellulosic
biofuels derived from any cellulose, hemicelluloses or lignin and achieving a lifecycle GHG
emission displacement of 60% compared to gasoline while the rest could be sugarcane ethanol
from Brazil. Conventional biofuels produced from corn starch are capped at 56 B liters in 2022.
Cumulative production of biofuels over the 2007-2022 period mandated by the RFS requires
1220 B liters of renewable fuel and at least 420 B liters of advanced biofuels while the amount of
conventional biofuels cannot exceed 800 B liters during this period.

8

The Food, Conservation, and Energy Act (FCEA) of 2008 provides tax credits for
blending biofuels with gasoline. The tax credits for corn ethanol peaked at $0.16 per liter in
1984, fell to $0.14 per liter in 1990, $0.13 per liter between 1998 and 2005 and is authorized at
$0.12 cents per liter till December 20102. The tax credit for cellulosic biofuels is $0.27 per liter
and authorized till January 1, 2013. It also requires that cellulosic biofuels should be produced
and consumed in the U.S.
In addition to biofuel mandates and volumetric tax credits, the U.S. imposes trade barriers
to restrict the imports of sugarcane ethanol from Brazil. The biofuel trade policy includes a 2.5%
ad valorem tariff and a per unit tariff of $0.14 per liter (authorized until January 2011). A key
motivation for the establishment of the tariff is to offset a tax incentive for ethanol-blended
gasoline. An exception to the tariff is the agreement of the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI)
initiated by the 1983 Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act (CBERA). Under this agreement,
ethanol produced from at least 50% agricultural feedstocks grown in CBI countries is admitted
into the U.S. free of duty. If the local feedstock content is lower than the requirement, a tariff rate
quota (TRQ) will be applied to the quantity of duty-free ethanol. Nevertheless, duty-free ethanol
from CBI countries is restricted to no more than 0.2 B liters or 7% of the U.S. ethanol
consumption. To take advantage of this tariff-free policy, hydrous ethanol produced in other
counties, like Brazil or European countries, can be imported to a CBI country and exported to the
U.S. after dehydration. In 2007, total imports account for roughly 6% of U.S. consumption (25.7
B liters), with about 40% of the import from Brazil and approximately 60% routed through CBI
countries to avoid the import tariff. However, CBI countries have never reached the ceiling on
their ethanol quota, partly due to insufficient capacity. Our analysis here assumes existing tariff
policy remain in effect till 2022.

9

IV. The Model
IV.1. General Description
We develop a multi-market, multi-period, price-endogenous, nonlinear mathematical
programming model which simulates the U.S. agricultural and fuel sectors and formation of
market equilibrium in the commodity markets including trade with the rest of the world. We
refer to this model as the Biofuel and Environmental Policy Analysis Model (BEPAM).
BEPAM is a dynamic, multi-market equilibrium model, which analyzes the markets for fuel,
biofuel, food/feed crops and livestock for an extendable future period (currently set for 20072022) in the U.S. This model determines several endogenous variables simultaneously, including
vehicle kilometers travelled (VKT), fuel and biofuel consumption, domestic production and
imports of oil and imports of sugarcane ethanol, mix of biofuels and the allocation of land among
different food and fuel crops and livestock. This is done by maximizing the sum of consumers’
and producers’ surpluses in the fuel and agricultural sectors subject to various material balances
and technological constraints underlying commodity production and consumption within a
dynamic framework (McCarl and Spreen 1980; Takayama and Judge 1971). This model is
designed specifically to analyze the implications of biofuel and climate policies on land use
patterns, commodity markets, and the environment.
The agricultural sector in BEPAM includes several conventional crops, livestock and
bioenergy crops (crop residues from corn and wheat and perennial grasses, miscanthus and
switchgrass) and distinguishes between biofuels produced from corn, sugarcane and cellulosic
feedstocks. Crops can be produced using alternative tillage and rotation practices. The model
incorporates spatial heterogeneity in crop and livestock production activity, where crop
production costs, yields and resource endowments are specified differently for each region and

10

each crop assuming linear (Leontief) production functions. As the spatial decision unit, the
model uses the CRDs in each state by assuming an aggregate representative producer who makes
planting decisions to maximize the total net returns under the resource availability and
production technologies (yields, costs, crop rotation possibilities, etc.) specified for that CRD.
The model covers CRDs in 41 of the contiguous U.S. states in five major regions.3
The model uses ‘historical’ and ‘synthetic crop mixes’ when modeling farms’ planting
decisions to avoid extreme specialization in regional land use and crop production. The use of
historical crop mixes ensures that the model output is consistent with the historically observed
planting behaviors (McCarl and Spreen 1980; Önal and McCarl 1991). This approach has been
used in some existing models also, such as FASOM, to constrain feasible solutions of
programming models and generate results which are consistent with farmers’ planting history.
To accommodate planting new bioenergy crops and unprecedented changes in crop prices in the
future FASOM allows crop acreage to deviate 10% from the observed historical mixes. In our
model we use synthetic (hypothetical) mixes to offer increased planting flexibility beyond the
observed levels and allow land uses that might occur in response to the projected expansion in
the biofuels industry and related increases in corn and cellulosic biomass production. Each
synthetic mix represents a potential crop pattern generated by using the estimated own and cross
price crop acreage elasticities and considering a set of price vectors where crop prices are varied
systematically. These elasticities are estimated econometrically using historical, county-specific
data on individual crop acreages for the period 1970-2007 as described in Huang and Khanna
(2010). Crop yields are assumed to grow over time at an exogenously given trend rate and to be
responsive to crop prices.

11

The model includes five types of land (cropland, idle cropland, cropland pasture, pasture
land and forestland pasture) for each CRD. We obtain CRD-specific planted acres for 15 row
crops for the period 1977 to 2007 from USDA/NASS (2009) and use this to construct the
historical and synthetic mixes of row crops. Cropland availability in each CRD is assumed to
change in response to crop prices. The responsiveness of total cropland to crop prices as well as
the own and cross-price acreage elasticities for individual crops is obtained from Huang and
Khanna (2010). Data on idle cropland, cropland pasture, pasture and forestland pasture for each
CRD are also obtained from USDA/NASS (2009). Idle cropland includes land use category for
cropland in rotations for soil improvement, and cropland on which no crops were planted for
various physical and economic reasons. The estimates of idle land include land enrolled in the
CRP which could be an additional source of land available for energy crops. Land in this
program is farmland that is retired from crop production and converted to trees, grass, and areas
for wildlife cover. We exclude land enrolled in CRP from our simulation model. Cropland
pasture is considered as a long-term crop rotation between crops and pasture at varying intervals.
Pasture land consists of land with shrub, brush, all tame and native grasses, legumes and
other forage while forestland pasture is stocked by trees of any size and includes a certain
percentage of tree cover. Pasture land and forestland pasture are primarily for grazing uses. We
keep the level of permanent pastureland and forestland pasture fixed at 2007 levels but allow idle
land and cropland pasture to move into cropland and back into an idle state. It can also be used
for perennial bioenergy crop production. A change in the composite crop price index triggers a
change at the extensive margin and leads to a shift in land from idle cropland and cropland
pasture to land available for crop production the following year. The responsiveness of aggregate
cropland supply to a lagged composite price index is econometrically estimated and the

12

implications of expanding crop production to idle land and cropland acreage for average yields
of conventional crops in each CRD are described in Huang and Khanna (2010). The remaining
idle land/pasture land can be used for bioenergy crops. While yields of bioenergy crops are
assumed to be the same on marginal land as on regular cropland there is a conversion cost to the
use of idle land/cropland pasture for bioenergy crop production. In the absence of an empirically
based estimate of the ease of conversion of marginal land for perennial grass production we
assume a CRD-specific conversion cost equal to the returns the land would obtain from
producing the least profitable annual crop in the CRD. This ensures consistency with the
underlying assumption of equilibrium in the land market, in which all land with non-negative
profits from annual crop production is utilized for annual crop production. As annual crop prices
increase, the cost of conversion increases; the “supply curve” for idle marginal land is, therefore,
upward sloping. We impose a limit of 25% on the amount of land in a CRD that can be
converted to perennial grasses due to concerns about the impact of monocultures of perennial
grasses on biodiversity or sub-surface water flows. We examine the sensitivity of model results
to this assumption by lowering this limit to 10%.
The perennial nature of the energy crops included in the model requires a multi-year
consideration when determining producers’ land allocation decisions in any given year. For this,
we use a rolling horizon approach where for each year of the period 2007-2022 the model
determines production decisions and the corresponding dynamic market equilibrium for a
planning period of 10 years starting with the year under consideration. After each run, the first
year production decisions and the associated market equilibrium are used to update some of the
model parameters (such as the composite crop price index, land supplies in each region and crop

13

yields per acre for major crops), based on previously generated endogenous prices, and the
model is run again for another 10-year period starting with the subsequent year.
The behavior of agricultural consumers’ behavior is characterized by linear demand
functions which are specified for individual commodities, including crop and livestock products,
In the crop and livestock markets, primary crop and livestock commodities are consumed either
domestically or traded with the rest of the world (exported or imported), processed, or directly
fed to various animal categories. Export demands and import supplies are incorporated by using
linear demand/supply functions. The commodity demand functions and export demand functions
for tradable row crops and processed commodities are shifted upward over time at exogenously
specified rates. The crop and livestock sectors are linked to each other through the supply and
use of feed items and also through the competition for land (because the grazing land needed by
the livestock sector has alternative uses in crop production).
The biofuel sector distinguishes biofuels produced from corn, sugarcane ethanol and
cellulosic feedstock with all biofuels being perfect substitutes for each other. Biofuel from
sugarcane is imported from Brazil and CBI countries subject to policies described above.
Gasoline is produced domestically as well as imported from the rest of the world. The demand
for gasoline and biofuels is derived from the demand for VKT. We assume a linear demand for
VKT as a function of the cost per kilometer and that VKT is produced using a blend of gasoline
and biofuels. At the individual consumer level (with a conventional vehicle), the two fuels are
currently perfectly substitutable in energy equivalent units up to a 10% blend. For an individual
consumer with a flex fuel car the two fuels are substitutable up to an 85% blend. At the
aggregate level, we consider a representative consumer that owns a vehicle fleet that consists of a
mix of the two types of vehicles; in 2007, only 2.9% of vehicles in 2007 were flex-fuel vehicles

14

(EIA 2010). The ability to substitute gasoline for biofuels at the aggregate level is, therefore,
limited by the mix of vehicles. It is also limited by the available ethanol distribution network
and infrastructure for retail ethanol sales. We, therefore, consider gasoline and biofuel to be
imperfectly substitutable at the aggregate level and use a constant elasticity of substitution
function to model the aggregate blend of fuel produced. The VKT demand function and CES
production function are calibrated for the base year assuming a specific value for the elasticity of
substitution between gasoline and ethanol and observed base year prices and quantities of these
fuels and VKT. We examine the implications of varying the extent of substitutability on the
consumption of the two types of fuels and on the agricultural and fuel sectors. The demand for
VKT is shifted upwards over time and the VKT consumed is determined by the marginal cost of
kilometers which in turn depends on the marginal costs of gasoline and biofuels. The shares of
various fuels are determined endogenously based on fuel prices.
In the presence of the RFS, the quantity mandate imposes a fixed cost of biofuel on
blenders. The average cost of the blended fuel (gasoline and ethanol) will fall as the level of
gasoline consumption increases, but the average cost will be greater than marginal costs for low
levels of gasoline consumption. Thus, at low levels of fuel consumption blenders can be
expected to price fuel based on its average cost (if average cost is greater than the marginal cost)
in order to avoid negative profits. In this case VKT will be determined by the average cost of a
kilometer rather than its marginal cost. If gasoline consumption is high enough (or if biofuel
consumption is small) it could be profitable to use marginal cost pricing of the blended fuel. The
model selects the appropriate rule for pricing the blended fuel depending on whether average
cost of VKT is greater or smaller than its marginal cost.
The endogenous variables determined by the model include: (1) commodity prices; (2)

15

production, consumption, export and import quantities of crop and livestock commodities; (3)
land allocations and choice of practices for producing row crops and perennial crops (namely,
rotation, tillage and irrigation options) for each year of the 2017-2022 planning horizon and for
each CRD and (4) the annual mix of feedstocks for biofuel production, domestic production and
imports of gasoline and consumption of VKT.

IV.2. Algebraic Presentation
We describe the algebraic form of the numerical model using lower case symbols to
denote the exogenous parameters and upper case symbols to represent endogenously determined
variables. The objective function is the sum of discounted consumers’ and producers’ surpluses
obtained from production, consumption and trade of the crop and livestock products plus the
surplus generated in the fuels sector over the 16-year planning horizon 2007-2022 and the
terminal values of standing perennial grasses in 2022. The algebraic expression is given
explicitly in (1):
T

Max :  e  rt {  
0

DEM t , z

0

z

f z (.)d (.)   
z

EXPt , z

0

f z (.) d (.)   
z

IMPt , z

0

f z (.)d (.)  

MILt

0

f z (.)d (.)

 rcr ,q ACRt , r ,q   pcr , p ACRt ,r , p   rsr ,q ACRt ,r ,q   ccr ACRt , r , p
r ,q

r, p

r ,q

r, p

 lck LIVt , k   sci PROt ,i
k



GASt

0

(1)

i

f g (.)d (.)  ecc ETH t ,c  ecb ETH t ,b }

e  rT  (vr , p  wr ) ACRT ,r , p
r, p

The first integral term in line of (1) represents the areas under the domestic demand
functions from which consumers’ surplus is derived. Each integral is associated with a crop,
livestock, or processed commodity for which a domestic market demand is considered

16

( DEM t ,z denotes the endogenous domestic demand variable in year t; z  {i, j , k} } denotes the
index set for crop commodities (i), processed products from crops (j), and livestock commodities
(k); f z (.) denotes the inverse demand function for the commodity involved; and d(.) denotes the
integration variable). The next two integral terms account for the areas under the inverse demand
functions for exports, EXPt ,z , and the areas under the import supply functions IMPt ,z (such as
sugar and sugarcane ethanol). The last integral term represents the area under the inverse demand
function for kilometers traveled (denoted by KILt ). The demand functions for crop products,
livestock products and kilometers traveled are all characterized by linear demand functions in the
current version, but other functional forms, such as constant elasticity demand functions, can be
incorporated without difficulty.
The second line in (1) includes the production costs of row crops, perennial crops and
crop/forest residues collected for biofuel production, and land conversion costs for marginal
lands converted to the production of perennial crops. The land allocated to row crops and
perennial crops (acreage) in region r and year t, denoted by ACRt , r ,q and ACRt ,r , p , respectively,
may use one of the various production practices which differ by crop rotation, tillage, and
irrigation. Fixed input-output coefficients (Leontief production functions) are assumed for both
row crops and perennial crops production. The third term represents the cost of collected crop
residues (biomass for cellulosic biofuel production) and involves the management options for
row crops that produce biomass (specifically, corn stover and wheat straw). The amount of
marginal lands converted for perennial grasses are denoted by ACRt ,r , p and ccr represents the
cost per unit of marginal land conversion. The last term denotes the costs of converted marginal

17

lands (such as idle land and crop pasture land) for perennial crops. The land conversion costs
include costs for land clearing, wind rowing and any necessary activities for seedbed preparation.
The third line in (1) includes the costs associated with livestock activities. The amount of
livestock is represented by LIVt , k , and lc k denotes the cost per unit of livestock category k (again
employing Leontief production functions) that is assumed to be the same across all regions. The
second term represents the total cost of converting primary crops (corn, soybeans, and
sugarcane) to secondary (processed) commodities (oils, soymeal, refined sugar, HFCS and
DDGS). The amount of processed primary crop i in year t is denoted by PROt ,i , and sci denotes
the processing cost per unit of i.
The fourth line involves the costs accruing to the fuel sector. The first integral represents
the area under the supply functions for gasoline from domestic producers and the rest of the
world, whose consumption and price are to be determined endogenously. The next two terms
represent the processing costs of corn and cellulosic ethanol in refinery, namely ETHt ,c , ETHt ,b .
Finally, the last line reflects the value of the remaining economic life of standing perennial
grasses beyond the planning period T, denoted by vr , p , net of the return from the most profitable
cropping alternative in region r, denoted by wr . The latter is used to account for the opportunity
costs of land.
In the model, we assume that the consumers obtain utility from VKT ( KILt ), which is
produced by blending gasoline ( GAS t ), corn ethanol ( ETHt ,c ), cellulosic ethanol ( ETHt ,b ) and
sugarcane ethanol ( IMPt , s ). Gasoline and ethanol are assumed to be imperfect substitutes in
kilometers production while corn ethanol and cellulosic ethanol are perfect substitutes. The total

18

amount of kilometers generated by use of all sources of fuels is formulated using a constant
elasticity production function as shown in equation (2) below:

KILt   t [t ( ETHt ,c  ETHt ,b  IMPt ,s )  (1  t )GASt ]1/ 

for all t

(2)

The regional material balance equations link the production and usage of primary crops,
as shown in constraint (3) for primary crop product i produced and marketed by region r:

MKTt ,r ,i  {CEt ,r }i corn   yr ,q ,i ACRt ,r ,q for all t , r , i

(3)

j

where MKTt ,r ,i denotes the amount of primary crop product i sold in the commodity markets and

yr ,q ,i is the yield of product i per unit of the land allocated to crop production activity q in region
r. For corn, MKTt ,r ,i includes non-ethanol uses and CEt ,r is the amount of corn converted to
ethanol production (which appears only in the balance constraint for corn).
The amount of primary crop i available in the market (excluding the corn used for
ethanol) comes from domestic regional supply ( MKTt ,r ,i ). This total amount is either consumed
domestically ( DEM t ,i ), exported ( EXPt ,i ), processed to secondary commodities ( PROt ,i ), or
used for livestock feed ( FEDt ,i ). This is expressed in constraint (4) below:
DEM t ,i  PROt ,i  FEDt ,i  EXPt ,i   MKTt ,r ,i

for all t , i

(4)

r

Similar to (4), a balance equation is specified for each processed commodity. Like
primary commodities, processed commodities can also be consumed domestically, exported, or
fed to animals, as shown in constraint (5) below:
DEM t , j  FEDt , j  EXPt , j  i , j PROt ,i  { i , j CEt , r } j  ddg ,i  corn for all t , j
r

where i , j denotes the conversion rate of raw product i to processed product j.
19

(5)

A particularly important component of the model that links the crop and fuel sectors is
the conversion of corn and cellulosic biomass to ethanol. During the conversion of corn a
secondary commodity, called the Distiller's Dried Grains with Solubles (DDGS), is produced as a
byproduct. The amount of DDGS produced is proportional to the amount of corn used for
ethanol, CEt ,r , through a fixed conversion rate corn,ddg , and it can either be fed to livestock as a
substitute for soymeal or exported.
The relations between ethanol production and crop production activities are expressed
below:
E t ,c    CEt ,r

(6)

for all t

r

Et ,b   ( byr , p ACt ,r , p   ryr ,q ACt ,r ,q )
r, p

for all t

(7)

r ,q

where  and  denote the amounts of ethanol produced per unit of corn and cellulosic
feedstock, respectively, and byr , p and ryr ,q are the biomass and crop residue yields in region r for
respective perennial and crop production activities.
Land is the only primary production factor considered in the model. In each region, the
total amount of land used for all agricultural production activities cannot exceed the available
land ( alt , r ), which is specified separately for irrigated and non-irrigated land. Due to the steady
increase in ethanol consumption the demand for agricultural land is expected to increase through
the conversion of some marginal lands (not currently utilized) to cropland. The extent of
conversion is assumed to depend on variations in crop prices over time. Therefore, in the model
we determine the agricultural land supply ‘endogenously’. Specifically, for a given year t in the
planning horizon 2007-2022, we solve the model assuming a fixed regional land availability for
each year of the 10-year production planning period considered in that run. From the resulting
20

multi-year equilibrium solution, we take the first-year values of the endogenous commodity
prices and use them to construct a composite commodity price index, CPI. Based on the CPI
generated thereby we adjust the land availability for the subsequent run (which considers another
10-year planning period starting with year t+1). The land constraint is shown in (8).

 ACR

t ,r ,q

q

  ACRt , r , p  alt ,r

for all t , r

(8)

p

To prevent unrealistic changes and extreme specialization in land use, which may be
particularly serious at regional level, we restrict farmers’ planting decisions to a convex
combination (weighted average) of historically observed acreage patterns ( hr , ht ,i ) where subscript
ht stands for the observed time periods prior to the base year. Historical land uses may be valid
when simulating farmer’s planting decisions under ‘normal’ conditions. However, they maybe
too restrictive for future land uses given the increased demand for ethanol and unprecedented
land use patterns that are likely to occur in the future to produce the required biomass crops. To
address this issue we introduce ‘hypothetical’ acreage patterns ( h 'r , n ,i ) for each row crop and
each region. To generate hypothetical acreage patterns (crop mixes), we first use the historical
data on prices and acreages of row crops in each region to estimate acreage elasticities for each
row crop with respect to its own price and cross-price changes while controlling other factors,
such as social- economic changes and time trend. Then we estimate a number of hypothetical
acreages using these price elasticities and considering a systematically varied set of crop prices.
The resulting set of actual and hypothetical crop mixes are used in constraint (9) to limit the
flexibility in planting decisions, where  i , q represents the share of row crop i in production
activity q and Wt ,r ,* represents the weight assigned to historical or hypothetical crop mixes. The
latter are defined as variables to be endogenously determined by the model.

21


q

i ,q

ACRt ,r , q   hr , ht ,iWt , r , ht   h 'r , n ,i Wt ,r , n
ht

for all t , r , i

(9)

n

The sum of the endogenous weights assigned to individual mixes must be less than or
equal to 1 (convexity requirement), as shown in equation (10).
 W
1
W
t , r ,
t, r, n

n

(10)

for all t ,r

A similar set of crop mix constraints is introduced for irrigated crops too, which we do
not show here, using only the historically observed irrigated land use patterns (no hypothetical
mixes for irrigated crops).
Large scale monocultures of perennial grasses may have unforeseen impacts on
biodiversity and sub-surface water flows. To prevent extreme specialization in the production of
perennial grasses in some regions, we restrict the land allocated to perennial grasses to less than
25% of total land available in each region ( alt , r ). The constraint is shown in (11).

 ACR

t ,r , p

 0.25* alt , r

(11)

for all t , r

p

In the livestock sector, we define production activity variables (number of animals) at
national level for each category of livestock except the beef and dairy cattle. Cattle production is
given special emphasis in the model for two reasons. First, cattle require grazing land, therefore
compete with crop production activities on total land in each region. Second, besides
requirements of feed crops directly fed to different types of livestock, DDGS (a byproduct of
corn ethanol production) is also used as a feed item that may substitute soymeal (both supplying
protein). The regional cattle production activities are aggregated in (12) to obtain the total cattle
activity at national level:
LIVt ,cattle   CTLt , r for all t

(12)

r

22

where CTLt ,r is the number of cattle stock in region r and year t. Cattle supply is constrained by
the grazing land availability. Therefore, for each region we specify the grazing rates and the
supply of grazing land, GLt ,r , g , where g denotes the type of grazing land (namely pasture land,
forest land and cropland that can be used for grazing -such as wheat and oats). The amounts of
other livestock (chicken, turkey, lamb, pork and eggs) are also constrained by historical numbers
at the national level. Constraint (13) below relates the usage of grazing land and cattle activity in
each region:

CTLt ,r   GLt ,r , g / gar , g for all t , r

(13)

g

where gar , g denotes the amount of grazing land required per unit of cattle.
Equations (14) and (15) establish the balances between nutrition needs of livestock
activities, in terms of protein and calories, and the amounts of nutrients provided by primary
feed crops (grains) and byproducts of crops processing (i.e., soymeal and DDGS):

nrk ,nu LIVt ,k   nci ,nu Ft ,i ,k   nc j ,nu Ft , j ,k for all t, k

(14)

FEDt , z   Ft , z ,k for all t , k and z  i, j used for feed

(15)

i

j

k

where ncz ,nu denotes the nutrition content per unit of feed item z, and nrk ,nu and F t , z , k are the
required amount of nutrient nu per unit of livestock and the amount of feed item z used by
livestock category k, respectively.
To avoid unrealistic changes in feed mixes, we impose historical feed mixes used by all
livestock categories. Constraints (16) and (17) constrain the consumption of feed to be within a
convex combination of historical feed uses.
FEDt , z   hf z ,htWFt ,ht

(16)

ht

23

WF

t , ht

1

(17)

ht

Soybean meal and DDGS are substitutes in the provision of protein up to a certain share level.
Because the share of DDGS in total feed consumption of each livestock category is restricted
(Babcock et al, 2008), we impose appropriate upper bounds for DDGS to reflect this aspect of
feeding practices. Livestock commodities can be consumed domestically or exported. The total
supply of each livestock commodity is then related to the respective livestock production activity
through a fixed yield coefficient, denoted by lyk , s . Constraint (18) establishes this relationship:
DEM t , k  EXPt ,k   lyk , s LIVt , s for all t , k

(18)

s

V. Data
The simulation model uses CRD specific data on costs of producing crops, livestock,
biofuel feedstocks, yields of conventional and bioenergy crops and land availability. We estimate
the rotation, tillage and irrigation specific costs of production in 2007 prices for 15 row crops
(corn, soybeans, wheat, rice, sorghum, oats barley, cotton, peanuts, potatoes, sugarbeets,
sugarcane, tobacco, rye and corn silage) and three perennial grasses (alfalfa, switchgrass and
miscanthus) at county level. These are aggregated to the CRD level for computational ease.
Production of dedicated energy crops is limited to the rainfed regions which include the Plains,
Midwest, South, and Atlantic, while conventional crops can be grown in the Western region as
well.1 The primary livestock commodities considered are eggs and milk. The secondary (or
processed) crop and livestock commodities consist of oils from corn, soybeans and peanuts,
soybean meal, refined sugar, high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS), wool and meat products such as
1

Western region includes Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah,
Washington and Wyoming; Plains includes Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas and Kansas;
Midwest includes Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Ohio and Wisconsin; South includes
Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi and South Carolina; Atlantic includes Kentucky,
Maryland, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia.

24

beef, pork, turkey, chicken and lamb. Feedstocks used for biofuel production in the model
include corn, corn stover, wheat straw, forest residues, miscanthus and switchgrass.

Dedicated Bioenergy Crops: Miscanthus and switchgrass have been identified as among the best
choices for high yield potential, adaptability to a wide range of growing conditions and
environmental benefits in the U.S. and Europe (Gunderson, Davis and Jager 2008; Heaton,
Dohleman and Long 2008; Lewandowski et al. 2003). Both grasses have high efficiency of
converting solar radiation to biomass and in using nutrients and water, and have good pest and
disease resistance (Clifton-Brown J, Y-C and TR 2008; Semere and Slater 2007).
Switchgrass is a warm season perennial grass native to North America while Miscanthus
is a perennial rhizomatous grass non-native to the U.S. A key concern with a large-scale
introduction of a non-native grass, such as miscanthus, is its potential to be an invasive species.
The miscanthus variety being evaluated in this study as a feedstock for biofuels is the sterile
hybrid genotype Miscanthus × giganteus that has been studied extensively through field trials in
several European countries. Switchgrass stands can have a life-span of 15-20 years in a native
state, but in cultivated conditions the U.S. Department of Energy estimates stand-life at 10
years.4 In the U.S, miscanthus stands that are more than 20 years old have been observed in
experimental fields in Illinois (Heaton, Dohleman and Long 2008). This study assumes a lifespan of 10 years for switchgrass and 15 years for miscanthus.
In the absence of long term observed yields for miscanthus and limited data for
switchgrass, we use a crop productivity model MISCANMOD to simulate their yields. The
MISCANMOD estimates yields of miscanthus and Cave-in-Rock variety of switchgrass using
GIS data, at a 1o by 1o scale, on climate, soil moisture, solar radiation and growing degree days

25

as model inputs, as described in Jain et al. (2010). The Cave-in-Rock switchgrass cultivar studied
here is an upland variety that originated in Southern Illinois and is cold-tolerant and well-suited
for the upper Midwest (Lemus and Parrish 2009; Lewandowski et al. 2003). Lowland varieties of
switchgrass, like Alamo, are most suited for southern US (Lemus and Parrish 2009). Recent
analysis of data from field trials across the U.S. shows that frequency distributions of yield for
the upland and lowland varieties were unimodal, with mean (±SD) biomass yields of 8.7 ± 4.2
and 12.9 ± 5.9 metric tons dry matter per hectare (MT DM/ha) for the two varieties, respectively
(Wullschlegera et al. 2010). This is consistent with estimates provided by a review of literature
which shows that annual yield of lowland variety of switchgrass ranges between 11-16 MT DM/
ha (Lemus and Parrish 2009) and is about 50% higher than that of the upland variety. We,
therefore, increase switchgrass yields from MISCANMOD by 50% for all regions other than the
Midwest (excluding Missouri) to account for higher yields of the lowland varieties.
The simulated yields show that the post-harvest (delivered) biomass yield of miscanthus
is about two times the yield of switchgrass at each location. For each crop, these yields vary from
north to south and from west to east in the U.S. Atlantic states have high yields for miscanthus
and switchgrass while western states have very low yields due to insufficient soil moisture.
Furthermore, southern states have higher yields for miscanthus and switchgrass as compared to
northern states. The average delivered yield of miscanthus is the highest in the Atlantic states at
31.6 MT DM/ha followed by the South at 30.2 MT DM/ha, Midwest at 23.8 MT DM/ha and the
Plains at 19.8 MT DM/ha. Corresponding estimates for average switchgrass yield are 16.4, 15.2,
10.7, 11 MT DM/ha, respectively.5
The costs of producing miscanthus and switchgrass differ over their lifetime, due to lags
between time of planting and harvestable yields. Costs of production of miscanthus and

26

switchgrass are developed for each year of their lifetime for each CRD and include the costs of
inputs including fertilizer, seed and chemicals; machinery required for establishment and harvest
of bioenergy crops; and storage and transportation. Cost of land for these crops is implicitly
included given a land constraint in the model. The cost of labor, building repair and depreciation,
and overhead (such as farm insurance and utilities) are excluded from the costs of production
since they are likely to be the same for all crops and would not affect the relative profitability of
crops. Costs of bioenergy crops in the first year differ from those in subsequent years because it
involves costs of seeding and land preparation to establish the crops. Existing studies vary in
their assumptions about input requirements, pre-harvesting, harvesting and storage costs of
bioenergy crops. This study constructs low cost and high cost scenarios for the production of the
bioenergy crops, and the simulation model will test the sensitivity of the results to these
assumptions. The low cost scenario considers a low fertilizer application rate, low replanting
probability, high second-year yield, low harvest loss and low harvesting costs while the high cost
scenario considers the opposite scenario of production. These are described in Jain et al. (2010).
Analysis of the break-even annualized costs of producing these grasses shows that there is
considerable spatial variation in the cost of cellulosic feedstocks in the U.S. and that the mix of
bioenergy crops will differ across geographic locations. Switchgrass is likely to have relatively
lower costs of production in some of the northern Midwestern states (Minnesota and Wisconsin)
and southern states (Texas and Louisiana) that have relatively high switchgrass yields while
Miscanthus has lower costs in the Southern, Atlantic and central Plain states.

Conventional Crops and Crop Residues: For row crops, we use the historical five year average
(2003-2007) yield per hectare for each CRD as the representative yield for that CRD

27

(USDA/NASS 2009) under dryland and irrigated land. The yields of corn, soybeans and wheat
are assumed to grow over time at the trend rate estimated using historical data. These yields are
also assumed to be price-elastic with the price elasticities estimated econometrically. The trend
rates and elasticities used in the model and more details of the econometric estimation methods
can be found in Huang and Khanna (2010). Some crops are grown in rotation with each other to
increase soil productivity and reduce the need for fertilizers. We adjust crop yields per hectare
based on crop rotations for each CRD. We obtain 15 crop rotation possibilities for each region of
the U.S. from USDA/ERS (1997), including corn-soybean rotation, continuous corn rotation,
fallow-wheat rotation and continuous rotations for other crops. In Midwestern states where a
corn-soybean rotation is the dominant rotation practice, we assume observed corn yields to be
those under a corn-soybean rotation. Corn yields per hectare under a continuous corn rotation are
assumed to be 12% lower than under a corn-soybean rotation. The fallow-wheat rotation is
primarily used to conserve soil moisture over a 2-year period for 1 year production, which leads
to a reduction in wheat yields by 50% in this rotation. The fallow-wheat rotation is widely used
in the Northern wheat-growing region (such as Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana and
Colorado) and in parts of the Northern Plains states (such as North Dakota, South Dakota,
Nebraska and Kansas). Some counties in Minnesota and Texas also use the fallow-wheat
rotation.6
Corn stover and wheat straw yields for each CRD are obtained based on a 1:1 grain-toresidue ratio of dry matter of crop grain to dry matter of crop residues and 15% moisture content
in the grain reported in Sheehan et al. (2003), Wilcke and Wyatt (2002) and Graham, Nelson and
Sheehan (2007). Similar to Malcolm (2008), we assume that 50% of the residue can be removed
from fields if no-till or conservation tillage is practiced and 30% can be removed if till or

28

conventional tillage is used. Corn stover yield ranges from 0.16-5.07 MT DM/ha under no-till
while wheat straw yield ranges from 0.34 to 4.38 MT DM/ha in the U.S. In contrast to
miscanthus, the average delivered yields for corn stover are the highest in Midwestern and Plain
states at 4.0 MT/ha followed by the southern and western states at 3.3 and 3.2 MT/ha
respectively. Atlantic states have the lowest corn stover yield at 2.8 MT/ha. Wheat straw
delivered yield is highest in the West at 3.1 MT/ha followed by the Midwestern states at 2.3
MT/ha and less than 2 MT/ha in other regions.
Costs of producing row crops and alfalfa are obtained from the crop budgets complied for
each state by state extension services and used to construct the costs of production for each CRD.
Crop budgets vary by rotation, tillage and irrigation choices. The costs of crop production
include costs of inputs such as fertilizer, chemicals and seeds, costs of drying and storage,
interest payments on variable inputs, costs on machinery and fuels and costs of crop insurance.
The costs of labor, building repair and depreciation, and overhead (such as farm insurance and
utilities) are excluded from these costs of production since they are likely to be the same for all
crops and would not affect the relative profitability of crops. We determine the cost of
production of corn silage by estimating the foregone revenue per hectare by growing corn silage
instead of corn, the additional cost of fertilizer replacement that is needed for corn silage, and
harvesting costs as reported in FBFM7.
Application rates for nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium and seeds for row crops and
alfalfa vary with crop yields, and differ across CRDs. Other costs of producing crops are
assumed to be fixed irrespective of crop yields per hectare but differ across states. In addition,
costs of fertilizer, chemicals and machinery under conventional tillage differ from those under
conservation tillage.

29

The costs of collecting corn stover and wheat straw include the additional cost of
fertilizer that needs to be applied to replace the loss of nutrients and soil organic matter due to
removal of the crop residues from the soil. The fertilizer application rates per dry metric ton of
stover and straw removed are assumed to be constant across regions and are obtained from
Sheehan et al. (2003) and Wortmann et al. (2008), respectively. In addition, the collection of
crop residues involves the costs of harvesting stover and staw (i.e., mowing, raking, baling,
staging and storage) that are estimated based on the state-specific crop budgets on hay alfalfa
harvesting. We find that the costs of production of crop residues are higher than those of
bioenergy crops grown on marginal lands, except for corn stover in Plain states, such as North
Dakota, South Dakota and Nebraska where corn yields are high due to irrigation. High wheat
yields in western mountain states (such as in Oregon, Idaho and Washington) can make wheat
straw in those states competitive with other biomass produced in rain-fed eastern US.

Land Availability: For each of the five types of land (cropland, idle cropland, cropland pasture,
pasture land and forestland pasture) we obtain CRD-specific data on land availability. CRDspecific planted acres for 15 row crops are used to obtain the cropland available in 2007
(estimated at 123 M ha for the 280 CRDs considered here), and to obtain the historical and
synthetic mixes of row crops. Cropland availability in each CRD is assumed to change in
response to crop prices. The responsiveness of total cropland to crop prices as well as the own
and cross-price acreage elasticities for individual crops are obtained from Huang and Khanna
(2010).
Data on idle cropland, cropland pasture, pasture and forestland pasture for each CRD are
obtained from USDA/NASS (2009). In 2007, the availability of pastureland and forestland

30

pasture is estimated to be 155 M ha and 10.5 M ha, respectively while that of idle cropland is 15
M ha and of cropland pasture is 13 M ha. Most of the idle cropland in 2007 was enrolled in the
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP). This size of the CRP decreased to 13 M ha from 2008
onwards. The analysis here assumes that land enrolled in CRP is preserved at 2008 levels and not
used for conventional crop or bioenergy crop production.
Crop and Livestock Sector: In the livestock sector we consider demands for several types of
meat (chicken, turkey, lamb, beef and pork), wool, dairy and eggs. The demand functions are
calibrated using the observed quantities consumed and prices and demand elasticities. The latter
are obtained from Adams et al. (2005). The supply of livestock (chicken, turkey, lamb and pork)
is constrained by their historical numbers at the national level. The supply of beef is restricted by
the number of cattle which in turn depends on the amount of grazing land available at regional
level. The historical livestock data at the national level and production of meat, dairy and eggs
for 2003-2007 are used to obtain the average livestock productivity. The data on grazing land
requirements for cattle, nutrition requirements (in terms of protein and grain) for each livestock
category, and production and processing costs are obtained from Adams et al. (2005). We use the
nutrient content of feed crops, soymeal and DDGS to find the least cost feed rations for each type
of livestock. The price of DDGS is determined by the lagged prices of corn and soymeal using
the relationship estimated by Ellinger (2008). To prevent unrealistic feed mixes consumed by
livestock we constrain the consumption of different types of feed based on the historically
observed levels obtained from USDA/NASS (2009).
The crops sector consists of markets for primary and processed commodities. The
demands for primary commodities, such as, corn and soybeans are determined in part by the
demands for processed commodities obtained from them and by other uses (such as seed). The

31

conversion rates from primary crop commodities to processed commodities are obtained from
USDA/NASS (2009). Conversion costs are obtained from Adams et al. (2005) and inflated to
2007 prices using the respective GDP deflator. We use two-year (2006-2007) average prices,
consumption, exports and imports of crop and livestock commodities to calibrate the domestic
demand, export demand and import supply functions for all commodities8. The data on prices,
consumption, exports and imports are obtained from ERS/USDA. Elasticities are assembled
from a number of sources including FASOM, USDA and existing literature as shown in Table 1.
Domestic demands, export demands and import supplies are shifted upward over time at
exogenously specified rates, listed in Table 1. We obtain projected amounts of crop and livestock
commodities for domestic consumption, exports and imports for 2010 and 2020 from FAPRI9
and interpolate then for the intervening years assuming a uniform annual growth rate.

Fuel Sector: We assume a linear demand function for VKT with a price elasticity of -0.2 that
shifts out by 1% each year10. The elasticity of substitution between gasoline and ethanol is 3.95
(Hertel, Tyner and Birur 2008). For the supply of gasoline, we consider two gasoline supply
curves to distinguish domestic gasoline supply and gasoline supply from the rest of the world.
The short-run supply of domestic gasoline is assumed to be linear with a slope of 0.9 (Greene
and Tishchishyna 2000) implying a short-run supply elasticity of 0.049 when the oil price is
$34/BBL while the short-run gasoline supply to the U.S. from the rest of the world is assumed to
have a constant elasticity form with a price-elasticity of 2 (National Research Council 2002).
To calibrate the demand function of vehicle kilometers, production function of vehicle
kilometers and supply functions of gasoline, data on consumption of kilometers and fuel
consumption and fuel prices in 2007 are assembled from several sources. The Federal Highway

32

Administration (FHWA) reports that total vehicle-kilometers traveled in 2007 were 5107 B
kilometers. The Energy Information Administration (EIA) reports that the consumption of
gasoline and ethanol are 519.4 B liters and 23.4 B liters, respectively, in the U.S. in 2007. The
EIA reports that average retail price of gasoline that year was $0.72 per liter. We calculate the
retail price of ethanol as the wholesale rack price plus $0.10 per liter fuel taxes and a $0.05 per
liter markup minus $0.13 per liter subsidy, yielding $0.61 per liter in 200711. In the benchmark
case we assume the price elasticity of VKT demand is -0.2 and elasticity of substitution between
gasoline and ethanol is 3.95 (Hertel, Tyner and Birur 2008).
We assume linear supply functions for ethanol imports from Brazil and CBI countries,
and use two-year (2006-2007) average prices and imports of ethanol imports to calibrate the
ethanol import supply functions. The excess supply elasticity of imported ethanol from Brail and
CBI counties is assumed to be 2.7 (as in de Gorter and Just (2008)). We calculate the sugarcane
ethanol price in Brazil and CBI countries as U.S. retail price minus $0.02 per liter transportation
cost, fuel tax and tariff, and plus subsidy, yielding $0.49 and $0.62 per liter, respectively.12
Ethanol yield from corn grain is 417.3 liters of denatured ethanol per metric ton of corn
while cellulosic biofuel yield from an nth-generation stand alone plant is estimated as 330.5 liters
per metric ton of dry matter of biomass (Wallace et al. 2005). The cost of conversion of corn
grain to ethanol is estimated as $0.20 per liter in 2007 prices based on EPA estimates (EPA
2010) while the non-feedstock costs of producing cellulosic ethanol are estimated as $0.37 per
liter in 2007 prices (EPA 2010). We assume that the current unit cost of conversion of feedstock
to biofuel, Ccum , is a declining function of cumulative production, i.e., Ccum  C0Cum b , where C0
is the cost of the first unit of production, Cum is the cumulative production, b is the experience
index. We assume b for corn ethanol is equal to -0.20 (Hettinga et al. 2009) and calibrate C0

33

using data on the processing cost and cumulative corn ethanol production in 2007. To calibrate
the function for cellulosic ethanol we assume Ccum in 2022 is $0.18 per liter (EPA 2010) and use
the production quantities specified in the RFS to obtain a value for b of -0.05.13 The feedstock
and refinery costs of sugarcane ethanol in Brazil and CBI countries are also assumed to be
declining functions of cumulative production. We assume b for sugarcane ethanol is -0.32 (van
den Wall Bake et al. 2009). Parameter C0 is calibrated using data on the feedstock and refinery
costs of sugarcane ethanol and cumulative sugarcane ethanol production in 2007. The growth
rate of sugarcane ethanol production is assumed to be constant and equal to 8% (van den Wall
Bake et al. 2009) and is used to compute the feedstock and refinery costs of sugarcane ethanol
for 2007-2022.
VII. Results
We first validated the simulation model assuming existing fuel taxes and corn ethanol tax
credits and compared the model results on land allocation, crop production, biofuel production,
and commodity prices with the corresponding observed values in the base year (2007). Since the
corn ethanol mandate was exceeded in 2007 it is not imposed as a binding constraint. As shown
in Table 2, the differences between model results and the observed land use allocations are less
than 10%. Food prices are generally within 10% of the observed values except for the wheat
price which is 12% higher than the actual prices in 2007. The fuel prices and fuel consumption
are also simulated well, within 5% deviation from the observed values. We consider these results
as a fairly good sign of the model’s validation capability.
We then examine the effects of two policy scenarios on the agricultural and fuel sectors:
biofuel mandates under the RFS alone, and biofuel mandates with volumetric tax credits. The
RFS mandates are set as nested volumetric requirements for the production of biofuels at

34

mandated levels for the period of 2007-2022. These mandates serve as the minimum quantity
restrictions on biofuel production that can shift up if economically competitive with conventional
fuels through policy support and technological improvements. We then compare model results
under biofuel policies to those under a business-as-usual (BAU) scenario. The BAU scenario is
defined as one without any biofuel policy, except for the tariff on biofuel imports which is kept
unchanged in all scenarios here. In all scenarios considered here we also include a fuel tax on
gasoline and biofuels, which is set at $0.10 per liter, and assume that the demands for crops and
VKT increase over time. Results for cropland allocation are presented in Table 3 while Table 4
shows the results for production and prices of key crop and livestock commodities. The regional
distribution of land for bioenergy feedstocks are presented in Table 5. Tables 6 and 7 present the
impact of biofuel policies on the fuel sector and on social welfare. Table 8 contains the results of
the sensitivity analysis.

Business-As-Usual (BAU) Scenario: In the absence of any government intervention in the biofuel
market we find that total crop acreage decreases by 0.3% from 121.5 in 2007 to 121.1 M ha in
2022 with corresponding increases in idle/pasture land. Corn and soybean acreages would
decrease by 0.8 M ha (2.8%) and 0.1 M ha (0.4%) while wheat acreage would increase by 1.2 M
ha (5.3%) over the 2007-2022 period. Land under cotton in 2022 decreases by 0.3 M ha (7.8%)
compared to 2007. Despite the reduction in corn and soybean acreages, their production would
increase by 16% and 10% over the 2007-2022 period due to 19% and 10% increases in corn and
soybean yields. The production of wheat also increases by 25% , which can be attributed to the
increases in wheat acreage and yields from 2.4 metric tons per hectare to 2.8 metric tons per
hectare over 2007-2022. In the livestock sector, beef production would increase by 10% between

35

2007-2022. Despite the increasing demand for corn for biofuel production, corn price decreases
by 7% in 2022 due to the increase in corn yields. Since corn is a major source of feed for beef
production, it leads to a reduction in beef price in 2022 by 12% compared to 2007. Soybean and
wheat prices change only marginally between 2007 and 2022. There is a significant increase in
exports of corn, soybean and wheat by 31%, 6% and 38% over the 2007-2022. Exports of beef
would increase by 30% due to lower beef prices.
In the fuel sector, we find an 8% increase in the price of VKT and a 7% increase in
gasoline price in 2022 compared to 2007. Ethanol consumption would be about 28 B liters in
2022 or 4% of fuel consumed with no government intervention. Of the cumulative consumption
of corn ethanol over the 2007-2022 period, a little over 10% is imported from Brazil.

Biofuels Mandate: With corn ethanol production at its maximum allowable level or 56 B liters
from 2015 and beyond, it could constitute a maximum of two-thirds of the cumulative biofuel
production between 2007-2022; the remaining mandate is met by advanced biofuels. With the
nested volumetric provisions of the RFS, however, advanced biofuels can meet more of the
mandate than the minimum level if they can compete with corn ethanol. Given the assumptions
about the rate of decline in costs of producing advanced biofuels from cellulosic feedstocks in
the US (described above), we find that the RFS would lead to the production of about 613 B
liters of corn ethanol and about 608 B liters of advanced biofuels including 38 B liters of
sugarcane ethanol imports over the 2007-2022 period. This would increase cumulative
production of corn ethanol by 107% relative to the BAU over this period. The cumulative
advanced biofuels (608 B liters) are largely produced using miscanthus (49%) and forest residues
(22%), with the rest produced using switchgrass, corn stover and wheat straw.

36

The RFS leads to a 6% increase in total cropland (6.86 M ha); most of this is to enable an
increase in corn production to produce the additional corn ethanol. There is a 16% increase
(about 4.7 M ha) in land under corn in 2022 compared to the BAU. With a high yielding grass
like miscanthus, only 4.4 M ha are required for miscanthus production and 3 M ha to switchgrass
production to produce cellulosic biofuels. Of this 7.44 M ha under bioenergy crops only 0.44 M
ha is converted from cropland and about 7M ha is from currently idle cropland or cropland
pasture. Thus, a total 12.14 M ha is required for biofuel production; of this, about 5 M ha of land
is released by reducing acreage under other crops (including soybeans, wheat, rice, cotton and
pasture), representing 4% of the 121.5 M ha of cropland in 2007 and the rest is obtained by a
change in land use at the extensive margin. Corn stover and wheat straw would be harvested
from 10% and 5% of the land under corn and wheat, respectively, in 2022.
There is considerable variation in the mix of feedstocks produced across regions. Stover
is harvested only in the Plain States while wheat straw is harvested mainly in the Western States.
More than half of the switchgrass acreage is in the Plain states, followed by the Midwest and the
South. Miscanthus acreage is largely in the Plains and the Midwest followed by the Atlantic and
Southern States. This acreage also changes over time; it expands as the mandate requires more
cellulosic biofuel production. Figure 1 shows the change in land under bioenergy crops over the
2007-2022 period under the mandate. Acreage under miscanthus expands from less than 1 M ha
in 2012 to over 4 M ha in 2022. Initially miscanthus and switchgrass acreage are similar as each
is produced in areas where it has a comparative advantage; in latter years miscanthus acreage
expands much more rapidly while switchgrass acreage levels off because of the relatively lower
costs of producing a high-yielding crop like miscanthus.

37

The RFS would significantly affect production, exports and prices of crop and livestock
commodities. The increase in demand for corn results in an increase in corn production in 2022
by 18% relative to the BAU. However, corn price in 2022 is still 24% higher than under the
BAU because 38% of corn production in 2022 is used for biofuel production. Soybean and wheat
prices in 2022 are also 20% and 7% higher than the BAU due to 8% reduction in their production
levels. The production of rice and cotton in 2022 would decrease by 8% and 2%, respectively,
relative to the BAU due to the acreage shifts to the production of corn. This increases rice and
cotton prices in 2022 by 5% and 2% relative to the BAU. Livestock prices also rise with beef
price increasing by 8% compared to the BAU due to the increases in feed prices and a 3%
reduction in beef production. In response to higher prices of crop commodities, export of corn,
soybean and wheat would decrease by 4%, 11% and 12% relative to the BAU while the exports
of rice would decrease by 42%. Higher livestock prices also lead to a reduction in beef exports
by 2% relative to the BAU.
As a result of the mandate, the volumetric share of ethanol in total fuel consumption
increases to 21% in 2022. The RFS results in a reduction in cumulative gasoline consumption
over the 2007-2022 period by 7% and a reduction in gasoline price in 2022 by 8% compared to
the BAU. While domestic gasoline production falls by 2.5% gasoline imports from the rest of the
world decrease by 8.5% relative to BAU. The overall cost of VKT falls from $0.087/km to
$0.085/km; as a result the VKT increases by 0.4% relative to the BAU scenario in 2022. This
market-based feedback effect on gasoline prices tempers the extent to which biofuels replace
gasoline. At a maximum, with perfect substitutability between gasoline and biofuels and a fixed
price of gasoline, the additional 109 B liters of biofuels produced in 2022 (over and above the 28
B liters in the BAU) could have displaced an energy equivalent volume of 72 B liters of gasoline.

38

With imperfect substitutability and the reduction in gasoline price, the amount of gasoline
reduced is 68 B liters; implying a rebound effect on gasoline consumption of about 6%.

Biofuel Mandate and Volumetric Tax Credits: The provision of tax credits for biofuels leads to
three significant impacts on total biofuel production and the mix of feedstocks used for biofuels.
First, it increases total biofuel production over 2007-2022 from the minimum mandated level of
1221 B liters to 1316 B liters. Second, it makes cellulosic ethanol competitive with corn ethanol
and sugarcane ethanol and reduces cumulative corn ethanol production from 613 B liters under a
mandate alone to 132 B liters. Cumulative cellulosic ethanol production increases to twice the
level under a mandate alone, from 570 B liters to 1159 B liters over the 2007-2022 period. Third,
it increases the share of miscanthus and switchgrass in cumulative advanced biofuels (cellulosic
biofuels plus sugarcane ethanol) from 49% and 18% under a mandate alone to 57% and 21%. The
corresponding shares of ethanol imports and biofuel produced from forest residues fall from 6%
and 22% under a mandate alone to 2% and 13%. The reduction in production of corn ethanol
(relative to the RFS) reduces the acreage under corn by 8.4 M ha. Of this, about 6 M ha is
diverted to other conventional crops while the rest is diverted to miscanthus and switchgrass. In
addition to this, 10.6 M ha of idle/cropland pasture is converted to produce these energy crops.
The increase in biofuels produced from miscanthus leads to an increase in the land under
miscanthus from 4.4 M ha under a mandate alone to 8.7 M ha under a mandate and volumetric tax
credits and a corresponding increase in land under switchgrass from 3 M ha to 4.2 M ha.
Switchgrass acreage expands in all rainfed regions as does miscanthus acreage. In particular,
these tax credits enable miscanthus acreage to more than double in the Midwest and to expand by
more than 50% in the Atlantic States. The biofuel tax credits also increase the acreage from which

39

corn stover and wheat straw are harvested in 2022, to 40% of corn acres and 9% of wheat acres,
respectively. With the tax credits, it is profitable to harvest corn stover in the Midwest and to
harvest wheat straw in the Plains and Southern States. Switchgrass acreage expands in all rainfed
regions as does miscanthus acreage. The expansion in acreage of energy crops over time is much
more rapid for miscanthus than for switchgrass (Fig.1). The volumetric tax credits also make the
production of switchgrass and miscanthus viable earlier than otherwise. Moreover, they change
the relative profitability of growing miscanthus and switchgrass. After 2016, miscanthus acreage
continues to expand while switchgrass acreage levels off and even declines in later years. This is
because volumetric subsidies increase the relative profitability of biofuels with higher yields per
hectare of land. After 2016, miscanthus and switchgrass compete for marginal land in the same
locations and the tax credits increase the relative profitability of miscanthus in those locations.
The change in the composition of biofuels due to the subsidy changes the total land under
crop production and under various row crops. Total cropland increases by 1.1 M ha relative to
that under the RFS alone, due to an expansion in acreage under energy crops. Acreage under
corn and corn production in 2022 declines by 13% relative to the BAU scenario; corn production
in 2022 is, however, still higher than that in 2007 under the BAU due to productivity increase. In
comparison to BAU, acreage under soybeans and soybean production in 2022 would increase by
2% and 3%, respectively. The reduction in total cropland availability results in a decrease of 1.5
M ha in acreage under wheat, rice, cotton and pasture compared to the BAU. However, the
acreage under these crops in 2022 under a mandate and subsidy are still higher than those under
a mandate alone.
The increase in the production of cellulosic biofuels due to biofuel subsidies alleviates
the adverse impact of the mandate on the prices of crop and livestock commodities. Corn and

40

soybean prices in 2022 would be 24% and 16% lower than under a mandate alone while beef
price in 2022 would be 6% lower. In comparison to the BAU, corn price in 2022 is 6% lower due
to productivity increase and decrease in demand for corn ethanol. Prices of soybeans, wheat, rice
and cotton are similar to those under the BAU, deviating from -1% for rice to 3% for wheat. Beef
price is about 1% higher relative to the BAU. In response to lower prices of corn, soybeans and
rice, exports demand for these commodities would increase by 0.7%, 0.1% and 2% relative to the
BAU. Lower beef price also leads to an increase in beef exports by 11% relative to the BAU.
The volumetric tax credits result in consumer prices of $0.54 per liter for corn ethanol
and $0.46 per liter for cellulosic ethanol that are significantly lower than those under a mandate
alone while the gasoline price is marginally higher due to increased demand for fuel relative to
the mandate alone. Relative to the RFS alone, cumulative VKT over the 2007-2022 period
increases by 581 B kilometers (0.7%), while gasoline consumption increases by 4.6 B liters
(0.05%) and biofuel consumption increases by 95.38 B liters (8%). The tax credits lower the
overall cost of fuel and thus the cost per kilometer by 6%.

VII.2. Social Welfare Effects of Biofuel Policies
We use the modeling framework presented here to estimate the changes in consumer and
producer surplus in each of the markets in the fuel and agricultural sector considered here and the
change in government revenues due to fuel taxes/subsidies. We present the change in social
welfare with the RFS compared to the BAU and the change in social welfare with the RFS and
volumetric tax credits relative to the RFS alone in Table 7. As described above, the RFS leads to
lower gasoline price but higher costs of corn ethanol and cellulosic biofuels; nevertheless it
lowers cost per kilometer. Therefore, it increases the consumer surplus of the vehicle kilometer

41

consumers. The RFS also raises conventional crop prices and by increasing demand for residues
and energy crops it raises returns from existing land as well as from marginal land that was
otherwise not used for agricultural production. It, therefore, benefits agricultural producers. This
is at the expense of agricultural consumers; only a portion of these are, however, domestic. Thus
some of the loss in surplus is borne by foreign consumers. The RFS hurts gasoline producers by
lowering demand for gasoline and its price. However, with two-thirds of the cumulative gasoline
consumption over the 2007-2022 period being imported, the bulk of the loss in producer surplus
is borne by foreign oil producers. As a result, the RFS leads to an increase in net present value of
social welfare (in 2007 dollars) of $122 B relative to the BAU. It also increases cumulative
biofuel production relative to the BAU by 890 B liters, implying a per liter benefit of $0.14.
As compared to the RFS, the provision of volumetric tax credits lowers crop prices and
the cost per kilometer; therefore, they benefit agricultural consumers and vehicle kilometer
consumers. Moreover, they benefit producers of cellulosic feedstocks by further increasing
demand for crop residues and energy crops. However, producers of conventional crops are
adversely affected as are gasoline producers. There is a significant government expenditure of
$221 B in present discounted value over the 2007-2022 period. As a result, aggregate social
welfare is $79 B lower than under the RFS alone. Focusing only on tax payer cost of these tax
credits would significantly overestimate the cost of additional biofuel production. By estimating
welfare cost we consider not only the costs to tax payers but also the net costs to the economy
after considering the gains and losses to fuel and crop consumers and producers. The tax credits
do lead to additional biofuel production over and above the RFS alone (by 95 B liters, that is by
about 8%) over the 2007-2022 period, implying a welfare cost of $0.83 per liter of biofuel. In
gasoline energy equivalent terms, this implies a cost of about $1.25 per liter.

42

Although our estimate of the welfare cost of biofuel is lower than the direct cost to tax
payers are per liter cost of additional biofuel is higher than that obtained by the CBO ( ), because
the incremental volume of biofuels attributable to the tax credits is lower than their assumption.
The low volume of incremental biofuel attributed to the tax credits in this study is due to our
assumption that the volume of biofuel mandated by the RFS will be achieved even in the absence
of a tax credit. In the event that this is not the case, or if there are other constraints to increasing
biofuel production, then the incremental biofuel production due to these tax credits could be
smaller or larger than that estimated here. Moreover, the welfare cost of these tax credits cannot
be disaggregated into those for corn ethanol and those for cellulosic biofuels since each of these
tax credits not only has a direct effect on the particular type of biofuel towards which it is
targeted but also indirectly affects the production of the other type of biofuel by changing their
relative costs. Thus, it is the combined effect of both the volumetric tax credits for corn ethanol
and cellulosic biofuels that together determines the effect on food and fuel prices and on social
welfare.

VII.3. Sensitivity Analysis
We examine the sensitivity of our results to changes in some key assumptions about
technology and cost parameters in the agricultural sector (see Table 8), such as, the rate of yield
increase of row crops, the costs of producing bioenergy crops and land availability for bioenergy
crops. Jain et al.(2010) describe two scenarios for the costs of production of miscanthus and
switchgrass, a low cost and a high cost scenarios. The benchmark case considered the low cost of
miscanthus and switchgrass production described there. We now examine the implications of the
costs of production being less optimistic for miscanthus14 than assumed in the benchmark case

43

but the same for other feedstocks as in the benchmark case. We also examine the implications of
constraining the amount of land in a CRD that can be used for bioenergy crops to 10% instead of
25% assumed in the benchmark case. In each case, only one parameter is changed at a time while
all other parameters remain the same. We report the results for the biofuel mandate alone (M)
and biofuel mandates plus volumetric tax credits (MS) scenarios. We present the percentage
variations due to the parameter changes relative to the same policy scenarios with the benchmark
parameters.
We find that compared to the benchmark case, a 50% reduction in rate at which crop
productivity reduces the acreage under corn under the RFS by about 5%, increases corn price by
2% and decreases the production of corn ethanol by 25%. It increases cellulosic biofuel
production by 27% and acreage under miscanthus and switchgrass increases by 31% and 7%.
This raises the marginal cost of feedstocks for cellulosic biofuel production and makes it
profitable to increase the area from which corn stover and wheat straw are harvested by 164%
and 53%, respectively. The volumetric subsidies now shift land even more towards miscanthus
and switchgrass (since they are relatively higher yielding feedstocks) and lowers acreage under
corn stover and wheat straw acreages by 9% and 7%, respectively. Corn and soybean prices are
7% and 4% higher than in the benchmark case. The welfare cost of the tax credits is lower than
in the benchmark case by 12% primarily because the producers of conventional crops and of
bioenergy crops are better off in this case; the former due to higher crop prices and the latter due
to greater demand for cellulosic biofuels. Incremental biofuel production due to the tax credits is
higher due to greater imports and the shift towards cellulosic biofuels. As a result the welfare
cost per liter of biofuels decreases to $0.7.

44

Raising the production cost of miscanthus relative to other feedstocks leads to a
significant decline in the production of miscanthus and expansion in the use of crop residues and
switchgrass to produce cellulosic biofuels. It increases the share of corn ethanol, ethanol from
forest residues and of ethanol imports in the cumulative biofuel production under the RFS and
under the RFS and tax credit scenario. The price of cellulosic biofuels increases by 16% but
overall impact on VKT and on gasoline consumption is small. There is a 3% reduction in
cumulative biofuel consumption in the MS scenario relative to the benchmark due to the absence
of the high yielding feedstock, miscanthus; same level of land under bioenergy crops now yields
a lower volume of biofuels. The welfare cost of the tax credits is significantly lower in this case
but so is the incremental biofuel production due to the tax credit, resulting in an increase in the
per liter welfare cost to $1.4.
A reduction in land available for bioenergy crops to a maximum of 10% of the CRD
reduces the share of cellulosic biofuels to meet the RFS by 10% while increasing the price of
cellulosic biofuels by 5%. Biomass feedstock producers are better off as are row crop producers.
The welfare costs of the subsidies are similar to those in the benchmark case, but cumulative
biofuel production is 5% lower than in the benchmark case (by 63 B liters). As a result the
welfare cost of biofuels is substantially higher.
In general, we find that changes in technology and cost parameters that limit the
potential to expand production of high yielding biofuels reduce the ability of the volumetric tax
credits to significantly increase biofuel production. The tax credits then primarily support biofuel
production that occurs anyway to meet the RFS, provided the RFS is binding; resulting in high
welfare costs per liter of biofuel production.

45

VIII. Conclusions and Discussion
Biofuel mandates and subsidy policies have been enacted with the intention of promoting
renewable alternatives to reduce dependence on gasoline. Concerns about the competition they
pose for land and its implications for food prices have led to a shift in policy incentives towards
second generation biofuels from non-food based feedstocks. This paper develops a framework to
examine the economic viability of these feedstocks and the extent to which biofuel expansion
will imply a trade-off between food and fuel production. It analyzes the differential incentives
provided by alternative policies for biofuel production and the mix of biofuels and the welfare
costs of biofuel policies.
Even with the option of high yielding energy crops, we find that a biofuel mandate
(without any subsidies) would rely on corn ethanol to meet 50% of the RFS mandate over 20072022; miscanthus and forest residues would produced 49% and 22% of the cumulative advanced
biofuels over 2007-2022 with switchgrass, crop residues and ethanol imports meeting the rest. In
the benchmark case, the mandate leads to a 16% increase in corn acreage which is largely met by
reducing acreage under soybean and other crops. Despite gains in corn productivity over 20072022 the corn price in 2022 is 24% higher than in the BAU. In response to higher crop and
livestock prices, exports of corn, soybeans, wheat and beef decline relative to the BAU. The
mandate lowers the price of gasoline by 8% in 2022 relative to the BAU which results in a
reduction in the cost per kilometer and increases cumulative VKT by 0.4% over the 2007-2022
period. The benefits to fuel consumers and agricultural producers more than offsets the costs to
domestic agricultural consumers and gasoline producers; consequently the RFS raises net present
value of cumulative social welfare relative to the BAU by $122 B. This ranges between $110$132 across the scenarios considered here.

46

Volumetric tax credits for corn ethanol and cellulosic biofuels significantly enhances the
competitiveness of cellulosic biofuels relative to corn ethanol and shifts the mix of biofuels such
that 88% of the cumulative biofuels over the 2007-2022 would now be produced from cellulosic
feedstocks. This mitigates the competition for land and reduces corn, soybean, wheat, rice, cotton
and beef prices relative to those with a mandate alone. Corn price in 2022 would now be 6%
lower than in the BAU. These tax credits lead to substantial reduction in the consumer price of
biofuels and in the cost per kilometer, despite marginal increases in the gasoline price. As a
result these tax credits benefit fuel consumers, agricultural consumers, gasoline producers and
biomass producers. However, they impose significant costs on tax payers and on conventional
crop producers (by eventually leading to a transition from corn ethanol to cellulosic biofuels). As
a result they lower social welfare relative to the RFS alone. The discounted present value of the
welfare costs of these tax credits range between $79 B and $118 B over the 2007-2022 period.
The incremental gain in total biofuel production beyond the RFS alone ranges between 32 B
liters and 99 B liters across the scenarios considered here. Thus, the welfare cost per liter varies
between $0.7 per liter and $2.6 per liter. These welfare costs are based on the premise that the
mandated volume of biofuel production is achieved even in the absence of these tax credits.
Moreover, these cost estimates are sensitive to assumptions about the costs of producing
cellulosic feedstocks and the extent to which there might be constraints to the expansion of
bioenergy crop production on marginal land.
Our analysis also shows the role of productivity enhancing technologies both in the
traditional crop sector and the bioenergy sector. Yield increases for major crops like, corn and
soybeans and the use of high yielding, long-lived energy crops, like miscanthus contribute to
mitigating the competition for land and the impact of biofuel production on food prices. Corn

47

price in 2022 would be 2-7% higher if the rate of productivity growth of row crops is 50% of that
assumed in the benchmark case. High relative costs of miscanthus production result in 14%
lower cumulative cellulosic biofuel production under the RFS and 3% lower with the RFS and
tax credits compared to the corresponding benchmark case.
Our analysis abstracted from considerations of the external benefits of biofuel production
in the form of energy security and reduced greenhouse gas emissions relative to gasoline as well
as other benefits of ethanol such as its additive value as an oxygenate for gasoline. It does,
however, show how high these benefits would need to be to offset the economic welfare costs of
tax credits estimated here.

Endnotes:
1

http://www.agmrc.org/renewable_energy/ethanol/the_relationship_of_ethanol_gasoline_and_oil_prices.cfm#
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=110_cong_public_laws&docid=f:publ246.pdf
3
Western region includes Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah,
Washington and Wyoming; Plains includes Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas and Kansas;
Midwest includes Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Ohio and Wisconsin; South includes
Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi and South Carolina; Atlantic includes Kentucky,
Maryland, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia.
4
http://southwestfarmpress.com/energy/121107-switchgrass-challenges/
http://www.osti.gov/bridge/servlets/purl/771591-9J657S/webviewable/771591.pdf
5
Delivered yields incorporate losses during harvesting, storing and transporting. Switchgrass yield is typically about
one-half of that for miscanthus. Exceptions to this are some northern states and some southern states where
switchgrass yields are relatively higher than those for miscanthus because minimum temperature are too low in the
north and not low enough in the south for miscanthus growth. Perlaack et al. (2005) assume switchgrass yields of 18
MT ha-1 in a high yield scenario and 12 MT ha-1 otherwise.
6
Information on crop rotation for each state is obtained from ERS/USDA report “Production Practices for Major
Crops in US Agriculture, 1990-1997”
7
www.farmdoc.uiuc.edu
8
An exception is the price of milk which is kept fixed at its observed 2006-2007 level.
9
http://www.fapri.iastate.edu/outlook/2010/text/Outlook_2010.pdf
10
We obtain historical data on vehicle kilometers travelled (VKT) from Federal Highway Administration website:
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/2008/vm202.cfm, and use average growth rate of VMT from
2000-2008.
11
www.neo.ne.gov/statshtml/66.html
12
Transportation cost of ethanol is estimated to be $0.02 per liter in Lasco et al (2010). The difference in ethanol
prices in Brazil and CBA countries can be attributed to additional processing cost in CBA countries because ethanol
needs to be dehydrated before admitted to the U.S.
13
These functions imply that the per liter conversion cost for corn ethanol declines by about 27% while that for
cellulosic ethanol declines by 50% by 2022.
14
This scenario considers higher fertilizer application rates, lower yields in the second year and higher yield losses
during harvest as well as higher harvesting costs per ton.
2

48

Table 1: Domestic Demand, Export Demand, Import Supply Elasticities1
Commodity
Barley
Corn
Cotton
Oats
Sorghum
Wheat
Soybean
Soybean Meal
Vegetable Oil3
Rice
Peanut
Beef
Chicken
Eggs
Pork
Turkey
Lamb
Wool
Refined Sugar
HFCS

Uses
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Export
Export
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Import
Domestic
Export
Domestic
Import
Domestic
Export

Shift (%)2
0.0
2.0
0.8
2.0
-2.0
0.3
-0.4
-1.5
2.0
1.0
-2.0
1.4
0.4
2.0
0.2
2.0
2.0
-0.4
0.8
0.3
2.0
1.4
1.4
0.8

Elasticities
-0.3
-0.2
-0.23
-0.26
-0.18
-0.65
-0.21
-0.2
-2.36
-0.3
-1.67
-0.29
-0.63
-1.41
-0.18
-2.24
-0.11
-1.63
-0.25
-0.75
-0.8
-0.46
-0.8
-0.11

1.0
2.0
0.8
1.4
0.0

-0.83
-0.8
-0.53
-0.8
-0.4

Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5
2.0

0.4
-0.8
-0.368
0.99
-0.91
-0.2

Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)

Sources
USDA/ERS (2009)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Fortenbery and Park (2008)
Adams et al. (2005)
Bredahl et al. (1979)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Bredahl et al (1979)
USDA/ERS (2009)
Bredahl et al. (1979)
Piggott and Wohlgenant (2002)
Piggott and Wohlgenant (2002)
Adams et al. (2005)
Piggott and Wohlgenant (2002)
Piggott and Wohlgenant (2002)
Gao et al.(1995)
Gao et al.(1995)
Carley and Fletcher (1989)
FAPRI (2009)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)
Adams et al. (2005)

Notes:1. This table shows the commodities that can be used for domestic consumption or traded with the rest of the
world. Domestic demand for commodities excludes uses for feed and ethanol production, and prices are fixed at
2007 prices if the elasticities are zeros.
2. Demand shifts are computed based on FAPRI 2010 U.S. and World Agricultural Outlook.
3. Vegetable oil includes corn oil, soybean oil and peanut oil.

49

Table 2: Model Validation for 2007

Total Land
Corn
Soybeans
Wheat
Sorghum
Corn
Soybeans
Wheat
Gas Prices ($/Liter)
Ethanol Prices ($/Liter)
Gas Consumption (B Liters)
Ethanol Consumption (B Liters)
Kilometers Consumption (B Kms)

Observed
Land Use (M Ha)
123.05
34.31
28.15
21.52
2.69
Commodity Prices ($/MT)
142.51
303.69
197.31
Fuel Sector
0.72
0.61
519.94
23.51
4863.29

Model

Difference (%)

121.76
31.12
28.41
22.46
2.93

-1.04
-9.30
0.94
4.38
9.05

133.22
319.40
220.33

-6.52
5.17
11.67

0.72
0.61
519.34
24.22
4863.29

0.00
-0.49
-0.11
3.02
0.00

Table 3: Effect of Biofuel Policies on Land Use in 2022(M Ha)

Total land
Corn
Soybeans
Wheat
Stover
Straw
Miscanthus1
Switchgrass2

Baseline 2007

Baseline

Mandate

Mandate with
Tax Credits

121.51
29.74
29.85
23.02

121.13
28.91
29.74
24.24

127.99
33.55
27.50
22.25
3.45
1.01
4.43
3.03

129.06
25.14
30.09
23.35
10.10
1.99
8.70
4.16

1

Of this, 0.32 M ha and 1.88 M ha are on regular cropland under the Mandate and Mandate and Tax Credits
respectively.
2
Of this, 0.12 M ha and 0.43 M ha are on regular cropland under the Mandate and Mandate and Tax Credits
respectively.

50

Table 4: Effect of Biofuel Policies on Commodity Prices and Production
Baseline (2007)

Corn
Soybean
Wheat
Beef

BAU (2022)

Mandate (2022)

Prices
($/MT)

Production
(M MT)

Prices
($/MT)

Production
(M MT)

Prices
($/MT)

Production
(M MT)

127.0
283.4
213.8
1298.1

276.7
81.4
54.7
16.6

117.6
287.0
212.9
1136.3

321.5
89.5
68.5
18.3

145.9
343.6
228.6
1230.2

380.0
82.9
63.3
17.8

Mandate with Tax Credits
(2022)
Prices
Production
($/MT)
(M MT)
111.0
288.0
219.5
1151.2

Table 5: Regional Distribution of Cellulosic Feedstocks in 2022 (M Ha)
Stover
Midwest
South
Plains
Atlantic
West
Midwest
South
Plains
Atlantic
West

3.44

Straw
Mandate

Switchgrass

Miscanthus

0.47
0.44
1.91
0.21

1.25
0.79
1.36
1.03

0.54
0.67
2.43
0.53

3.08
1.09
2.91
1.63

0.22
0.79
Mandate with Subsidies

6.67
3.22

0.19
0.75

0.20

1.04

51

282.2
92.6
67.9
18.2

Table 6: Effect of Biofuel Policies on Fuel Sector
Baseline 2007

Baseline 2022

Mandate

Mandate with Tax
Credits

Prices in 2022 ($/Km or $/Liter)
Vehicle Kilometers
0.080
0.087
0.085
0.080
Corn ethanol
0.69
0.66
0.70
0.54
Cellulosic ethanol
0.70
0.46
Gasoline
0.73
0.78
0.72
0.73
Consumption in 2022 (B Liters or B Kilometers)
Vehicle Kilometers
4863.29
5513.13
5531.19
5595.92
Domestic Gasoline
172.44
179.30
171.68
172.49
Gasoline from ROW
354.85
409.24
349.11
355.26
Ethanol
15.24
27.70
136.27
136.27
Corn
13.79
24.82
53.35
0.00
Stover
5.74
17.72
Straw
1.02
1.81
Miscanthus
47.73
84.79
Switchgrass
13.01
17.25
Ethanol Imports
1.45
2.88
3.23
2.24
Forest Residues
12.19
12.46
Cumulative Consumption (Over 2007- 2022) (B Liters or B Kilometers)
Vehicle Kilometers
82885.78
83235.64
83817.33
Domestic Gasoline
2815.63
2747.38
2748.44
Gasoline from ROW
6107.17
5586.40
5589.91
Ethanol
330.78
1220.98
1316.36
Corn
295.82
613.22
131.66
Stover
24.75
70.71
Straw
2.14
9.36
Miscanthus
299.76
674.18
Switchgrass
107.87
246.22
Ethanol Imports
34.96
38.22
25.60
Forest Residues
135.03
158.64

Table 7: Welfare Costs of Biofuel Policies
Mandate Relative
to BAU
122.80
890.21
0.14

Change in Social Welfare ($B)
Additional Cumulative Biofuel (B Liters)
Benefit/ Cost per liter of additional biofuel
($/Liter)

52

Mandate with Tax Credits
Relative to Mandate
-78.93
95.38
-0.83

Table 8: Sensitivity Analysis to Technology Parameters1
High cost of
Rate of yield
production of
increase reduced by
miscanthus
50%
M
MS
M
MS
Land Use in 2022 (%)
Total Land

Upper limit of 10%
on energy crop
acres in a CRD
M
MS

Corn

1.0
-4.8

0.1
-0.1

0.4
1.3

0.9
-1.6

-1.2
1.2

-2.0
1.6

Soybeans

4.1

-0.2

0.4

-3.0

0.0

-0.6

Wheat

1.7

0.6

-0.9

-1.6

0.8

1.6

Cellulosic Feedstock Acres in 2022 (%)
Stover

164.3

-8.9

345.8

111.0

209.2

92.3

Straw

52.8

-6.5

122.0

822.2

52.8

591.6

Miscanthus

31.3

3.6

-100.0

-99.0

-20.1

-5.7

Switchgrass

6.6

0.5

149.8

305.9

-42.6

-61.0

Crop Production and Prices in 2022 (%)
Corn Production

-13.3

-7.9

2.2

0.2

2.3

2.3

Corn Price

2.4

6.6

0.0

-3.1

0

0

Soybeans Production

-1.2

-5.5

-0.7

-2.2

0

-0.9

Soybeans Price

3.5

4.4

1.7

4.4

-0.1

2.2

Wheat Production

-6.6

-7.6

0

-1.8

0.7

0.3

Wheat Price

7.0

6.1

0

1.4

0

-0.9

Fuel Prices in 2022 and Cumulative Consumption of Fuels and Kilometers (%)
Gasoline Price

-0.04

-0.01

-0.01

-0.3

-0.1

-0.3

Corn Ethanol price

1.3

3.2

-1.7

-1.4

-1.5

-0.3

Cellulosic Ethanol Price

1.5

0.7

1.8

16.2

5.7

16.4

Gasoline Consumption

-0.05

-0.03

-0.03

0.1

-0.03

0.3

Corn Ethanol

-25.3

-2.8

12.9

-3.8

8.9

1.7

Cellulosic Ethanol

27.1

0.6

-14.1

-2.8

-9.8

-5.9

Ethanol Imports
Total Biofuels
Kilometer Consumption

2.0
0
-0.04

0.7
0.25
-0.01

3.0
0
-0.03

7.2
-2.74
-0.1

2.7
0
-0.03

9.9
-4.84
-0.1

-81.3
4.9

133.7

-83.2
2.6

Welfare Cost of Biofuels
Welfare Cost ($ B)

2

Additional Biofuels (%)

110.2

-69.6
8.1

Welfare Cost ($/liter)

$0.71

132.6

$1.37

1

$2.62

Percentage changes are calculated relative to the same policy in the benchmark scenario
Welfare cost of mandate is change in welfare relative to BAU; welfare cost of mandate and
volumetric tax credits is change in welfare relative to mandate alone.

2

53

.

Figure 1: Land Under Energy Crops
10.0
9.0
8.0

Million Hectares

7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Switchgrass (Mandate with Subsidies)

Miscanthus (Mandate with Subsidies)

Switchgrass (Mandate)

Miscanthus (Mandate)

54

References
Abbott, P. C., C. Hurt, and W. E. Tyner. 2008. What's Driving Food Prices? Farm Foundation
Issue Report, Farm Foundation, Oak Brook, IL.
Adams, D., R. Alig, B. McCarl, and B. C. Murray. 2005. FASOMGHG Conceptual Structure,
and Specification: Documentation. http://agecon2.tamu.edu/people/faculty/mccarlbruce/FASOM.html.
Birur, D., T. Hertel, and W. Tyner. 2008. The Biofuels Boom: Implications for World Food
Markets. Sponsored by the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, January 9, 2008.
Bredahl, M. E., W. H. Meyers, and K. J. Collins. 1979. "The Elasticity of Foreign Demand for
U.S. Agricultural Products: The Importance of the Price Transmission Elasticity."
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 61 (1): 58-63.
Carley, D. H., and S. M. Fletcher. 1989. Analysis of the Impact of Alternative Government
Policies on Peanut Farmers. in Experiment Station Special Publiccation 62, University
of Georgia.
CBO. 2010. Using Biofuels Tax Credits to Achieve Energy and Environmental Policy Goals.
Congressional Budget Office, Congress of the United States, Washington DC. .
Clifton-Brown J, C. Y-C, and H. TR. 2008. Miscanthus: Genetic Resources and Breeding
Potential to Enhance Bioenergy Production. In: Genetic Improvement of Bioenergy
Crops (ed.Vermerris W), pp. 273–294. Springer Science1Business Media,LLC, New
York.
de Gorter, H., and D. R. Just. 2008. "The Economics of the U.S. Ethanol Import Tariff with a
Blend Mandate and Tax Credit." Journal of Agricultural & Food Industrial Organization
6: 1-21.
Dumortier, J., D. J. Hayes, M. Carriquiry, F. Dong, X. Du, A. Elobeid, J. F. Fabiosa, and S.
Tokgoz. 2009. Sensitivity of Carbon Emission Estimates from Indirect Land-Use Change.
Ames, Iowa, Center for Agricultural and Rural Development, Iowa State University, pp.
1-15.
EIA. 2007. Annual Energy Outlook 2007 With Projections to 2030. U.S. Energy Information
Administration. Available at
http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/ftproot/forecasting/0383%282007%29.pdf.
EIA. 2010. Annual Energy Outlook 2010. U.S. Energy Information Administration. Available at
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/.
EIA. 2010. How Dependent Are We on Foreign Oil?
http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/energy_in_brief/foreign_oil_dependence.cfm.
Ellinger, P. 2008. Ethanol Plant Simulator. Urbana, Illinois, Dept. Agr Econ, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Elobeid, A., and A. Tokgoz. 2008. "Removing Distortions in the U.S. Ethanol Market: What
Does It Imply for the United States and Brazil?" American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 90 (4): 918-932.
Elobeid, A. E., S. Tokgoz, D. J. Hayes, B. A. Babcock, and C. E. Hart. 2007. "the Long-Run
Impact of Corn-Based Ethanol on Grain, Oilseed, and Livestock sectors with
Implications for Biotech Crops." AgBioForum 10 (1): 11-18.
English, B., D. G. Ugarte, R. Menard, and T. West. 2008. Economic and Environmental Impacts
of Biofuel Expansion: the Role of Cellulosic Ethanol. Atlanta, GA.

55

EPA. 2010. Renewable Fuel Standard Program (RFS2) Regulatory Impact Analysis. U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Available on line at
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/fuels/renewablefuels/index.htm.
Fabiosa, J. F., J. C. Beghin, F. Dong, A. Elobeid, S. Tokgoz, and T.-H. Yu. 2009. Land
Allocation Effects of the Global Ethanol Surge: Predictions from the Internationsl FAPRI
Model. Ames, Iowa, Center for Agricultural and Rural Development, Iowa State
University, pp. 1-21.
FAPRI. 2009. Elasticity Database.
Ferris, J., and S. Joshi 2009. Prospects for Ethanol and Biodiesel, 2008 to 2017 and Impacts on
Agriculture and Food. ed. M. Khanna, J. Scheffran, and D. Zilberman, Springer.
Fortenbery, T. R., and H. Park. 2008. The Effect of Ethanol Production on the U.S. National
Corn Price. Staff Paper No. 523. Department of Agricultural & Applied Economics,
University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Gao, X. M., E. J. Wailes, and G. L. Cramer. 1995. "Double-hurdle Model with Bivariate Normal
Errors: An Application to U.S. Rice Demand." Journal of Agricultural and Applied
Economics 27 (2): 363-376.
Graham, R. L., R. Nelson, and J. Sheehan. 2007. "Current and Potential U.S. Corn Stover
Supplies." Agronomy Journal 99: 1-11.
Greene, D. L., and N. I. Tishchishyna. 2000. Costs of Oil Dependence: A 2000 Update.
Gunderson, A. C., E. B. Davis, and I. H. Jager. 2008. Exploring Potential U.S.Switchgrass
Production for Lignocellulosic Ethanol. ORNL/TM-2007/183. Oak Ridge, TN: Oak
Ridge National Laboratory.
Hayes, D., B. Babcock, J. Fabiosa, S. Tokgoz, A. Elobeid, and T.-H. Yu. 2009. "Biofuels:
Potential Production Capacity, Effects on Grain and Livestock Sectors, and Implications
for Food Prices and Consumers." Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics 41 (2):
1-27.
Heaton, E., F. Dohleman, and S. Long. 2008. "Meeting US Biofuel Goals with Less Land: the
Potential of Miscanthus." Global Change Biology 14: 2000-2014.
Heaton, E. A., F. G. Dohleman, and S. P. Long. 2008. "Meeting US biofuel goals with less land:
the potential of Micanthus." Global Change Biology 14: 2000-2014.
Hertel, T. W., W. E. Tyner, and D. K. Birur. 2010. "The Global Impacts of Biofuel Mandates."
The Energy Journal 31 (1): 75-100.
Hertel, W. T., W. E. Tyner, and D. K. Birur. 2008. Biofuels for all? Understanding the Global
Impacts of Multinational Mandates. GTAP Working Paper No.51.
Hettinga, W. G., H. M. Junginger, S. C. Dekker, M. Hoogwijk, A. J. McAloon, and K. B. Hicks.
2009. "Understanding the Reductions in US Corn Ethanol Production Costs: An
Experience Curve Approach." Energy Journal 37: 190-203.
Huang, H., and M. Khanna. 2010. An Econometric Analysis of U.S. Crop Yields and Cropland
Acreages: Implications for the Impact of Climate Change. Paper presented at AAEA
annual meeting, Denver, Colorado, 25-27July
(http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/handle/61527).
Jain, A., M. Khanna, M. Erickson, and H. Huang. 2010. "An Integrated Biogeochemical and
Economic Analysis of Bioenergy Crops in the Midwestern United States." GCB
Bioenergy: In Press.
Lemus, R., and D. L. Parrish. 2009. "Herbaceous Crops with Potential for Biofuel Production in
the USA." CABI Reviews: Perspectives in Agriculture, Veterinary Science, Nutrition and
Natural Resources 4: 1-23.
56

Lewandowski, I., J. M. O. Scurlock, E. Lindvall, and M. Christou. 2003. "The Development and
Current Status of Perennial Rhizomatous Grasses as Energy Crops in the US and
Europe." Biomass and Bioenergy 25 (4): 335-361.
Lewandowski, I., J. M. O. Scurlock, E. Lindvall, and M. Christou. 2003. "The development and
current status of potential rhizomatous grasses as energy crops in the US and Europe."
Biomass and Bioenergy 25 (4): 335-361.
Malcolm, S. 2008. Weaning Off Corn: Crop Residues and the Transition to Cellulosic Ethanol.
St. Louis, MO.
McCarl, B. A., and U. A. Schneider. 2001. "Greenhouse Gas Mitigation in U.S. Agriculture and
Forestry." Science 294: 2481-2482.
McCarl, B. A., and T. H. Spreen. 1980. "Price Endogenous Mathematical Programming as a
Tool for Policy Analysis." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 62: 87-102.
McPhail, L. L., and B. A. Babcock. 2008. Short-Run Price and Welfare Impacts of Federal
Ethanol Policies. 08-WP 468,Center for Agricultural and Rural Development, Iowa State
University.
Metcalf, G. E. 2008. "Using Tax Expenditures to Achieve Energy Policy Goals." American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 98 (2): 90-94.
NRC. 2002. Effectiveness and Impact of Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standards.
National Research Council.
Önal, H., and B. A. McCarl. 1991. "Exact Aggregation in Mathematical Programming Sector
Models." Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics 39: 319-334.
Pfuderer, S., G. Davies, and I. Mitchell. 2010. The Role of Demand for Biofuel in the
Agricultural Commodity Price Spikes of 2007/2008. Food and Farming Analysis, Defra.
Piggott, N. E., and M. K. Wohlgenant. 2002. "Price Elasticities, Joint Products, and International
Trade." Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 46 (4): 487-500.
Reilly, J., A. Gurgel, and S. Paltsev. 2009. Biofuels and Land Use Change. ed. M. Khanna St.
Louis, MO, Farm Foundation.
Semere, T., and F. M. Slater. 2007. "Invertebrate Populations in Miscanthus
(Miscanthus×giganteus) and Reed Canary-Grass (Phalaris Arundinacea) Fields." Biomass
and Bioenergy 31 (1): 30-39.
Sheehan, J., A. Aden, K. Paustian, K. Killian, J. Brenner, M. Walsh, and R. Nelson. 2003.
"Energy and Environmental Aspects of Using Corn Stover for Fuel Ethanol." Journal of
Industrial Ecology 7: 117-146.
Takayama, T., and G. G. Judge. 1971. Spatial and Temporal Price and Allocation Models.
Amsterdam: North Holland Publ. Co.
Tokgoz, S., A. Elobeid, J. F. Fabiosa, D. Hayes, B. A. Babcock, T.-H. Yu, F. Dong, C. E. Hart,
and J. C. Beghin. 2007. Emerging Biofuels: Outlook of Effects on U.S. Grain, Oilseed,
and Livestock Markets.
Tyner, W., and F. Taheripour. 2008. "Policy Options for Integrated Energy and Agricultural
Markets." Review of Agricultural Economics 30 (3): 387-396.
Ugarte, D. d. l. T., B. C. English, C. Hellwinckel, T. O. West, K. L. Jensen, C. D. Clark, and R.
J. Menard. 2009. Analysis of the Implications of Climate Change and Energy Legislation
to the Agricultural Sector. Knoxville, Tennessee., Department of Agricultural
Economics, Institute of Agriculture, The University of Tennessee.
Ugarte, D. G., M. E. Walsh, H. Shapouri, and S. P. Slinsky. 2003. The Economic Impacts of
Bioenergy Crop Production on U.S. Agriculture. U.S. Department of Agriculture.
USDA. 2010. Available at: http://www.nass.usda.gov/.
57

USDA/ERS. 1997. General Crop Management Practices. Available at:
http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/sb969/sb969e.pdf.
USDA/ERS. 2009. Commodity and Food Elasticities: Demand Elasticities from Literature.
Available at: http://www.ers.usda.gov/Data/Elasticities/query.aspx
USDA/ERS. 2010. Available at: http://www.ers.usda.gov/.
USDA/NASS. 2009. Available at: http://quickstats.nass.usda.gov/.
USDA/NASS. 2009. U.S. & All States County Data - Crops. Available at:
http://www.nass.usda.gov/.
van den Wall Bake, J. D., M. Junginger, A. Faaij, T. Poot, and A. Walter. 2009. "Explaining the
Experience Curve: Cost Reductions of Brazilian Ethanol from Sugarcane." Biomass and
Bioenergy 33 (4): 644-658.
Wallace, R., K. Ibsen, A. McAloon, and W. Yee. 2005. Feasibility Study for Co-Locating and
Integrating Ethanol Production Plants from Corn Starch and Lignocellulogic Feedstocks.
Wilcke, W., and G. Wyatt. 2002. Grain Storage Tips. Twin Cities, MN, The University of
Minnesota Extension Service, the University of Minnesota.
Wortmann, C. S., R. N. Klein, W. W. Wilhelm, and C. Shapiro. 2008. Harvesting Crop
Residues. University of Nebraska
Wullschlegera, S. D., E. B. Davisb, M. E. Borsukb, C. A. Gundersona, and L. R. Lyndb. 2010.
"Biomass Production in Switchgrass across the United States: Database Description and
Determinants of Yield " Agronomy Journal 102 (4): 1158-1168.

58

