                                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ENCY, CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR, AND RECIDIVISM BY INTERVENING ON PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS OTHER THA
                          A REVIEW OF THE INTERVENTION LITERATURE

                                                      Patrick L. Hill
                                                     Brent W. Roberts
                                                    Jeffrey T. Grogger
                                                     Jonathan Guryan
                                                      Karen Sixkiller

                                                  Working Paper 16698
                                          http://www.nber.org/papers/w16698


                                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                               January 2011




          The preparation of this manuscript was supported by Grant AG21178 from the National Institute of
          Aging. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
          of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

          NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
          reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
          NBER publications.

          © 2011 by Patrick L. Hill, Brent W. Roberts, Jeffrey T. Grogger, Jonathan Guryan, and Karen Sixkiller.
          All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
          permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Decreasing Delinquency, Criminal Behavior, and Recidivism by Intervening on Psychological
Factors Other than Cognitive Ability: A Review of the Intervention Literature
Patrick L. Hill, Brent W. Roberts, Jeffrey T. Grogger, Jonathan Guryan, and Karen Sixkiller
NBER Working Paper No. 16698
January 2011
JEL No. K4

                                                ABSTRACT

Research on the causes of delinquency has a long research history, often with an undue focus on how
cognitive ability serves as the main predictor of delinquent activity. The current review examines interventions
that focus on psychological factors other than cognitive ability, and discusses how several of these
programs have demonstrated efficacy in reducing delinquent behavior. Our review uncovers certain
themes shared by a number of effective interventions. First, these interventions tend to emphasize
rigorous and consistent implementation. Second, effective interventions often incorporate the family
environment. Third, several effective interventions have focused on promoting adaptive social skills.
In conclusion, our review discusses the possibility that these interventions have proven efficacious
in part because they promote adaptive personality trait development.


Patrick L. Hill                                        Jonathan Guryan
Department of Psychology                               Northwestern University
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign               Institute for Policy Research
603 E. Daniel St.                                      2040 Sheridan Road
Champaign, Il 61820                                    Evanston, IL 60208
phill1@illinois.edu                                    and NBER
                                                       j-guryan@northwestern.edu
Brent W. Roberts
Department of Psychology                               Karen Sixkiller
University of Illinois                                 Department of Psychology
Champaign, IL 61820                                    University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
broberts@cyrus.psych.uiuc.edu                          603 E. Daniel St.
                                                       Champaign, IL 61820
Jeffrey T. Grogger                                     sixkill1@illinois.edu
Irving B. Harris Professor of Urban Policy
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jgrogger@uchicago.edu
                                                 661

1. Introduction

       Research on the causes of crime and delinquency has a long history, with philosophical

and theoretical commentary on the topic dating back centuries (see for a review, Binder, 1987;

Emler & Reicher, 1995). This work often has been directly or indirectly catalyzed by efforts to

define laws and penalties appropriate to juvenile offenders. If one deems a youth to be a

cognitively mature decision-maker, then the youth might be more “deserving” of penalties

similar to adult offenders. If one instead is sympathetic to the turmoil and tumult inherent in the

adolescent experience (see e.g., Blos, 1962; Erikson, 1950, 1968), more lenient penalties may be

in order. Given the legal implications, it is unsurprising that most efforts to decrease delinquency

focus on addressing its cognitive ability catalysts. Another benefit to a cognitive ability approach

is that it seems to explain the decrease in illegal activity with age. Adults are assumed to have

better cognitive capabilities than adolescents, and thus are able to make better decisions.

       Three issues confront researchers who focus solely on cognitive ability antecedents to

delinquency and criminality. First, focusing on cognitive ability assumes that adults make more

conservative judgments about the consequences of their risky decisions. However, some research

suggests that adults may actually feel more “invulnerable” to risks than adolescents (e.g.,

Millstein & Halpern-Felsher, 2002a, 2002b; Quadrel, Fischhoff, & Davis, 1993). Indeed,

adolescents have reported greater personal risks for negative events (e.g., injury, having an

accident while driving drunk) than young adults (Millstein & Halpern-Felsher, 2002a, 2002b).

This work suggests that adolescents are not relatively more optimistic in their risk assessments.

Such evidence sheds doubt on the idea that faulty decision-making skills are solely to blame for

adolescents’ increased risk-taking tendencies.
                                                662

       Second, recent work has demonstrated that skills other than cognitive ability predict a

number of developmental outcomes in both the economic (e.g., Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman,

& ter Weel, 2008; Cunha & Heckman, 2009; Heckman, 2009; Heckman, Stixrud, & Urzua,

2006) and psychological literatures (e.g., Benet & Ozer-Martinez, 2006; Lodi-Smith & Roberts,

2007; Roberts, Kuncel, Shiner, Caspi, & Goldberg, 2007). For example, personality traits appear

to predict significant life outcomes (e.g., divorce, occupational attainment, and mortality) as well

as socioeconomic status or cognitive ability (Roberts et al., 2007). Moreover, there is evidence

that emotional and behavioral skills motivate cognitive skill development, but the reverse does

not appear to hold (Cunha & Heckman, 2008). Therefore, not only do psychological factors other

than cognitive ability predict developmental outcomes, but they also may indirectly influence

outcomes through promoting cognitive development.

       Economists refer to these as “non-cognitive” factors, which, taken literally, is nonsensical

from several perspectives. What is really meant by the term “non-cognitive” is “all things that

are not cognitive ability”, which is quite a bit different from the literal meaning of non-cognitive.

Many of the factors other than cognitive abilities are clearly cognitive in nature. When people

set goals they clearly think about what they want or desire. Thus, the term needlessly

characterizes everything that is not cognitive ability as an omission (i.e., “non”).

       Rather than lump all sources of individual heterogeneity that are not measured by IQ tests

into a single category, it is useful to separate these characteristics and skills more finely. There

are fields, terms, and systems already in place that can be used to be more descriptively accurate.

Several of the authors of this chapter refer to themselves as personality psychologists, which is a

field that subsumes all individual differences, including cognitive abilities. Although there are

several alternatives, we have proposed that there are at least four categories of individual
                                                663

differences contained within the study of personality: Cognitive abilities, personality traits,

motivations, and narratives (Roberts & Wood, 2006). We have distinguished among these four

domains because constructs found within each grouping tend to be conceptually and empirically

distinct. Or, to put it in terms similar to the ideas outlined by economists, important life

achievements, such as status in work or marital stability can be predicted independently from IQ,

personality traits, motives, and individual experience (narratives; Roberts et al, 2007).

       A third reason the sole focus on cognitive ability is problematic is that research has

consistently demonstrated that psychological factors other than cognitive ability predict one’s

likelihood for delinquent action (for a review, see e.g., Dodge, Coie, & Lynam, 2006; Hirschi,

1969). For example, in a sample of 6th – 10th graders, personality traits significantly predict a

number of antisocial behaviors, including conduct problems, aggression, and symptoms of

antisocial personality disorder (Miller, Lynam, & Leukefeld, 2003). In that study, facets of

conscientiousness, neuroticism, and particularly agreeableness were strongly related to these

antisocial outcomes. Similarly, evidence suggests that delinquents’ personality traits predicted

their likelihood to recidivate (Steiner, Cauffman, & Duxbury, 1999).

       When one examines the effect sizes associated with various risk factors for crime it is

hard to understand why research has focused so strongly on cognitive ability. Table 1 provides

representative effect sizes from several reviews and meta-analyses examining the relative

importance of different risk factors (Cottle, Lee, & Heilbrun, 2001; Gerard & Buehler, 2004;

Loeber et al., 2007). Although statistically significant predictors, cognitive and environmental

factors typically have effect sizes that are relatively modest in nature. In contrast, factors such as

“nonsevere pathology” (e.g., stress and anxiety; Cottle et al., 2001), hostility (Loeber et al.,

2005), and impulsiveness (Farrington, Ttofi, & Coid, 2009) are as important if not more
                                                664

important than cognitive ability. For example, compare the results in Table 1 to the magnitude of

the correlations found by Miller et al. (2003) between personality facets and the stability of

conduct problems: neuroticism (-.02 to .30), agreeableness (-.06 to -.47), and conscientiousness

(-.15 to -.35). Indeed, these correlations are often stronger in magnitude than several of the risk

factors assumed to be most important for predicting delinquency. Overall, it is clear that

intervention research must move past the sole focus on cognitive factors.

                                     Insert Table 1 about here

       The existence of factors other than cognitive ability that predict criminality and

delinquency invites questions about the ability to intervene and change these characteristics. The

potential for intervening to change the personalities of children and adolescents rather than

intervening to change abilities was made clear recently by work with the Perry Preschool Project

(Heckman, Malofeeva, Pinto, & Savelyev, 2008; Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, & Yavitz,

2008; Heckman, Moon, Pinto, & Yavitz, 2008). The Perry Preschool Project is a well-known

intervention program that was intended to promote academic skill development among at-risk

youth. The effects of the intervention in the Perry Preschool Project on cognitive skills were

relatively disappointing, with no evidence for long-term differential gains in academic or

cognitive skills. However, recent analyses have demonstrated that intervention participants

outperformed non-participants on a number of important life outcomes, such as employment and

criminal behavior. Heckman and colleagues found that cognitive ability factors contribute

relatively little to these outcomes, and concluded instead that the Perry Preschool Program

seemed to benefit its participants primarily through its effect on personality factors. This work

provides a clear example of the importance of personality variables, given that the program

would largely be viewed as unsuccessful if one looked only at cognitive ability outcomes. It also
                                                665

highlights the fact that psychological factors other than cognitive ability, such as personality, are

a potential fruitful focus for intervention research. These attributes appear to be changeable,

especially in childhood and adolescence, and the changes gained through intervention lead to

concrete gains in human capital above and beyond cognitive ability and socioeconomic status.

We therefore suggest that interventions that focus solely on cognitive skills, though sometimes

beneficial, may fail to address the totality of the effective ways to intervene to diminish the

likelihood of criminal behavior. In the following review, we provide an overview of

interventions that focus on changing psychological factors other than cognitive ability.



2. Outline for the Review

       Two issues often bias reports of intervention results. First, most evaluations of

intervention efficacy are performed by the developers of the intervention program. Accordingly,

such results can be colored by the researchers’ desire to find positive results of their hard work.

Second, given the costs involved in testing interventions, researchers often employ smaller

samples for evaluation tests, leading to questions regarding their generalizability or lack of

statistical power. For these reasons, we focus on reviewing only those studies that have garnered

“strong” empirical support. We followed two criteria for defining strong support: (1) that any

positive results for a program (or program category) have been replicated at least once, (2) that

support for a program has come from multiple research groups.

       To help address these issues, we let past meta-analyses of the literature guide our review.

It is worth noting that these guidelines often paint a different picture than that portrayed in the

literature. One prominent example is the frequent assumption in the literature that longer

interventions should have more significant effects (Dodge, 2008; Kazdin, 1987). However, meta-
                                                666

analyses of intervention efficacy have been more equivocal on this topic; some fail to

demonstrate a significant effect for study duration (e.g., Garrard & Lipsey, 2007; Wilson &

Lipsey, 2007), while others do find a “dosage” effect (Lipsey & Wilson, 1998). Given this

discrepancy, and the emphasis that has been placed on study duration in the literature, we first

classified interventions according to whether they were short-term or long-term in nature. In one

meta-analysis of interventions across multiple domains, the median study duration was 21-30

weeks (Lipsey & Wilson, 1998). Accordingly, we considered interventions with an average

duration of up to 6 months (about 26 weeks) to be short-term, and any intervention that exceeds

this threshold to be long-term.

       Such an approach also has inherent value for economic analyses of these interventions.

Given that only a few of the interventions discussed have yet to receive formal cost-benefit

analysis, duration period provides at least some indication of the inherent costs. Long-term

interventions have greater costs than short-term ones, and therefore, need to demonstrate larger

effects in order to be cost-effective. To this end, we characterize the reviewed literature

according to its duration, and whether it has demonstrated consistent support. In Table 2, we

provide an organizing framework for our review, showing how we classified the different

intervention programs according to these two factors. It is worth noting that most interventions

were short-term in nature, as one would expect given the costs of long-term approaches. More

often than not, it appears that efficacy is not contingent upon duration. Indeed, several short-term

interventions have demonstrated consistently positive effects.

                                     Insert Table 2 about here

       Moreover, in Table 2, we have included the estimates of benefits associated with some of

the interventions we review from a recent comparison of the costs and benefits of different
                                                 667

intervention programs (Drake, Aos, & Miller, 2009). As noted, only a subset of the reviewed

interventions has received cost-benefit review. Indeed, even some of the studies reviewed did not

have appropriate benefit and cost information, as noted by the asterisks in the table. In addition,

programs such as boot camps look somewhat beneficial, however this program demonstrated no

benefits and only reduced costs compared to institutionalization. To preface our remarks below,

this work does coincide with the results of the studies and meta-analyses, as many of the

programs that we label as “positive” also are cost-effective. Those programs labeled as

“negative” exhibit little to no benefits, and thus have poorer cost-benefit ratios. In sum, the little

extant cost-benefit work does correspond to our determination of intervention efficacy, and when

available, we report program-specific cost-benefit studies below.

       Within these four cells, we also limited our review to interventions that attempted to

intervene on psychological risk factors other than cognitive ability or environmental factors, such

as poverty. In this effort, we tried to be as inclusive as possible, and it became clear that many of

the interventions focus on proximal mechanisms that researchers presume they can change. So,

for example, researchers may focus on improving “aggressive cognitions”, not on “aggression”

per se, because the trait of aggression incorporates its cognitive nature as well as the biological,

behavioral, and emotional factors involved (see Roberts & Jackson, 2008). While this seems a

reasonable approach, it creates an interesting mismatch between the risk factors to crime and

delinquency and the focus of psychologically oriented interventions. Most of the risk factors

appear to be relatively stable personality factors that are akin to cognitive ability. That is, they

are difficult to change. Yet, the interventions focus on components of those personality domains

that are presumed to be more changeable. It is unclear whether the target of many of the
                                                668

interventions results in change on the psychological risk factors most consistently linked to

criminal outcomes. We will return to these ideas in our summary.



3. Short-Term Positive Interventions

       Short-term promising interventions can be generally classified into four sections. First, a

number of programs have addressed antisocial behavior from the classroom, likely because

schools provide researchers with easy opportunities to sample several youth in one setting.

Second, programs have addressed the social skills of youth, given the strong influence that peers

have on youth delinquency. Third, intervening in the family system often demonstrates positive

outcomes. Fourth, recently, some more provocative studies have demonstrated that changes in

nutrition might have an impact on aggression and delinquency.



3.1 School-Based Programs

       Given that school-based programs are among the more frequently employed, this area has

received more attention in literature reviews and meta-analyses (e.g., Garrard & Lipsey, 2007;

Gottfredson, Gerstenblith, Soulé, Wormer, & Lu, 2004; Wilson & Lipsey, 2007). We therefore

focus on the overarching themes presented by these reviews. Before discussing specific study

characteristics, a clear emphasis espoused by this literature is the need for rigorous

implementation. For example, in one meta-analysis, the average effect size for well-implemented

school-based conflict resolution programs was .42, compared to .04 - .08 for programs that

experienced some implementation problems (Garrard & Lipsey, 2007). Indeed, more than any

other variable, it has been suggested that the best predictor of efficacy in school interventions is

the school’s ability to carry out the intervention (Wilson & Lipsey, 2007).
                                               669

       When evaluating more specific characteristics, one of particular interest is the student’s

age. For interventions within the family system, it has been frequently suggested that early

interventions are preferable (e.g., Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000; Greenberg,

Domitrovich, & Bumbarger, 2001), because it is best to address parenting or family issues before

they have become too ingrained. Evaluations of school-based interventions though have provided

more equivocal results. When examining the effects of conflict resolution education on antisocial

behavior, older children have been shown to benefit more than younger children (Garrard &

Lipsey, 2007). However, the results are more nuanced when considering interventions for

aggressive behavior (Wilson & Lipsey, 2007). If these programs are implemented universally (to

classrooms as a whole), they tend to work better with younger students. Programs that target at-

risk or problem youth though show no systematic age differences. While such results are clearly

mixed, we point them out to counter the frequently held belief that interventions must start in

childhood to prove effective. On the contrary, some interventions appear to work better for

adolescents.

       This claim also receives support from the literature on after-school programs. One review

of the literature suggests that participation in these programs was effective in reducing

delinquency among older (grades 6-8) students but not for younger (grades 4-5) students

(Gottfredson et al., 2004). The reviewed programs all included academic and social skills

development, as well as recreational services. When looking at the mediators of these effects

among older students, the results presented two possibilities. First, after-school program

participation was positively related to intentions to not use drugs. Second, there is some evidence

that these programs also promote positive peer associations. Moreover, the intervention effect

sizes were greatest for those programs that emphasized social skills and character development.
                                               670

These results suggest that after-school programs might be effective not because they emphasize

academic skills or participation in constructive activities, but rather because they decrease

youths’ intentions to use drugs and promote their social competence.

       Promoting positive peer relations is an important theme for conflict resolution programs

in the school as well. Interventions that include peer mediation appear to demonstrate stronger

effect sizes, although such programs are few in number (Garrard & Lipsey, 2007). Broadly

speaking, conflict resolution programs are generally quite effective in reducing antisocial

behavior among youth. The efficacy of conflict resolution programs is most likely the result of

their focus on interpersonal and behavioral skills, which have demonstrated some promise in

reducing problem behavior, both in and outside of the school environment.



3.2 Social Skills Training

       A wealth of research has demonstrated the effects of peer influence on delinquency and

risky decision-making (e.g., Dishion, 2000; Elliott & Menard, 1996; Gifford-Smith, Dodge,

Dishion, & McCord, 2005; Thornberry & Krohn, 1997). Indeed, Thornberry and Krohn (1997)

suggest that the negative effects of associating with deviant peers are among the most replicated

findings in the field. As noted above, documented increases in delinquency following ineffective

interventions might result from the fact that these programs congregate deviant adolescents

together. It thus is not surprising that Lipsey and Wilson (1998) suggest that treatments that

emphasized interpersonal skills are among the most effective both for institutionalized and non-

institutionalized juvenile offenders.

       Social skills training (SST) was initially employed for use with psychiatric patients (e.g.,

Argyle, 1969), but was adapted for work with delinquents soon thereafter. SST is intended to
                                                  671

help those individuals lacking in even the most basic interaction abilities, such as making “small

talk” and maintaining eye contact. Some of the initial work on SST found that it had positive

effects on basic social interaction skills (Spence & Marzillier, 1979), but that its long-term

effects on social problems were more mixed (Spence & Marzillier, 1981). One SST program that

has demonstrated efficacy is Aggression Replacement Training (ART; Glick & Goldstein, 1987).

Over a 10-week period, intervention participants were taught moral education, anger control

skills, and other social skills, such as basic social interaction abilities, stress-coping skills,

planning skills, and dealing with feelings. These skills were taught through a combination of

observation, discussion, and role-playing in which individuals learned more effective behavioral

responses to anger. Compared to controls at post-test, intervention participants had fewer

behavioral incidents and scored lower on impulsiveness. They also scored better on a number of

social skills, including expressing complaints, keeping out of fights, and responding to anger;

moreover, there was evidence that intervention participants were also able to transfer these skills

to different contexts. A second study with youth who committed serious crimes replicated some

but not all of these results. Another social skills program, ASSET, has similarly reported

decreases in recidivism among the intervention group, and retention of social skills at 8-month

follow-up (Hazel, Schumaker, Sherman, & Sheldon-Wildgren, 1981, 1982).

        However, there are some conflicting results on social skills interventions. For example,

Bailey and Ballard (2006) found few differences between intervention and control groups across

a variety of outcomes. In their discussion, they note that the 10-week program might not be long

enough to allow for real, consequential skill development. Another possibility is that social skills

programs might work best if included as part of a broad approach. For example, Serna,
                                                 672

Schumacher, Hazel, and Sheldon (1986) found promising results for a program that taught social

skills to both adjudicated youth and their parents.

       These results point to two important conclusions. First, while the broad category of

“social skills training” has received empirical support from multiple labs, as well as support from

meta-analyses, the results of individual social skills programs have been more mixed. Second, it

seems that social skills programs might work best when implemented in tandem with other types

of interventions. As noted above, school programs with social skills training were among the

more efficacious. Moreover, social skills might be taught best within the family, as with most

things, social interactions are first taught in the home.



3.3 Family Interventions

       One common thread in the developmental research on delinquency is the importance

placed on the family environment. Several family indicators have been invoked as possible risk

factors for delinquency and conduct disorder, such as being raised by a single parent, marital

troubles between parents, and parental drug use and depression (e.g., Brandt, 2006; Hirschi,

1969; Loeber, 1990; Loeber & Farrington, 2000). The family system often serves as a primary

predictor of many developmental and behavioral problems and is integrally tied to the other

subsystems discussed here (for a review, see Cummings, Davies, & Campbell, 2000).

Accordingly, it appears as though family therapy works best when part of a multifaceted

approach (Lipsey, 1999), which we discuss with respect to broad interventions. However, a few

more narrow family counseling programs have demonstrated promise.

       One example is parent management training (PMT), which focuses on teaching parents

better disciplinary techniques (Kazdin, 2005). Typically, such programs ask parents to meet with
                                              673

therapists, and they work together to decide on appropriate punishment programs for their

children, and on how to be more responsive to the child’s needs. These techniques have received

widespread empirical support (e.g., Eyberg, Nelson, & Boggs, 2008; Kazdin, 2005; Nixon,

2002), and work well with children who have conduct or externalizing problems (Brestan &

Eyberg, 1998; Hautmann, Stein, Hanisch, Eichelberger, Plück, Walter, & Döpfner, 2009). Unlike

the research on school-based interventions, parental training programs tend to be most

efficacious when implemented with parents who have younger children, as it is best to address

parenting issues earlier rather than later.

        One program though that has shown consistent efficacy with adolescents is functional

family therapy (FFT; Alexander & Parsons, 1982; Sexton & Alexander, 2002). FFT works with

the family unit as a whole to promote more positive family interactions and problem-solving.

Desired outcomes include more empathetic responding to family members, better discussions of

family issues, and general family cohesion. On average, families take part in 12 sessions over the

course of 3 months, mostly occurring within the home. Results have consistently supported FFT

as a means for decreasing problem behavior and recidivism (e.g., Alexander & Parsons, 1973;

Gordon, Arbuthnot, Gustafson, & McGreen, 1988). For example, when looking at misdemeanors

and felonies, Gordon, Graves, and Arbuthnot (1995) reported a 8.7% recidivism rate for FFT

delinquents compared to 40.9% for the comparison youth at 32-month follow-up. These studies

provide support that FFT is among the best performing short-term programs with respect to its

long-term effects on recidivism.

        Two additional programs are worth noting that tend to be more comprehensive in nature.

Given the intensive nature of these two interventions, researchers have been more interested in

their cost-benefit analysis compared to the interventions above. We note these analyses below,
                                               674

but generally speaking, they do appear to be relatively cost-effective. Accordingly, we count

them among the interventions that have “worked.”




3.3.1 Multisystemic Therapy

       MST was initially developed by Henggeler and colleagues (Henggeler & Borduin, 1990;

Henggeler, Shoenwald, Borduin, Rowlands, & Cunningham, 1998) in an effort to treat severely

antisocial children and adolescents (typically around 14-16 years old). It is assumed that those

youth who enter into MST have multiple issues across multiple domains, which necessitates

intensive therapy. Each program is individually tailored to the adolescent, and typically starts

with daily sessions that become less frequent over the three- to five-month course of treatment

(Burns, Schoenwald, Burchard, Faw, & Sanots, 2000). Due to this flexibility, this program

avoids the issues mentioned above with respect to job and vocational training, namely that

programs drafted for the population writ large may fail to address the individual needs of the

specific juvenile delinquent.

       MST was based conceptualized according to the ideals of Bronfenbrenner’s (1979)

ecological systems theory. Bronfenbrenner strongly emphasized that a child’s development

cannot be accurately viewed by examining it within a single domain. Instead, development

occurs within several subsystems and the more proximal systems (e.g., family, school, friends)

are all interconnected, which also follows from systems theory (Plas, 1992). Moreover, these

proximal systems are subsumed within the broader context of the child’s environment (culture,

government, economy). Accordingly, MST treats the delinquent by considering his or her

problem within the broader context of these interrelated and hierarchical systems, rather than
                                                675

focusing more narrowly on a single domain. Indeed, Bronfenbrenner’s theory can be viewed as

the general rationale behind why broad interventions are generally preferable to narrow ones.

       MST programs have received widespread empirical support for their efficacy in reducing

behavioral problems. Studies suggest that MST generally leads to fewer re-arrests, less drug use,

and decreased incarceration and drug use in comparison to usual juvenile justice services

(Henggeler, Borduin, Melton, Mann, Smith, Hall, Cone, & Fucci, 1991; Henggeler, Melton, &

Smith, 1992). Among first time offenders, it leads to decreased delinquency and re-offending,

and to increased school and family functioning (Sutphen, Thyer, & Kurtz, 1995). Moreover,

MST effects have been demonstrated more than two years after intervention (Henggeler, Melton,

Smith, Schoenwald, & Hanley, 1993), and one study reports that MST decreased recidivism by

50% in comparison to individual therapy at follow-up over a decade post-intervention (Schaeffer

& Borduin, 2005).

       Given the consistent evidence for its efficacy, research has investigated the possible costs

involved in widespread implementation of MST. The typical cost per child ranges from $4000 to

$12,000 per child (Brown et al., 1997; Schaeffer & Borduin, 2005; Sheidow et al., 2004). While

these costs are prohibitive enough to discourage large-sample evaluations of MST, this is

relatively cheap in comparison to traditional juvenile justice services (i.e., incarceration). Indeed,

MST was the most cost-effective intervention for juvenile offenders among the 11 programs

reviewed by the State of Washington (Washington State Institute for Public Policy, 1998).



3.3.2 Multidimensional Treatment Foster Care

       MST programs sometimes are implemented as a last resort before having to displace the

juvenile offender. However, when the adolescent needs to be removed from his or her home, one
                                                676

of the most effective options is to place them in multidimensional treatment foster care

(Chamberlain & Reed, 1998; Fisher & Chamberlain, 2000). As part of this program, children are

taken from their homes and placed in foster care until they reach a set of behavioral benchmarks.

After return to their natural family, counseling is provided on a need basis in the following

months. Given the intensive nature of this program, some youth can stay in the program for

nearly two years. However, Leve and Chamberlain (2005) reported that the average intervention

dosage was around six to seven months in their study.

       When in foster care, intervention participants are cared for by several personnel both in

and out of the foster home. The first line of treatment comes from the foster parents, who provide

consistent positive reinforcement when encouraging social, prosocial, and personal skill

development. In addition, youth are provided with opportunities for counseling, and a behavior

support specialist to help modify their social interaction skills. While the youth is presented with

these opportunities in foster care, the child’s natural family also receives therapy sessions to

indoctrinate a more positive family environment. A case manager or team supervisor oversees all

of these activities, which is particularly important given the number of people involved in this

type of intervention.

       MTFC interventions have consistently demonstrated promise for reducing delinquency

and recidivism. Boys in the intervention committed fewer delinquent actions after one year, and

fewer serious offenses at the two-year follow-up than non-treated youth (Chamberlain & Reed,

1998; Eddy, Whaley, & Chamberlain, 2004), and similar trends have been reported with girls as

well (Chamberlain, Leve, & DeGarmo, 2007; Leve & Chamberlain, 2004; Leve, Chamberlain, &

Reid, 2005). Mediators of these effects include supervision efficacy, disciplinary practices, and

decreased exposure to deviant peers (Eddy & Chamberlain, 2000; Leve & Chamberlain, 2005).
                                                677

Such results again speak to the importance of consistent intervention implementation, and the

negative effects of deviant peer association.

       While MTFC interventions are quite intensive in nature, studies do suggest that they are

generally cost-effective. When considering the costs of prevented crimes and incarcerations,

Aos, Phipps, Barnoski, and Leib (1999, 2001) report that MTFC saves taxpayers from $21,836 to

$87,622 per youth (reported in Chamberlain et al., 2007). As another mark of its effectiveness,

researchers have begun to modify MTFC programs to instruct regular foster care parents as well

(Price, Chamberlain, Landsverk, & Reid, 2009). Preliminary results suggest that MTFC might be

effective not only for reducing problem behavior among youth needing intervention, but also for

use with “normal” foster-care children.



3.4 Health-Based Interventions

       Among the more provocative efforts toward reducing crime have been those that target

the participants’ nutrition. For centuries, it was assumed that psychological issues resulted from

physical or nutritional problems. With the advent of more modern psychological theories,

researchers have moved toward new methods for treating mental and behavioral problems.

However, in doing so, researchers may have overly discounted the role of physical health on

mental health. Indeed, evidence continues to accumulate in favor of the idea that diet can have a

profound influence on mood (Kaplan, Crawford, Field, & Simpson, 2007), as well as on

antisocial and criminal behavior (Benton, 2007).

       For example, one line of work has demonstrated that providing participants with essential

fatty acids (EFA), often found in fish oil can decrease levels of aggression (e.g., Gesch,

Hammond, Hampson, Eves, & Crowder, 2002; Hamazaki & Hamazaki, 2008; Itomura et al.,
                                               678

2005; Buydens-Branchey, Branchey, & Hibbeln, 2008). In an initial study, young adult prisoners

who were given vitamin supplements (which included, among other things, essential fatty acids)

demonstrated significant decreases in violent prison offenses compared to a placebo group

(Gesch et al., 2002). Fatty acid supplements have also been shown to decrease both aggression in

young girls (Itomura et al., 2005), as well as anger and anxiety in substance users (Buydens-

Branchley et al., 2008). One reason why these effects may occur is because these supplements

help participants’ serotonergic functioning (Hamazaki & Hamazaki, 2008). Serotonin deficiency

is related to increased impulsive behavior (Mann, 1999), and such deficiencies have been linked

to decreased intake of fatty acids. Therefore, providing individuals with needed fatty acids might

help those with under-developed serotonergic systems, who otherwise would be predisposed to

aggressive behavior.

       Similarly, work has suggested that correcting chemical imbalances and vitamin

deficiencies can reduce antisocial behavior. In a study of patients diagnosed with a behavioral

disorder, researchers found that a majority had clear chemical imbalances (Walsh, Glab, &

Haakenson, 2004). The researchers then provided participants with supplements designed

specifically for each individual. Participants showed significant decreases in assaultive and

destructive behaviors after 4-8 months of treatment. It is worth noting that, given the idiographic

nature of the intervention, the authors did not employ a placebo group. However, these results

are promising for future efforts to decrease behavioral disorders through biochemical

interventions.

       Before concluding this section, it is interesting to note how these studies might relate to

cognitive interventions. One longitudinal study found that malnutrition at age 3 predicted

behavioral problems at ages 8, 11, and 17 (Liu, Raine, Venables, & Mednick, 2004). This link
                                                 679

was mediated at ages 8 and 11 by participants’ cognitive ability, but this was not true for the

results at age 17. Clearly these results point to the long-term importance of nutrition on

externalizing behavior. Moreover, they suggest that it might prove as efficacious to provide early

interventions for nutrition, as it is to provide early cognitive interventions. If nutrition influences

cognitive ability, which in turn decreases problem behaviors, it seems that one can better address

the problem by intervening at the “root.” This speculation is supported further by the fact that the

meditational tests were not significant at age 17, suggesting that the long-term effects of

malnutrition on externalizing cannot be fully explained by cognitive ability.



3.5 Summary

       In summary, four areas provide promise for addressing issues of antisocial behavior using

relatively short-term interventions: school, social skills, family, and nutrition. Of the four, the

area most in need of future work appears to be social skills interventions; the category as a whole

appears effective, but there is greater uncertainty at the individual program level. While all

benefit economically from being short in duration, it does appear that some clearly cost more

than others. For example, providing necessary nutrients involves little to no labor (other than

possibly the initial diagnosis stage) and few institutional resources. On the contrary, intensive

therapy programs such as MTFC will cost much more per participant. However, one might also

expect such programs to demonstrate larger effects. Future research is certainly needed to

provide cost-benefit comparisons between these short-term interventions, especially given their

disparate nature.
                                               680

4. Short-Term Interventions with Negative and Inconclusive Effects

       As noted above, most intervention programs tend to be short-term in nature, given the

lesser costs involved in their implementation. Not surprisingly then, there are nearly as many

ineffective short-term programs as there are effective ones. Unfortunately, in some cases, these

ineffective programs have received as much or more media acclaim as the effective ones. This

likely has been one reason behind their perseverance in the face of their disappointing results.

Most of these programs can be characterized as being “tough” on delinquency, which can often

lead to results opposite of those intended.



4.1 Juvenile Awareness Programs, Boot Camps, and Incarceration

       Possibly the most publicized interventions are those that either incarcerate youth or

attempt to rehabilitate them by scaring them with that possibility. The documentary “Scared

Straight!” (Shapiro, 1978) and its subsequent sequels brought widespread attention to efforts

toward this latter goal. Accordingly, most people would be surprised to learn that these programs

have received almost no empirical support, and that some of these programs may even promote

increased delinquency (e.g., Finckenauer, 1982; Finckenauer & Gavin, 1999; Petrosino, Turpin-

Petrosino, & Buehler, 2003).

       Petrosino et al. (2003) reviewed the literature on juvenile awareness programs, a category

that broadly includes all programs for which juvenile delinquents are confronted with the prison

environment (either through prison visits or interactions with prisoners). They chose only those

studies that randomly assigned delinquents into no-treatment control or intervention (awareness)

groups. In a meta-analysis of recidivism rates, the authors found that delinquents placed in the

intervention programs were actually more likely to recidivate than those in the control groups.
                                               681

Indeed, none of the reviewed programs demonstrated a decrease for the intervention group.

Lipsey (1992) reported similar results in his meta-analysis of these programs, suggesting that

intervention participants were on average 7% more likely to recidivate than controls. Moreover,

it appears to be even less effective to actually imprison delinquents than to simply scare them

with the possibility. Multiple studies have reported recidivism rates for adjudicated youth at or

above 50% (e.g., Beck & Shipley, 1987; Snyder & Sickmund, 2006).

       A fellow traveler to these programs is the “boot camp” intervention. The boot camp

approach places delinquents in a militaristic lifestyle, assuming that increased discipline and

structure should promote self-control and decrease future recidivism (e.g., Empey, Stafford, &

Hay, 1999; Gottfredson & Hirschi, 1990). Similar to juvenile awareness programs, the primary

assumption underlying the boot camp approach is that it will scare first-time delinquents out of

pursuing lifelong criminal activity (MacKenzie & Parent, 1991). However, these programs also

have proven largely ineffective in reducing recidivism (e.g., Burns & Vito, 1995; Jones, 1996;

MacKenzie, 1991; MacKenzie & Shaw, 1993). Some studies even suggest that these programs

may even have detrimental effects (Jones & Ross, 1997; Morash & Rucker, 1990).

       Another widely publicized program that has received little to no support is DARE (Drug

Abuse Resistance Education). DARE programs attempt to decrease drug use largely through

informing students of its prevalence and inherent risks. However, ever since DARE programs

were introduced in 1983, most evaluations of their efficacy suggest that they either have no

effect or in fact increase drug use (Lynam, Milich, Zimmerman, Novak, Logan, Martin,

Leukefeld, & Clayton, 1999; MacKillop, Lisman, Weinstein, & Rosenbaum, 2003; Werch &

Owen, 2002). Indeed, Lilienfeld (2007) recently provided DARE as an example of a program

that “does harm” to its participants.
                                                682

       Why do these programs perform so poorly? And furthermore, why do programs with so

little empirical support continue to receive government funding? With respect to the first

question, one issue is that delinquents are subject to a variety of iatrogenic effects (Rhule, 2005).

Once one has been labeled as an adjudicated youth, this can lead differential treatment by those

in the youth’s social environment (Caprara, 1993; Dweck & Leggett, 1988). People in the

community are likely to treat the adjudicated youth as less competent and trustworthy, which

significantly complicates the readjustment process post-intervention. Indeed, others in the

community are more likely to make negative attributions of the delinquent’s actions (Dodge,

1980), and in turn may be more prone to aggression toward the child (Dodge & Frame, 1982).

Finally, by congregating antisocial youth together in intervention groups, they might adopt more

negative social norms because they now view antisocial activities as more ubiquitous and

socially acceptable (e.g., Morash & Rucker, 1990; Stormshak, Bierman, Bruschi, Dodge, Coie,

& the Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 1999). Youth in this situation also might

increase antisocial behavior in an effort to “prove” to peers that the youth was not deterred or

scared by the program.

       With respect to the second question, a few reasons have been suggested regarding why

these programs persist despite a lack of empirical support (Finckenauer, 2005). One follows from

the field’s general focus on cognitive ability factors. If one believes that delinquent activities

result from deliberative decision-making, it seems logical that adolescents would engage in

fewer risky actions if the negative consequences of these actions were made more salient.

Another issue involves what is meant by program “efficacy.” As demonstrated by the public

interest in the Scared Straight documentaries, it is easy to get people to believe in a program by

reporting on individual success stories. Compelling anecdotes lead people to believe that
                                               683

programs are making a difference if they can help “just one person.” Finally, these programs,

especially boot camps, have inherent appeal for those who believe that we need to “get tough” on

delinquents. People who believe in a strict morality are likely to approve of these seemingly

harsher penalties (Lakoff, 2002), regardless of their lack of empirical support. This claim also

provides rationale for why school suspensions and expulsions continue despite the fact that they

often fail to reduce school violence (Skiba, 2002).



4.2 Job and Vocational Training

       Counter to these approaches that take a hard line on delinquency, some programs seek to

reduce delinquency by motivating youth toward more adaptive life commitments. Research

frequently suggests that having adolescents commit to age-appropriate roles can decrease their

likelihood for delinquency (Hirschi, 1969; Laub & Sampson, 2003; Sampson & Laub, 1993).

However, adolescents who prematurely adopt adult roles might actually be more likely to

commit delinquent acts (Hirschi, 1969). One example of an adolescent-appropriate role

commitment is their entry into the workplace. Accordingly, research frequently has examined

whether job training and vocational programs might help reduce delinquency.

       Generally, the results of such programs are equivocal at best. In a meta-analysis of

studies with juvenile offenders, job skills programs were found to have limited effects on

recidivism (Lipsey, 2009). Another meta-analysis suggests that vocational education programs

may even increase recidivism rates (Lipsey & Wilson, 1998; see also Bloom, Orr, Cave, Bell,

Doolittle, & Lin, 1994). Two points though temper any strong negative conclusions. First,

employment related programs appear more efficacious for non-institutionalized than for

institutionalized offenders (Lipsey & Wilson, 1998). Second, there is great variability in this area
                                                684

with respect to program goals and methodological rigor, which can influence their reported

effectiveness (Bouffard, MacKenzie, & Hickman, 2000). Given these points, it is difficult to

make any broad conclusions regarding job-training programs other than they work for some

delinquents some of the time.



4.3 Summation

       The current section makes two important points. First, some short term interventions

work. It is clearly not the case that small investments must necessarily result in small rewards.

Changing nutrition or working with families are interventions that can be done in an expedient

manner, and they appear to have lasting effects on criminal behavior. Second, not all short term

interventions work; while duration is important in determining cost, it is less important for

efficacy than the content of the intervention and how well it is implemented. Before drawing

firm conclusions we examine the longer interventions. Afterwards, we will discuss common

features of effective interventions regardless of duration.



5. Long-Term Positive Interventions

       We now discuss interventions that take longer than six months on average. It clearly

requires more resources in general to implement these interventions, but more time is also

required before strong conclusions can be drawn regarding their long-term benefits. Accordingly,

less empirical support is available for these programs, and it is rare to find any that have been

replicated by researchers outside of the lab that first created them.

       Moreover, given the relative lack of evaluations of long-term interventions, long-term

interventions also are underrepresented in meta-analyses. We therefore sought other sources for
                                                685

direction in selecting studies to review, and decided to follow the suggestions of the “Blueprints

for Violence Prevention” program at the University of Colorado (Center for the Study and

Prevention of Violence, 2009). The Blueprints program has evaluated hundreds of interventions

and has nominated a few programs as being either “models” or “promising” for decreasing

violent and antisocial behavior. We review three of these programs below as our examples of

long-term positive interventions. It is worth noting that some of the short-term interventions

mentioned above were also nominated, including multisystemic therapy, multidimensional

treatment foster care, and the Perry Preschool Project.



5.1 Olweus Bullying Program

       We begin this section with one of the most consistent and well-received intervention

programs to reduce aggressive behavior. The Olweus Bullying Program (Olweus, 1993, 1994,

1995) seeks to reduce bullying in schools using a multifaceted approach with training for

students, teachers, and parents. The Olweus Program seeks to address the problem of bullying by

first dissuading some myths on the topic. For example, bullying does not occur because of larger

class sizes, failure in school, or differences in students’ appearances. Instead, bullies are marked

by their generally aggressive and antisocial dispositions, an important point given its

implications for interventions.

       At the school level, teachers receive training to better diagnose and monitor bullying

behavior. They also are taught how to engender better social skills among their students. In class,

students engage in role-playing scenarios and cooperative groups to practice better social

interactions. When bullying does occur, either in the classroom or on the playground, teachers

have serious discussions with both the bully and victim. It is of the utmost importance that
                                                686

teachers do not allow even minor cases of bullying behavior to persist in the classroom.

Moreover, teachers report these problems to the parents of the students, who also play an

important role in discouraging bullying behavior.

       At the family level, parents also receive training on how to discern the signs of

aggression and bullying at home. They are expected to maintain consistent rules and disciplinary

practices to deter their children from aggressive behavior. Parents are taught to identify even

seemingly minor signs of bullying and aggression, such as damaged schoolbooks and cuts or

bruises. These small signs can be indicative of victimization, and should be reported to teachers

and staff during parent-school meetings. In addition, parents should keep a close eye on their

child’s friends and social activities, which will help teachers get a better idea of which students

are involved.

       Olweus (1991, 1995) reviewed the evidence on program effectiveness in a large sample

of students from grades 4 to 7, following these students over a span of 2.5 years. Bullying

decreased by at least 50%, and general antisocial behavior was markedly reduced. More broadly,

the program had positive effects on the general school environment. Teachers reported more

positive peer interactions, and better attitudes toward schoolwork. Although other reviews have

demonstrated somewhat smaller effect sizes, the program has consistently demonstrated

reductions in bullying behavior over the past two decades (Limber, 2006; Olweus, 2005).

Moreover, these effects tend to get stronger with time (Olweus, 2005), demonstrating significant

dosage effects. While future work is needed to better investigate possible moderators and

mediators of these effects (Limber, 2006), this program remains one of the most effective for

reducing aggressive and antisocial behavior in the literature.
                                                687

5.2 Life Skills Training

        Life skills training programs (LST; Botvin, Eng, & Williams, 1980; Botvin & Griffin,

2004) seek to discourage drug use among early adolescents. Intervention sessions involve

teaching adolescents self-management skills (goal-setting, problem-solving), social skills (ability

to interact with others), and drug-related information (consequences and skills to reduce peer

drug influences). Often these sessions occur in the school with teacher assistance, because

schools provide a ready opportunity to sample several adolescents at the same time. With respect

to its goals and methods, LST clearly mirrors some of the social skills programs mentioned

above. However, LST includes “booster” sessions on these topics for an additional two years

time.

        LST programs have consistently demonstrated efficacy in reducing drug use in both

small-scale and large-scale study implementations (for a review, see Botvin & Griffin, 2004).

For example, Botvin, Griffin, Diaz, and Ifill-Williams (2001) report that intervention participants

were less than half as likely to report binge drinking than control adolescents at both 1- and 2-

year follow-ups, demonstrating the long-term effects of LST programs. Using the wealth of data

on these programs, researchers have been able to identify a number of mediating variables that

might partially account for the evidenced decreases in drug use (Botvin & Griffin, 2004). Some

possible mediators include participants’ attitudes toward drugs, their perceived norms of drug

use, assertiveness, decision-making, and refusal skills. It is worth noting that several of these are

similar to those mentioned above with respect to the short-term interventions.
                                                 688

5.3 Seattle Social Development Project

         The Seattle Social Development Project (SSDP) is a school-based approach that extends

into the family environment (Hawkins, Catalano, Morrison, O’Donnell, Abbott, & Day, 1992;

Hawkins, Smith, Hill, Kosterman, & Catalano, 2007). The program posits that children can

follow either a prosocial path, which serves as a protective buffer, or an antisocial path, which

serves to promote delinquent and problem behaviors. The overarching goal of the program is to

motivate youth toward the prosocial path, and away from the influence of deviant and delinquent

peers.

         The first stage of implementation occurs at the teacher level. Teachers are trained to

implement more prosocial and cooperative activities in their classrooms. Emphasis is placed on

providing students with opportunities to learn in small groups, and implementing consistent

disciplinary and reward practices. Methods are specifically tailored to provide age-appropriate

instruction for students from 1st to 6th grade. After appropriate training, teachers are told to

integrate these practices into their daily curriculum, providing students with consistent doses of

the intervention. Students then progress through the school years, receiving the preventive

intervention for as many years as their school system allows. This allows for the long-term

development of communication, social, and decision-making skills.

         The second stage of intervention involves parent-training sessions. Again these sessions

are tailored to provide parents with information specific to their child’s current stage of

development. Early on, parents are taught appropriate disciplinary techniques, including child-

monitoring skills. Later they learn methods for discouraging their child’s drug use. Each year,

parents are provided with the opportunity to take part in these training sessions, which are not

particularly time consuming (only 4-7 sessions per year).
                                                689

       The SSDP has demonstrated efficacy in addressing its primary program goals. Receiving

two years of the intervention reduced aggressive and antisocial behavior among Caucasian boys

compared to the control group (Hawkins, Von Cleve, & Catalano, 1991). After receiving four

years of treatment, intervention participants scored better on a number of family and school

outcomes, including family management and communication, and school commitment and

attachment (Hawkins et al., 1992). In addition, intervention students reported less initiation of

delinquent and alcohol-related behaviors. Finally, studies have assessed whether these effects are

lasting by sampling intervention participants at age 21 (Hawkins, Kosterman, Catalano, Hill, &

Abbott, 2005; Lonczak, Abbott, Hawkins, Kosterman, & Catalano, 2002). Overall, full

intervention participants performed better on several measures of general life outcomes (high

school graduation, current employment), mental health, crime, and sexual behavior (see Hawkins

et al., 2007 for a review). Therefore, it appears that the intervention continued to lead to positive

outcomes even into emerging adulthood. However, since the long-term effects of this

intervention are sometimes small and nonsignificant (see e.g., Hawkins, Catalano, Kosterman,

Abbot, & Hill, 1999), further research is needed to investigate possible mediators and moderators

of intervention efficacy.



6. Long-Term Negative and Inconclusive Interventions

       Obviously a number of projects could be reviewed in our final category, since most long-

term interventions can be considered as having “inconclusive” support. We therefore chose to

mention a couple in hopes of sparking interest for future work. It is worth emphasizing that we

are not saying these are negative programs, but rather that “the jury is still out” regarding their

effectiveness.
                                                690


6.1 Positive Youth Development

       Positive youth development (PYD) programs counter the traditional approach of

identifying “negatives” and addressing them. Instead, PYD programs posit that youth possess the

potential for “good,” which should be nurtured by the community (Benson, 2003; Lerner, 2004;

Lerner et al., 2005). PYD programs focus on promoting social competence and connectedness,

resilience, and the adoption of prosocial standards. To achieve these ends, PYD programs often

work with youth throughout their development in multiple areas (family, school, and

community). This movement is relatively recent, and thus these programs have had relatively

fewer empirical tests. However, recent work does support the claim that PYD programs can

decrease youth’s propensity to take part in delinquent activities.

       Lerner and colleagues (Jelicic, Bobek, Phelps, Lerner, & Lerner, 2007; Lerner et al.,

2005) have investigated PYD using a longitudinal investigation of 4-H programs, which provide

youth with opportunities to learn about science and farming using cooperative group activities

(The 4-H story, 2009). Youth are able to participate in these programs from early childhood into

adolescence. Jelicic et al. (2007) assessed 4-H participants as 5th and 6th graders on indicators of

the five primary PYD goals (caring, character, connection, competence, and confidence), as well

as adaptive and maladaptive outcomes. They demonstrate that youth higher on the PYD goals at

5th grade were less likely to take part in risk behaviors at 6th grade (delinquency and substance

use). It thus appears that promoting PYD can decrease crime behaviors among youth.

       While researchers are increasingly looking into PYD approaches (see Catalano et al.,

2002 for a review), the 4-H study and the SSDP are two of the few PYD programs that have

systematically assessed their efficacy in reducing problem behaviors. Given that the PYD
                                               691

movement has emphasized its distinction from past risk-prevention approaches, it is unsurprising

that most programs tend to focus on the positive (Schwartz, Pantin, Coatsworth, & Szapocznik,

2007). However, most of the PYD goals clearly resemble those mentioned above as detractors to

crime and delinquency, such as social competence and cooperation. One therefore would predict

that PYD approaches should similarly prove efficacious in reducing problem behaviors. To this

end, Schwartz et al. (2007) suggest that future research on interventions need to integrate ideas

from risk-protection and PYD approaches to provide the most thorough solutions to the problems

of youth.



6.2 Prison-Based Interventions

       A second set of interventions with inconclusive results focuses on rehabilitation programs

within prison populations. While these intervention programs sometimes last less than six

months, we classified these long-term given that the length of imprisonment itself probably

should be included when considering whether they decrease recidivism post-release. A recent

meta-analysis suggests that prison interventions can be effective in reducing prison misconduct

(French & Gendreau, 2006). Moreover, the interventions that proved effective in reducing

misconduct also were shown to decrease levels of recidivism after release. Therefore, although

imprisonment itself might be a poor deterrent, as noted above, there are ways to help decrease

recidivism even within the prison environment.

       In the meta-analysis, behavioral programs appeared to be most effective for reducing

problem behavior (French & Gendreau, 2006). It is worth noting that this category was rather

inclusive in nature, containing approaches using behavioral, cognitive-behavioral, and social

learning techniques. This was contrasted against “non-behavioral” programs that included
                                               692

everything from group interventions to nutrition programs. Clearly then, there is great

heterogeneity in the types of interventions employed in prisons. Moreover, the meta-analysis

indicated large levels of heterogeneity in the results of these programs, with some fairly strong

outliers. This is one reason why we chose to consider the evidence on prison interventions as

inconclusive, despite the positive effects on average for both behavioral and non-behavioral

programs. Another reason to classify this initial evidence as inconclusive is that several elements

of the prison system impede the ability for rigorous evaluation of these programs. For one, levels

of overcrowding differ dramatically across prisons, which can have profound effects on

implementation efficacy. Therefore, interventions might work for some prisons and for some

prisoners that fail to show effects in other contexts. Future research thus needs to conduct more

thorough on-site evaluations, and focus on rigorous program implementation (French &

Gendreau, 2006).



6.3 Social Cognitive Skills Training

       We end our review of long-term negative and inconclusive interventions by examining

recent work on programs to develop interpersonal skills from a social cognitive framework.

Deviant youth have been shown to interpret social situations differently from “normal” youth.

Aggressive youth are more likely to attribute others’ actions as signs of hostility (e.g., Dodge,

Price, Bachorowski, & Newman, 1990; MacBrayer, Milich, & Hundley, 2003; Slaby & Guerra,

1988). Moreover, hostile and aggressive individuals appear to attend more to aggressive cues and

actions than nonaggressive individuals (Dodge, Lockman, Harnish, Bates, & Pettit, 1997; Zelli,

Huesmann, & Cervone, 1995). To address these issues, social cognitive interventions target the

youth’s social information processing skills on several levels. These interventions intend to lead
                                                693

youth toward (a) better attention to and interpretation of social cues, (b) more adaptive action

goals and scripts, and (c) better activation and retrieval of these scripts, which in turn promotes

more adaptive responses to social situations (see e.g., Crick & Dodge, 1994; Huesmann, 1998).

These efforts often take place over multiple years, and incorporate teachers, counselors, and

parents in the intervention process.

       Evidence for these programs though can be viewed as, at best, equivocal. They can be

successful in targeting their proximal outcomes, such as social cognitive skills (for a meta-

analysis, see Beelmann, Pfingsten, & Lösel, 1994). There is much less support though for the

long-term nature of these effects, or that these interventions in fact decrease problem behaviors.

One study reported moderate, but significant, decreases in conduct problems between the

intervention and control groups (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2002).

However, not all indicators of conduct behaviors showed significant differences, and even some

indicators of social cognitive skills failed to reach significance. More recent work paints an even

less promising picture. A multisite study evaluation was recently conducted for the GREAT

program (Guiding Responsibility and Expectations in Adolescents Today and Tomorrow; Meyer,

Allison, Reese, Gay, & Multisite Violence Prevention Program, 2004; Orpinas, Horne, &

Multisite Violence Prevention Program, 2004; Smith et al, 2004), which demonstrated that social

cognitive interventions might instead have detrimental effects (Multisite Violence Prevention

Project, 2009). Indeed, youth who received the universal intervention (participants were not

selected based on risk) demonstrated significant increases in aggression and the endorsement of

norms supporting aggression.

       Generally, two points are worth noting with respect to social cognitive skills

interventions. First, these interventions appear more effective for high-risk children, and thus
                                               694

should not be universally applied. While the program had negative effects when applied

universally, the effectiveness of the GREAT program was moderated by the child’s level of risk

(Multisite Violence Prevention Project, 2008, 2009). Children appeared to benefit more (or in

some cases, be less negatively affected) when they were classified as having multiple risk

factors. However, even in these studies, often only those participants reporting with at least half

of the examined risk factors actually demonstrated positive effects. Second, such programs

appear to be cost-effective only for the highest-risk group (Foster & Jones, 2007), given that the

cost per child can exceed $50,000 and, more importantly, that they only seem to decrease

criminal activity for the highest risk youth. Perhaps then the most optimistic appraisal of these

interventions is that they are burdened by the idiosyncrasy and nuance of their effects. These

programs only appear to help a select group of youth, and at a particularly prohibitive cost.

Indeed, this idiosyncrasy is underscored by research in Scotland that found much more variation

between different schools within a treatment category than between schools from different

treatment categories (Sharp & Davids, 2003).



7. Summary and Conclusion

       In this review, we examined the initial work on interventions for antisocial behavior that

addressed the problem by focusing on factors other than cognitive ability. As is evident

throughout, a number of these programs show promise in their ability to reduce delinquent

actions. A few common themes across this review are worth noting. First, with respect to

intervention duration, the conclusions are more ambiguous than portrayed in the literature. It

does appear that single-dose interventions are unlikely to demonstrate strong results. However,

short-term interventions can demonstrate significant effects, and often there is more evidence in
                                                695

favor of their efficacy than currently available for long-term programs. Therefore, conclusions

about duration are tempered by what one means by “short” and “long.” Our review does

contradict a strict interpretation of duration benefits, insofar that longer is not always better. We

would hasten to add that extremely short-term approaches seem ineffective. Possibly the best

message to take home regarding duration is that it is not as clear a predictor of efficacy as it has

been portrayed at times in the literature.

       Second, in order to reduce delinquency, interventions in any domain could emphasize

rigorous and consistent implementation. For example, with respect to school-based programs,

reducing delinquency requires teachers and parents to set forth clear directions and rules for

youth, and those who break these rules must be disciplined in a consistent fashion. Several

programs reviewed sought to train teachers and parents to better identify and respond to youth

problems. Therefore, it appears that one mark of an effective intervention is whether it is

rigorously implemented. Indeed, meta-analyses show that implementation integrity is a

significant predictor of program efficacy (Lipsey & Wilson, 1998), and even suggest that the best

advice for schools is to choose the program that they have the most faith that they can implement

(Wilson & Lipsey, 2007).

       Third, to maximize the chance of promoting cognitive development, interventions could

incorporate the family environment in some capacity. This is evident both with respect to the

short-term effective programs (e.g., functional family therapy and parent management training),

and the long-term ones (e.g., the Olweus program and the SSDP). The family system is the most

proximal to the youth (Bronfenbrenner, 1979), and thus it is unsurprising that programs are most

effective when they target the family. Family-based programs also tend to be among those

deemed most effective in meta-analyses (Lipsey, 2009; Lipsey & Wilson, 1998).
                                                696

       Fourth, as made evident by programs emphasizing social skills, interventions that are

most likely to result in reduced criminal activity would motivate youth to develop more effective

strategies for dealing with social situations. Youth offenders often are less adept at interpreting

social situations (Dodge et al., 2003; Gouze, 1987), which can serve as a catalyst for deviant

activities. Social skills training thus can help youth not only by teaching them appropriate social

schemata for future use, but also by providing youth the opportunity to practice these skills.

Through practice, such skills can become routinized and readily accessible to the youth for use in

future interactions. Given the lack of efficacy for social cognitive interventions, this points to a

potential significant insight. Learning interpersonal rituals that are routinized and thus no longer

“cognitive” is a very effective means of reducing delinquent behavior. Thus, cultural rituals for

“proper” or polite interpersonal behavior, which is often the focus of life skills or interpersonal

training, may provide simple, but effective ways of decreasing delinquency.

       We again note the correspondence between the cost-benefit comparisons provided by

Drake et al. (2009) and our review. It is worth further note that they found little relation between

the percent change in crime outcomes and the cost of the program. For example, in their review,

functional family therapy (FFT) demonstrated the greatest reduction in crime outcomes, yet was

only around the median of reviewed interventions with respect to costs. To compare its effects to

a therapy program the reader may better know, cognitive-behavioral treatment (CBT), this

reduction was over six times greater than that evidenced by CBT, which focuses instead on

correcting aberrant emotions and behaviors by attempting to retrain the way individuals think

and behavior in specific situations. On the other hand, programs like boot camps and Scared

Straight can be implemented with little to no cost, yet fail to have any beneficial effect on crime.

Moreover, this cost-benefit comparison accounted for the methodological rigor of the studies, by
                                                697

both attenuating effect sizes for studies with less than ideal designs (i.e., not having a true control

group and randomized design) and eliminating all studies that failed to meet a set methodological

rigor. Therefore, even though we sought to provide a broader review of the intervention

literature, one comes to the same conclusions even when assessing interventions using cost-

benefit analyses based on only rigorous program evaluations.

       The gestalt one takes from the effective interventions is that they either affect

physiological systems or entail a high degree of immersion, which we would differentiate from

dose or length of intervention. By immersion, we mean that a significant portion of the juvenile’s

social structures are all dedicated to changing or limiting the behavior of the juvenile. So, for

example, family appears to be an effective vector for intervention, presumably because family

constitutes one of the most important, multifaceted structures in the lives of children and

juveniles. Similarly, interventions like the Olweus Bullying program act on all of the major

social structures that children face, such as school, peers, and family, and are highly effective. In

turn, physiological interventions, though apparently non-immersive, may mimic some of the

effects of pervasive social control on psychological outcomes. One possibility is that the

serotonergic system is at the root of the psychological systems responsible for the variety of

behaviors associated with delinquency and criminality.

       Moreover, this gestalt coincides with theories of developmental psychopathology, which

attempt to describe the developmental trajectories of psychological and skill deficits starting

early in youth (Cummings et al., 2000). In line with our review, these developmental pathways

are complex and incorporate factors across different domains (family, social, environmental,

biological). Moreover, an individual is never destined for adaptive or maladaptive development

(Sroufe, 1997), suggesting that interventions can be successful even for children at the highest
                                                  698

risk. Indeed, “resilience” can be conceptualized similarly to recent views on personality traits

(e.g., Roberts, 2009), insofar that while resilience demonstrates continuity over time, it is not

static and unchanging (Luthar, 1991, 1995; Luthar, Doernberger, & Zigler, 1993). This view of

development thus argues against focusing on any single predictor (e.g., cognitive ability), and

provides rationale why immersive programs may best benefit youth as they address a wider

range of social and environmental factors that put youth at risk for criminal activity.

        Interestingly, pervasive and consistent social environments have been hypothesized to be

the most likely types of environments to affect change in personality traits (Roberts et al., 2008).

Ironically, despite the fact that personality traits are clear risk factors for criminal activities, the

interventions we reviewed seldom assessed changes in personality, presumably because

researchers often make the mistake that they are unchangeable (Roberts & Caspi, 2001). That

being said, many of the interventions detailed above may be working exactly because they are

facilitating fundamental changes in the personalities of the children and adolescents who are

participating in the interventions. Changing personality traits, as opposed to more “changeable”

constructs, such as very specific thoughts and behaviors, may be a more effective intervention

because of the simple fact that people take their personalities with them across situations.

        For example, several of the desired intervention outcomes can be readily designated as

facets of conscientiousness (Roberts et al., 2005). Conscientiousness is a family of traits marked

by subfacets such as industriousness, impulse control, deciveness orderliness, responsibility, and

conventionality; the latter focusing on following rules and norms. Any decrease in crime and

delinquency implicitly suggests that the delinquent is demonstrating better adherence to the rules

of conventions of society, as well as improved impulse control. Even having to adhere to

intervention guidelines should motivate one to be more reliable and punctual, and to follow the
                                                699

order and conventions of the specific intervention. Second, several programs emphasized

problem-solving and decision-making skills, often in social or family contexts, which are direct

initiatives to promote decisiveness. Third, to the extent that job training or educational initiatives

work, these types of programs appear to be directly designed to promote the industriousness.

Accordingly, developing interventions for conscientiousness should serve as a primary goal for

future research.

       It too is worth noting that some programs might also serve to promote greater

agreeableness. Agreeable individuals are marked by their cooperation and trustfulness (e.g.,

Costa & McCrae, 1992). It thus is unsurprising that several of the most effective programs were

those that taught youth better social and life skills. In addition, the more effective school-based

programs were those able to motivate agreeableness at the school-level (e.g., general school

ethos and affection). Moreover, it is clear that the family context would be a primary target for

interventions to increase agreeableness, because temperament quality and emotional stability

early in childhood might serve as antecedents for the display of agreeableness later in life (e.g.,

Graziano & Eisenberg, 1997). It even appears that the recent PYD movement posits the

promotion of agreeable behavior as a primary objective. Indeed, three of the five indicators of

PYD (Lerner et al., 2005) – character, connection, and caring/compassion – would be similarly

indicative of an agreeable individual. Since agreeableness counterindicates delinquency (Lynam

et al., 2003), we believe that PYD programs have promise for decreasing rates of crime and

delinquency among youth, even though they currently have relatively less empirical support.

       Of course, there are very little direct data to support the idea that these interventions are

affecting change in personality. In fact, despite focusing so strongly on bullies, even the Olweus

Bullying program has failed to track whether the personality of bullies changes over time as a
                                                 700

result of intervention. However, there are some indirect data to support this inference. First,

personality traits do change and often change at ages typically not entertained, such as middle

age (Roberts, Walton & Viechtbauer, 2006). Moreover, the changes in personality traits found in

young adulthood and middle age are often correlated with social environmental factors

associated with overcoming criminal activities, such as stable marriages (Robins, Caspi, &

Moffitt, 2002; Roberts & Bogg, 2004), and successful occupational experiences (Roberts, Caspi,

& Moffitt, 2003). These associations are surprisingly similar to the theories of social control that

propose that experiences in work and marriage can lead to a desistance from a life of crime

(Sampson & Laub, 1990). Finally, there is a nascent literature on the changeability of

personality through direct therapeutic intervention. Several studies have shown that personality

traits change when individuals successfully complete some form of therapy for disorders such as

depression (Piedmont & Ciarrocchi, 1999; De Fruyt, Van Leeuwen, Bagby, Rouillon, & Rolland,

2006). More recently it was shown that a mindfulness intervention for doctors also resulted in

personality trait change, especially in the domains of conscientiousness and neuroticism (Krasner

et al., 2009). Finally, coming full circle with the nutrition interventions that appear to be

affecting serotonergic functioning, a recent study showed that taking serotonin reuptake

inhibitors resulted in personality trait change and that the reductions seen in depression were

largely a result of this change (Tang et al., 2009).

       We therefore suggest that several of the programs reviewed here might demonstrate

positive effects by virtue of their ability to change personality traits. To this end, one clear

direction for research is to design and implement interventions for promoting more adaptive

personality traits, such as conscientiousness, agreeableness, social self-confidence, and

emotional stability. We nominate these personality dimensions because they have been
                                               701

previously designated as indicators of greater maturity (Hogan & Roberts, 2004), a construct

seemingly antagonistic to delinquent and unlawful action.



7.1 Conclusion

       In conclusion, we wish to end on the positives rather than the negatives. Throughout this

review, it is clear that youth are not condemned to life of crime. Instead this work demonstrates

the multifinality inherent in this population. Accordingly, one must not characterize these youth

as “hopeless” which in turn leads one to avoid intervening. Moreover, in our review, we hope to

have debunked two myths regarding how to intervene. First, researchers need not be

overwhelmed by the perceived demands of implementing intervention programs. Our review

demonstrates that relatively short-term and easy-to-implement programs can demonstrate

significant effects (e.g., health-based interventions). Second, non-cognitive interventions can

have as strong, if not stronger, effects than programs targeting IQ or the environment. Several

factors influence the development of delinquency, and accordingly, a single-minded focus on

intelligence seems misguided. While Descartes famously decreed, “I think therefore I am,”

intervention researchers should take note that we are more than what we think.
                                                702

References

Alexander, James F., and Bruce V. Parsons. 1973. “Short-term Behavioral Intervention with

Delinquent Families: Impact on Family Process and Recidivism.” Journal of Abnormal

Psychology 81(3): 219–225.



Alexander, James F., and Bruce V. Parsons. 1982. Functional Family Therapy: Principles and

Procedures. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.



Aos, S., P. Phipps, R. Barnoski, and R. Leib. 1999. The Comparative Costs and Benefits of

Programs to Reduce Crime: A Review of National Research Findings with Implications for

Washington State. Olympia: WA: Washington State Institute for Public Policy.



Aos, Steve, Polly Phipps, Robert Barnoski, and Roxanne Leib. 2001. The Comparative Costs

and Benefits of Programs to Reduce Crime. Document no. 01-05-1201. Olympia, WA:

Washington State Institute for Public Policy.



Argyle, Michael. 1969. Social Interaction. London: Methuen.



Axelman, Michael, and Sara Bonnell. 2006. “When the Peer Group Becomes the Parent: Social

and Developmental Issues Associated with Youth Gangs.” In Mental Disorders of the New

Millennium: Public and Social Problems, volume 2, edited by Thomas G. Plante, 101–125.

Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
                                              703

Bailey, K. A., and J. D. Ballard. 2006. “Social Skills Training: Effects on Behavior and

Recidivism with First-time Adjudicated Youth.” Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice 2(1):

26–42.



Beck, A. J., and B. E. Shipley. 1987. “Recidivism of Young Parolees.” Special report.

Washington, D.C.: United States Bureau of Justice Statistics. May.



Beelmann, Andreas, Ulrich Pfingsten, and Friedrich Lösel. 1994. “Effects of Training Social

Competence in Children: A Meta-analysis of Recent Evaluation Studies.” Journal of Clinical

Child Psychology 23(3): 260–71.



Benson, Peter L. 2003. “Developmental Assets and Asset-building Community: Conceptual and

Empirical Foundations.” In Developmental Assets and Asset-building Communities:

Implications for Research, Policy, and Practice, edited by Richard M. Lerner and Peter L.

Benson, 19–43. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.



Benton, David. 2007. “The Impact of Diet on Anti-social, Violent, and Criminal Behaviour.”

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review 31(5): 752–74.



Binder, A. 1987. “An Historical and Theoretical Introduction." In Handbook of Juvenile

Delinquency, edited by Herbert C. Quay, 1–32. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
                                              704

Bloom, H., L. L. Orr, G. Cave, S. H. Bell, F. Doolittle, and W. Lin. 1994. The National JTPA

Study: Overview of Impacts, Benefits, and Costs of title IIA. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.



Blos, Peter. 1962. On Adolescence: A Psychoanalytic Interpretation. New York: Free Press.



Borghans, Lex, Angela Lee Duckworth, James J. Heckman, and Bas ter Weel. 2008. “The

Economics and Psychology of Personality Traits.” Journal of Human Resources 43(4): 972–

1059.



Botvin, Gilbert J., and Kenneth W. Griffin. 2004. “Life Skills Training: Empirical Findings and

Future Directions.” The Journal of Primary Prevention 25(2): 211–32.



Botvin, Gilbert J., Anna Eng, and Christine L. Williams. 1980. “Preventing the Onset of

Cigarette Smoking through Life Skills Training.” Preventive Medicine 9(1): 135–43.



Botvin, Gilbert J., Kenneth W. Griffin, Tracy Diaz, and Michelle Ifill-Williams. 2001.

“Preventing Binge Drinking during Early Adolescence: One- and Two-year Follow-up of a

School-based Preventive Intervention.” Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 15(4): 360–65.



Bouffard, Jeffrey A., Doris Layton MacKenzie, and Laura J. Hickman. 2000. “Effectiveness of

Vocational Education and Employment Programs for Adult Offenders: A Methodology-based

Analysis of the Literature.” Journal of Offender Rehabilitation 31(1 and 2): 1–41.
                                            705

Brandt, David E. 2006. Delinquency, Development, and Social Policy. New Haven, CT: Yale

University Press.



Brestan, Elizabeth V., and Sheila M. Eyberg. 1998. “Effective Psychosocial Treatments of

Conduct-disordered Children and Adolescents: 29 Years, 82 Studies, and 5,272 Kids.” Journal

of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology 27(2): 180–9.



Bronfenbrenner, Urie. 1979. The Ecology of Human Development: Experiments by Nature and

Design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.



Brown, Tamara L., Cynthia Cupit Swenson, Phillippe B. Cunningham, Scott W. Henggeler,

Sonja K. Schoenwald, and Melissa D. Rowland. 1997. “Multisystemic Treatment of Violent and

Chronic Offenders: Bridging the Gap between Research and Practice.” Administration and

Policy in Mental Health 25(2): 221–38.



Burns, Barbara J., Sonja K. Schoenwald, John D. Burchard, Leyla Faw, and Albert B. Santos.

2000. “Comprehensive Community-based Interventions for Youth with Severe Emotional

Disorders: Multisystemic Therapy and the Wraparound Process.” Journal of Child and Family

Studies 9(3): 283–314.



Burns, J. C., and G. F. Vito. 1995. “An Impact Analysis of the Alabama Boot Camp Program.”

Federal Probation 59: 63–7.
                                             706

Buydens-Branchey, Laure, Marc Branchey, and Joseph R. Hibbeln. 2008. “Associations between

Increases in Pplasma n-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Aacids following Supplementation and

Decreases in Anger and Anxiety in Substance Abusers.” Progress in Neuro-

Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry 32(2): 568–75.



Caprara, Gian Vittorio. 1993. “Marginal Deviations, Aggregate Effects, Disruption of

Continuity and Deviation Amplifying Mechanisms.” In Foundations of Personality, NATO ASI

Series: D: Behavioural and Social Sciences, volume 72, edited by Joop Hettema and Ian J.

Deary, 227–44. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.



Caspi, Avshalom, Joseph McClay, Terrie E. Moffitt, Jonathan Mill, Judy Martin, Ian W. Craig,

Alan Taylor, and Richie Poulton. 2002. “Role of Genotype in the Cycle of Violence in

Maltreated Children.” Science 297(5582): 851–4.



Caspi, Avshalom, Terrie E. Moffitt, Julia Morgan, Michael Rutter, Alan Taylor, Louise

Arseneault, Lucy Tully, Catherine Jacobs, Julia Kim-Cohen, and Monica Polo-Tomas. 2004.

“Maternal Expressed Emotion Predicts Children’s Antisocial Behavior: Using Monozygotic-twin

Differences to Identify Environmental Effects on Behavioral Development.” Developmental

Psychology 40(2): 149–61.
                                               707

Catalano, Richard F., M. Lisa Berglund, Jean A.M. Ryan, Heather S. Lonczak, and J. David

Hawkins. 2004. “Positive Youth Development in the United States: Research Findings on

Evaluations of Positive Youth Development Programs.” Annals of the American Academy of

Political and Social Science 591(1): 98–124.



Catalano, Richard F., M. Lisa Berglund, Jean A.M. Ryan, Heather S. Lonczak, and J. David

Hawkins. 2002. “Positive Youth Development in the United States: Research Findings on

Evaluations of Positive Youth Development Programs.” Prevention & Treatment 5(1). doi:

10.1037/1522-3736.5.1.515a.



Chamberlain, Patricia, and John B. Reid. 1998. “Comparison of Two Community Alternatives

to Incarceration for Chronic Juvenile Offenders.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical

Psychology 66(4): 624–33.



Chamberlain, Patricia, Leslie D. Leve, and David S. DeGarmo. 2007. “Multidimensional

Treatment Foster Care for Girls in the Juvenile Justice System: 2-year Follow-up of a

Randomized Clinical Trial.” Journal of Counseling and Clinical Psychology 75(1): 187–93.



Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. 2002. “Evaluation of the First 3 Years of the Fast

Track Prevention Trial with Children at High Risk for Adolescent Conduct Problems.” Journal

of Abnormal Child Psychology 30(1): 19–35. http://www.springerlink.com/content/0091-

0627/30/1/
                                             708

Cottle, Cindy C., Ria J. Lee, and Kirk Heilbrun. 2001. “The Prediction of Criminal Recidivism in

Juveniles: A Meta-analysis.” Criminal Justice and Behavior 28(3): 367–94.



Crick, Nicki R., and Kenneth A. Dodge. 1994. “A Review and Reformulation of Social

Information-processing Mechanisms in Children’s Social Adjustment.” Psychological Bulletin

115(1): 74–101.



Cummings, E. Mark, Patrick T. Davies, and Susan B. Campbell. 2000. Developmental

Psychopathology and Family Process: Theory, Research, and Clinical Implications. New York:

Guilford.



Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. 2008. “Formulating, Identifying, and Estimating the

Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” Journal of Human Resources

43(4): 738–82.



Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. 2009. “The Economics and Psychology of Inequality and

Human Development.” Journal of European Economic Association 7(2-3): 320–64.



De Fruyt, Filip, Karla Van Leeuwen, R. Michael Bagby, Frederic Rouillon, and Jean-Pierre

Rolland. 2006. “Assessing and Interpreting Personality Change and Continuity in Patients

Treated for Major Depression.” Psychological Assessment 18(1): 71–80.
                                             709

Dishion, Thomas J. 2000. “Cross-setting Consistency in Early Adolescent Psychopathology:

Deviant Friendships and Problem Behavior Sequelae.” Journal of Personality 68(6): 1109–26.



Dodge, Kenneth A. 1980. “Social Cognition and Children’s Aggressive Behavior.” Child

Development 51(1): 162–70.



Dodge, Kenneth A. 2008. “Framing Public Policy and Prevention of Chronic Violence in

American Youths.” American Psychologist 63(7): 573–90.



Dodge, Kenneth A., and Cynthia L. Frame. 1982. “Social Cognitive Biases and Deficits in

Aggressive Boys.” Child Development 53(3): 620–35.



Dodge, Kenneth A., John D. Coie, and Donald R. Lynam. 2006. “Aggression and Antisocial

Behavior in Youth.” In Handbook of Child Psychology, Sixth Edition, volume 3: Social,

Emotional, and Personality Development, edited by Nancy Eisenberg, 719–88. New York: John

Wiley & Sons.



Dodge, Kenneth A., Jennifer E. Lansford, Virginia Salzer Burks, John E. Bates, Gregory S.

Pettit, Reid Fontaine, and Joseph M. Price. 2003. “Peer Rejection and Social Information-

processing Factors in the Development of Aggressive Behavior Problems in Children.” Child

Development 74(2): 374–93.
                                            710

Dodge, Kenneth A., John E. Lochman, Jennifer D. Harnish, John E. Bates, and Gregory S. Pettit.

1997. “Reactive and Proactive Aggression in School Children and Psychiatrically Impaired

Chronically Assaultive Youth.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 106(1): 37–51.



Dodge, Kenneth A., Joseph M. Price, Jo-Anne Bachorowski, and Joseph P. Newman. 1990.

“Hostile Attributional Biases in Severely Aggressive Adolescents.” Journal of Abnormal

Psychology 99(4): 385–92.



Drake, Elizabeth K., Steve Aos, and Marna G. Miller. 2009. “Evidence-based Public Policy

Options to Reduce Crime and Criminal Justice Costs: Implications in Washington State.” Victims

and Offenders 4(2): 170–96.



Dweck, Carol S., and Ellen L. Leggett. 1988. “A Social-cognitive Approach to Motivation and

Personality.” Psychological Review 95(2): 256–73.



Eddy, J. Mark, and Patricia Chamberlain. 2000. “Family Management and Deviant Peer

Association as Mediators of the Impact of Treatment Condition on Youth Antisocial Behavior.”

Journal of Counseling and Clinical Psychology 68(5): 857–63.



Eddy, J. Mark, Rachel Bridge Whaley, and Patricia Chamberlain. 2004. “The Prevention of

Violent Behavior by Chronic and Serious Male Juvenile Offenders: A 2-year Follow-up of a

Randomized Clinical Trial.” Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders 12(1): 2–8.
                                             711

Elliott, Delbert S., and Scott Menard. 1996. “Delinquent Friends and Delinquent Behavior:

Temporal and Developmental Patterns.” In Delinquency and Crime: Current Theories, edited by

J. David Hawkins, 28–67. New York: Cambridge University Press.



Emler, Nicholas, and Stephen Reicher. 1995. Adolescence and Delinquency: The Collective

Management of Reputation. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.



Empey, Lamar T., Mark C. Stafford, and Carter H. Hay. 1999. American Delinquency: Its

Meaning and Construction, 4th edition. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.



Erikson, Erik H. 1950. Childhood and Society. New York: Norton.



Erikson, Erik H. 1968. Identity: Youth and Crisis. New York: Norton.



Eyberg, Sheila M., Melanie M. Nelson, and Stephen R. Boggs. 2008. “Evidence-based

Psychosocial Treatments for Children and Adolescents with Disruptive Behavior.” Journal of

Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology 37(1): 215–37.



Farrington, David P., Maria M. Ttofi, and Jeremy W. Coid. 2009. “Development of

Adolescence-limited, Late-onset, and Persistent Offenders from Age 8 to Age 48.” Aggressive

Behavior 35(2): 150–63.
                                             712

Finckenauer, James O. 1982. Scared Straight! and the Panacea Phenomenon. Englewood Cliffs,

NJ: Prentice-Hall.



Finckenauer, James O. 2005. “Ruminating about Boot Camps: Panaceas, Paradoxes, and

Ideology.” Journal of Offender Rehabilitation 40(3-4): 199–207.



Finckenauer, James O., and Patricia W. Gavin. 1999. Scared Straight: The Panacea

Phenomenon Revisited. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.



Fisher, Philip A., and Patricia Chamberlain. 2000. “Multidimensional Treatment Foster Care: A

Program for Intensive Parenting, Family Support, and Skill Building.” Journal of Emotional and

Behavioral Disorders 8(3): 155–64.



Foster, E. Michael, and Damon E. Jones. 2007. “The Economic Analysis of Prevention: An

Illustration Involving Children’s Behavior Problems.” The Journal of Mental Health Policy and

Economics 10(4): 165–75.



4-H. 2009. “The 4-H Story.” http://4-h.org/4hstory.html.



French, Sheila A., and Paul Gendreau. 2006. “Reducing Prison Misconducts: What Works!”

Criminal Justice and Behavior 33(2): 185–218.
                                             713

Garrard, Wendy M., and Mark W. Lipsey. 2007. “Conflict Resolution Education and Antisocial

Behavior in U. S. Schools: A Meta-analysis.” Conflict Resolution Quarterly 25(1): 9–38.



Gerard, J. M., and C. Buehler. 2004. “Cumulative Environmental Risk and Youth

Maladjustment: The Role of Youth Attributes.” Child Development 75(6): 1832–49.



Gesch, C. Bernard, Sean M. Hammond, Sarah E. Hampson, Anita Eves, and Martin J. Crowder.

2002. “Influence of Supplementary Vitamins, Minerals, and Essential Fatty Acids on the

Antisocial Behaviour of Young Adult Prisoners: Randomised, Placebo-controlled Trial.” British

Journal of Psychiatry 181(1): 22–8.



Gibbons, Frederick X., and Meg Gerrard. 1995. “Predicting Young Adults’ Health Risk

Behavior.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 69(3): 505–17.



Gibbons, Frederick X., Meg Gerrard, Hart Blanton, and Daniel W. Russell. 1998. “Reasoned

Action and Social Reaction: Willingness and Intention as Independent Predictors of Health

Risk.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74(5): 1164–80.



Gifford-Smith, Mary, Kenneth A. Dodge, Thomas J. Dishion, and Joan McCord. 2005. “Peer

Influence in Children and Adolescents: Crossing the Bridge from Developmental to Intervention

Science.” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 33(3): 255–65.
                                            714

Glick, Barry, and Arnold P. Goldstein. 1987. “Aggression Replacement Training.” Journal of

Counseling and Development 65(7): 356–62.



Gordon, Donald A., Jack Arbuthnot, Kathryn E. Gustafson, and Peter McGreen. 1988. “Home-

based Behavioral-systems Family Therapy with Disadvantaged Juvenile Delinquents.” American

Journal of Family Therapy 16(3): 243–55.



Gordon, Donald A., Karen Graves, and Jack Arbuthnot. 1995. “The Effect of Functional Family

Therapy for Delinquents on Adult Criminal Behavior.” Criminal Justice and Behavior 22(1):

60–73.



Gottfredson, Denise C., Stephanie A. Gerstenblith, David A. Soulé, Shannon C. Womer, and

Shaoli Lu. 2004. “Do After School Programs Reduce Delinquency?” Prevention Science 5(4):

253–66.



Gottfredson, Michael R., and Travis Hirschi. 1990. A General Theory of Crime. Palo Alto, CA:

Stanford University Press.



Gouze, Karen R. 1987. “Attention and Social Problem Solving as Correlates of Aggression in

Preschool Males.” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 15(2): 181–97.
                                             715

Graziano, William G., and Nancy H. Eisenberg. 1997. “Agreeableness: A Dimension of

Personality.” In Handbook of Personality Psychology, edited by Robert Hogan, John Johnson

and Stephen Briggs, 795–824. San Diego: Academic Press.



Greenberg, Mark T., Celene Domitrovich, and Brian Bumbarger. 2001. “The Prevention of

Mental Disorders in School-aged Children: Current State of the Field.” Prevention & Treatment

4(1). doi: 10.1037/1522-3736.4.1.41a



Grice, H. P. 1975. “Logic and Conversation.” In The Logic of Grammar, edited by D. Davidson

and G. Harman, 64–75. Encino, CA: Dickerson.



Grice, H. P. 1978. “Further Notes on Logic and Conversation.” In Syntax and Semantics:

Pragmatics, edited by Peter Cole, 183–97. New York: Academic Press.



Hamazaki, Tomohito, and Kei Hamazaki. 2008. “Fish Oils and Aggression or Hostility.”

Progress in Lipid Research 47(4): 221–32.



Hautmann, Christopher, Petra Stein, Charlotte Hanisch, Ilka Eichelberger, Julia Plück, Daniel

Walter, and Manfred Döpfner. 2009. “Does Parent Management Training for Children with

Externalizing Problem Behavior in Routine Care Result in Clinically Significant Changes?”

Psychotherapy Research 19(2): 224–33.
                                            716

Hawkins, J. David, Richard F. Catalano, Rick Kosterman, Robert Abbott, and Karl G. Hill. 1999.

“Preventing Adolescent Health-risk Behaviors by Strengthening Protection during Childhood.”

Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 153(3): 226–34.



Hawkins, J. David, Richard F. Catalano, Diane M. Morrison, Julie O’Donnell, Robert D. Abbott,

and L. Edward Day. 1992. “The Seattle Social Development Project: Effects of the First Four

Years on Protective Factors and Problem Behaviors.” In Preventing Antisocial Behavior:

Interventions from Birth through Adolescence, edited by Joan McCord and Richard E. Tremblay,

139–61. New York: Guilford Press.



Hawkins, J. David, Rick Kosterman, Richard F. Catalano, Karl G. Hill, and Robert D. Abbott.

2005. “Promoting Positive Adult Functioning through Social Development Intervention in

Childhood: Long-term Effects from the Seattle Social Development Project.” Archives of

Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 159(1): 25–31.



Hawkins, J. David, Brian H. Smith, Karl G. Hill, Rick Kosterman, Richard F. Catalano, and

Robert D. Abbott. 2007. “Promoting Social Development and Preventing Health and Behavior

Problems during the Elementary Grades: Results from the Seattle Social Development Project.”

Victims and Offenders 2(2): 161–81.



Hawkins, J. David, ElizabethVon Cleve, and Richard F. Catalano. 1991. “Reducing Early

Childhood Aggression: Results of a Primary Prevention Program.” Journal of the American

Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 30(2): 208–17.
                                             717


Hazel, J.S., J.B. Schumaker, J.A. Sherman, and J.B. Sheldon-Wildgren. 1981. “The

Development and Evaluation of a Group Skills Training Program for Court Adjudicated

Youths.” In Behavioral Group Therapy, 1981: An Annual Review, edited by Dennis Upper and

Steven M. Ross, 113–52. Champaign, IL: Research Press.



Hazel, J.Stephen, Jean B. Schumaker, James A. Sherman, and Jan Sheldon-Wildgren. 1982.

“Group Training for Social Skills: A Program for Court-adjudicated, Probationary Youths.”

Criminal Justice and Behavior 9(1): 35–53.



Heckman, James J. 2008. “Schools, Skills, and Synapses.” Economic Inquiry 46(3): 289–324.



Heckman, J. J., L. Malofeeva, R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev. 2009. “The Effect of the Perry

Preschool Program on the Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skills of its Participants.” Working

paper, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.



Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, and A. Q. Yavitz. 2009. “The Rate of Return to the Perry

Preschool Program.” Working paper, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.



Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz. 2009. “A Reanalysis of

the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program.” Working paper, University of Chicago, Department

of Economics.
                                             718

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and

Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor

Economics 24(3): 411–82.



Henggeler, Scott W., and Charles M. Borduin. 1990. Family Therapy and Beyond: A

Multisystemic Approach to Treating the Behavior Problems of Children and Adolescents. Pacific

Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.



Henggeler, S.W., C.M. Borduin, G.B. Melton, B. J. Mann, L. Smith, J.A. Hall, L. Cone, and

B.R. Fucci. 1991. “Effects of Multisystemic Therapy on Drug Use and Abuse in Serious Juvenile

Offenders: A Progress Report from Two Outcome Studies.” Family Dynamics of Addiction

Quarterly 1: 40–51.



Henggeler, Scott W., Gary B. Melton, and Linda A. Smith. 1992. “Family Preservation using

Multisystemic Therapy: An Effective Alternative to Incarcerating Serious Juvenile Offenders.”

Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 60(6): 953–61.



Henggeler, Scott W., Gary B. Melton, Linda A. Smith, Sonja K. Schoenwald, and Jerome H.

Hanley. 1993. “Family Preservation using Multisystemic Treatment: Long-term Follow-up to a

Clinical Trial with Serious Juvenile Offenders.” Journal of Child and Family Studies 2(4): 283–

93.
                                             719

Henggeler, Scott W., Sonja K. Schoenwald, Charles M. Borduin, Melisa D.Rowland, and

Phillippe B. Cunningham. 1998. Multisystemic Treatment of Antisocial Behavior in Children and

Adolescents. New York: Guilford.



Hirschi, Travis. 1969. Causes of Delinquency. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.



Hogan, Robert, and Brent W. Roberts. 2004. “A Socioanalytic Model of Maturity.” Journal of

Career Assessment 12(2): 207–17.



Houston, James G. 1996. “What Works: The Search for Excellence in Gang Intervention

Programs.” The Journal of Gang Research 3(3): 1–16.



Huesmann, L. Rowell. 1998. “The Role of Social Information Processing and Cognitive Schema

in the Acquisition and Maintenance of Habitual Aggressive Behavior." In Human Aggression:

Theories, Research, and Implications for Social Policy, edited by Russell G. Green and Edward

Donnerstein, 73–109. New York: Academic Press.



Itomura, Miho, Kei Hamazaki, Shigeki Sawazaki, Makoto Kobayashi, Katsutoshi Terasawa,

Shiro Watanabe, and Tomohito Hamazaki. 2005. “The Effect of Fish Oil on Physical Aggression

in Schoolchildren – A Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-controlled Trial.” Journal of

Nutritional Biochemistry 16(3): 163–71.
                                             720

Jelicic, Helena, Deborah L. Bobek, Erin Phelps, Richard M. Lerner, and Jacqueline V. Lerner.

2007. “Using Positive Youth Development to Predict Contribution and Risk Behaviors in Early

Adolescence: Findings from the First Two Waves of the 4-H Study of Positive Youth

Development.” International Journal of Behavioral Development 31(3): 263–73.



Jones, M. 1996. “Do Boot Camp Graduates Make Better Probationers?” Journal of Crime and

Justice 19(1): 1–14.



Jones, Mark, and Darrell L. Ross. 1997. “Is Less Better? Boot Camp, Regular Probation and

Rearrest in North Carolina.” American Journal of Criminal Justice 21(2): 147–61.



Kaplan, Bonnie J., Susan G. Crawford, Catherine J. Field, and J. Steven A. Simpson. 2007.

“Vitamins, Minerals, and Mood.” Psychological Bulletin 133(5): 747–60.



Kazdin, Alan E. 1987. “Treatment of Antisocial Behavior in Children: Current Status and Future

Directions.” Psychological Bulletin 102(2): 187–203.



Kazdin, Alan E. 2005. Parent Management Training: Treatment for Oppositional, Aggressive,

and Antisocial Behavior in Children and Adolescents. New York: Oxford University Press.
                                             721

Krasner, Michael S., Ronald M. Epstein, Howard Beckman, Anthony L. Suchman, Benjamin

Chapman, Christopher J. Mooney, and Timothy E. Quill. 2009. "Association of an Educational

Program in Mindful Communication with Burnout, Empathy, and Attitudes among Primary Care

Physicians.” Journal of the American Medical Association 302(12): 1284–93.



Lakoff, George. 2002. Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.



Laub, John H., and Robert J. Sampson. 2003. Shared Beginnings, Divergent Lives: Delinquent

Boys to Age 70. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.



Lerner, Richard M. 2004. Liberty: Thriving and Civic Engagement among America’s Youth.

Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.



Lerner, Richard M., Jacqueline V. Lerner, Jason B. Almerigi, Christina Theokas, Erin Phelps,

Steinunn Gestsdottir, Sophie Naudeau, Helena Jelicic, Amy Alberts, Lang Ma, Lisa M. Smith,

Deborah L. Bobek, David Richman-Raphael, Isla Simpson, Elise DiDenti Christiansen, and

Alexander von Eye. 2005. “Positive Youth Development, Participation in Community Youth

Development Programs, and Community Contributions of Fifth-grade Adolescents: Findings

from the First Wave of the 4-H Study of Positive Youth Development.” Journal of Early

Adolescence 25(1): 17–71.
                                             722

Leve, Leslie D., and Patricia Chamberlain. 2004. “Female Juvenile Offenders: Defining an

Early-onset Pathway for Delinquency.” Journal of Child and Family Studies 13(4): 439–52.



Leve, Leslie D., and Patricia Chamberlain. 2005. “Association with Delinquent Peers:

Intervention Effects for Youth in the Juvenile Justice System.” Journal of Abnormal Child

Psychology 33(3): 339–47.



Leve, Leslie D., Patricia Chamberlain, and John B. Reid. 2005. “Intervention Outcomes for Girls

Referred from Juvenile Justice: Effects on Delinquency.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical

Psychology 73(6): 1181–5.



Lilienfeld, Scott O. 2007. “Psychological Treatments that Cause Harm.” Perspectives on

Psychological Science 2(1): 53–70.



Limber, S. P. 2006. “The Olweus Bullying Prevention Program: An Overview of Its

Implementation and Research Basis.” In Handbook of School Violence and School Safety: From

Research to Practice, Shane R. Jimerson and Michael J. Furlong, 293–307. Mahwah, NJ:

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.



Lipsey, Mark W. 1992. “Juvenile Delinquency Treatment: A Meta-analytic Inquiry into the

Variability of Effects.” In Meta-analysis for Explanation: A Casebook, edited by Thomas D.

Cook, Harris Cooper, David S. Cordray, Heidi Hartmann, Larry V. Hedges, Richard J. Light,

Thomas A. Louis, and Frederick Mosteller, 83–127. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
                                              723


Lipsey, Mark W. 1999. “Can Intervention Rehabilitate Serious Delinquents?” Annals of the

American Academy of Political and Social Science 564(1): 142–66.



Lipsey, Mark W. 2009. “The Primary Factors that Characterize Effective Interventions with

Juvenile Offenders: A Meta-analytic Overview.” Victims and Offenders 4(2): 124–47.



Lipsey, Mark W., and David B. Wilson. 1998. “Effective Intervention for Serious Juvenile

Offenders: A Synthesis of Research.” In Serious and Violent Juvenile Offenders: Risk Factors

and Successful Interventions, edited by Rolf Loeber and David P. Farrington, 313–45. Thousand

Oaks: Sage Publications.



Liu, Jianghong, Adrian Raine, Peter H. Venables, and Sarnoff A. Mednick. 2004. “Malnutrition

at Age 3 years and Externalizing Behavior Problems at Ages 8, 11, and 17 Years.” American

Journal of Psychiatry 161(11): 2005–13.



Lodi-Smith, Jennifer, and Brent W. Roberts. 2007. “Social Investment and Personality: A Meta-

analytic Analysis of the Relationship of Personality Traits to Investment in Work, Family,

Religion, and Volunteerism.” Personality and Social Psychology Review 11(1): 68–86.



Loeber, Rolf. 1990. “Development and Risk Factors of Juvenile Antisocial Behavior and

Delinquency.” Clinical Psychology Review 10(1): 1–41.
                                             724

Loeber, Rolf, and David P. Farrington. 2000. “Young Children who Commit Crime:

Epidemiology, Developmental Origins, Risk Factors, Early Interventions, and Policy

Implications.” Development and Psychopathology 12(4): 737–62.



Loeber, Rolf, Dustin Pardini, D. Lynn Homish, Evelyn H. Wei, Anne M. Crawford, David P.

Farrington, Magda Stouthamer-Loeber, Judith Creemers, Steven A. Koehler, and Richard

Rosenfeld. 2005. “The Prediction of Violence and Homicide in Young Men.” Journal of

Consulting and Clinical Psychology 73(6): 1074–88.



Lonczak, Heather S., Robert D. Abbott, J. David Hawkins, Rick Kosterman, and Richard F.

Catalano. 2002. “Effects of the Seattle Social Development Project on Sexual Behavior,

Pregnancy, Birth, and Sexually Transmitted Disease Outcomes by Age 21 Years.” Archives of

Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 156(5): 438–47.



Luthar, Suniya S. 1991. “Vulnerability and Resilience: A Study of High-risk Adolescents.”

Child Development 62(3): 600–16.



Luthar, Suniya S. 1995. “Social Competence in the School Setting: Prospective Cross-domain

Associations among Inner-city Teens.” Child Development 66(2): 416–29.



Luthar, Suniya S., Carol H. Doernberger, and Edward Ziegler. 1993. “Resilience is Not a

Unidimensional Donstruct: Insights from a Prospective Study of Inner-city Adolescents.”

Development and Psychopathology 5(4): 703–17.
                                             725


Lynam, Donald R., Richard Milich, Rick Zimmerman, Scott P. Novak, T.K. Logan, Catherine

Martin, Carl Leukefeld, and Richard Clayton. 1999. “Project DARE: No Effects at Ten-year

Follow-up.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 67(4): 590–3.



MacBrayer, Elizabeth Kirby, Richard Milich, and Mary Hundley. 2003. “Attributional Biases in

Aggressive Children and Their Mothers.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 112(4): 698–708.



MacKenzie, Doris Layton. 1991. “The Parole Performance of Offenders Released from Shock

Incarceration: A Survival Time Analysis.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 7(3): 213–36.



MacKenzie, Doris Layton, and Dale G. Parent. 1991. “Shock Incarceration and Prison Crowding

in Louisiana.” Journal of Criminal Justice 19(3): 225–37.



MacKenzie, Doris Layton, and James W. Shaw. 1993. “The Impact of Shock Incarceration on

Technical Violations and New Criminal Activities.” Justice Quarterly 10(3): 463–88.



MacKillop, James, Stephen A. Lisman, Allison Weinstein, and Deborah Rosenbaum. 2003.

“Controversial Treatments for Alcoholism.” In Science and Pseudoscience in Clinical

Psychology, edited by Scott O. Lilienfeld, Steven Jay Lynn, and Jeffrey M. Lohr, 273–305. New

York: Guilford Press.
                                             726

Mann, J. John. 1999. “Role of the Serotonergic System in the Pathogenesis of Major Depression

and Suicidal Behavior.” Neuropsychopharmacology 21(supp. 1): S99–S105.

http://www.nature.com/npp/journal/v21/n1s/index.html.



McCrae, Robert R., and Paul T. Costa, Jr. 1992. “Discriminant Validity of the NEO-PIR Facet

Scales.” Educational and Psychological Measurement 52(1): 229–37.



Meyer, Aleta L., Kevin W. Allison, LeRoy E. Reese, Franklin N. Gay, and Multisite Violence

Prevention Project. 2004. “Choosing to be Violence Free in Middle School: The Student

Component of the GREAT Schools and Families Universal Program.” American Journal of

Preventive Medicine 26(1), supp. 1: 20–8.



Miller, Joshua D., Donald Lynam, and Carl Leukefeld. 2003. “Examining Antisocial Behavior

through the Lens of the Five Factor Model of Personality.” Aggressive Behavior 29(6): 497–514.



Millstein, Susan G., and Bonnie L. Halpern-Felsher. 2002a. “Judgments about Risk and

Perceived Invulnerability in Adolescents and Young Adults.” Journal of Research on

Adolescence 12(4): 399–422.



Millstein, Susan G., and Bonnie L. Halpern-Felsher. 2002b. “Perceptions of Risk and

Vulnerability.” The Journal of Adolescent Health 31(1), supp. 1: 10–27.
                                             727

Moffitt, Terrie E. 2005. "The New Look of Behavioral Genetics in Developmental

Psychopathology: Gene-environment Interplay in Antisocial Behavior.” Psychological Bulletin

131(4): 533–54.



Morash, Merry, and Lila Rucker. 1990. “A Critical Look at the Idea of Boot Camp as a

Correctional Reform.” Crime & Delinquency 36(2): 204–22.



Multisite Violence Prevention Project. 2008. “The Multisite Violence Prevention Project: Impact

of a Universal School-based Violence Prevention Program on Social-cognitive Outcomes.”

Prevention Science 9(4): 231–44.



Multisite Violence Prevention Project. 2009. “The Ecological Effects of Universal and Selective

Violence Prevention Programs for Middle School Students: A Randomized Trial.” Journal of

Consulting and Clinical Psychology 77(3): 526–42.



Nixon, Reginald D. V. 2002. “Treatment of Behavior Problems in Preschoolers: A Review of

Parent Training Programs.” Clinical Psychology Review 22(4): 525–46.



Olweus, Dan. 1991. “Bully/victim Problems among Schoolchildren: Basic Facts and Effects of a

School-based Intervention Program.” In The Development and Treatment of Childhood

Aggression, edited by Debra J. Pepler and Kenneth H. Rubin. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum

Associates, Inc.
                                             728

Olweus, Dan. 1993. Bullying at School: What We Know and What We Can Do. Cambridge, MA:

Blackwell.



Olweus, Dan. 1994. “Bullying at School: Basic Facts and Effects of a School Based Intervention

Program.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 35(7): 1171–90.



Olweus, Dan. 1995. “Bullying or Peer Abuse at School: Facts and Intervention.” Current

Directions in Psychological Science 4(6): 196–200.



Olweus, Dan. 2005. “A Useful Evaluation Design, and Effects of the Olweus Bullying

Prevention Program.” Psychology, Crime, & Law 11(4): 389–402.



Orpinas, Pamela, Arthur M. Horne, and Multisite Violence Prevention Program. 2004. “A

Teacher-focused Approach to Prevent and Reduce Students’ Aggressive Behavior: The GREAT

Teacher Program.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 26(1), supp. 1: 29–38.



Ozer, Daniel J., and Verónica Benet-Martínez. 2006. “Personality and the Prediction of

Consequential Outcomes.” Annual Review of Psychology 57: 401–21.



Petrosino, Anthony, Carolyn Turpin-Petrosino, and John Buehler. 2003. “Scared Straight and

Other Juvenile Awareness Programs for Preventing Juvenile Delinquency: A Systematic Review

of the Randomized Experimental Evidence.” Annals of the American Academy of Political and

Social Science 589(1): 41–62.
                                             729


Petrosino, Anthony, Carolyn Turpin-Petrosino, and James O. Finckenauer. 2000. “Well-meaning

Programs Can Have Harmful Effects! Lessons from Experiments of Programs such as Scared

Straight.” Crime & Delinquency 46(3): 354–79.



Piedmont, Ralph L., and Joseph W. Ciarrocchi. 1999. “The Utility of the Revised NEO

Personality Inventory in an Outpatient, Drug Rehabilitation Context.” Psychology of Addictive

Behaviors 13(3): 213–26.



Plas, J. M. 1992. “The Development of Systems Thinking: A Historical Perspective.” In The

Handbook of Family-school Intervention: A Systems Perspective, edited by Marvin J. Fine and

Cindy Carlson, 45–56. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.



Price, Joseph M., Patricia Chamberlain, John Landsverk, and John Reid. 2009. “KEEP Foster-

parent Training Intervention: Model Description and Effectiveness.” Child & Family Social

Work 14(2): 233–42.



Quadrel, Marilyn Jacobs, Baruch Fischhoff, and Wendy Davis. 1993. “Adolescent

(In)vulnerability.” American Psychologist 48(2): 102–16.



Rhule, Dana M. 2005. “Take Care To Do No Harm: Harmful Interventions for Youth Problem

Behavior.” Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 36(6): 618–25.
                                             730

Roberts, Brent W. 2009. “Back to the Future: Personality and Assessment and Personality

Development.” Journal of Research in Personality 43(2): 137–45.



Roberts, Brent W., and Timothy Bogg. 2004. “A Longitudinal Study of Relationships between

Conscientiousness and the Social-Environmental Factors and Substance-Use Behaviors That

Influence Health.” Journal of Personality 72(2): 325–54.



Roberts, Brent W., and Joshua J. Jackson. 2008. “Sociogenomic Personality Psychology.”

Journal of Personality 76(6): 1523–44.



Roberts, Brent W., Timothy Bogg, Kate E. Walton, Oleksandr S. Chernyshenko, and Stephen E.

Stark. 2004. “A Lexical Investigation of the Lower-order Structure of Conscientiousness.”

Journal of Research in Personality 38(2): 164–78.



Roberts, Brent W., Avshalom Caspi, and Terrie E. Moffitt. 2003. “Work Experiences and

Personality Development in Young Adulthood.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology

84(3): 582–93.



Roberts, Brent W., Nathan R. Kuncel, Rebecca Shiner, Avshalom Caspi, and Lewis R. Goldberg.

2007. “The Power of Personality: The Comparative Validity of Personality Traits,

Socioeconomic Status, and Cognitive Ability for Predicting Important Life Outcomes.”

Perspectives in Psychological Science 2(4): 313–45.
                                              731

Roberts, Brent W., Kate E. Walton, and Wolfgang Viechtbauer. 2006. “Patterns of Mean-level

Change in Personality Traits across the Life Course: A Meta-analysis of Longitudinal Studies.”

Psychological Bulletin 132(1): 1–25.



Sampson, Robert J., and John H. Laub. 1990. “Crime and Deviance over the Life Course: The

Salience of Adult Social Bonds.” American Sociological Review 55(5): 609–27.



Sampson, Robert J., and John H. Laub. 1993. Crime in the Making: Pathways and Turning

Points through Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.



Schaeffer, Cindy M., and Charles M. Borduin. 2005. “Long-term Follow-up to a Randomized

Clinical Trial of Multisystemic Therapy with Serious and Violent Juvenile Offenders.” Journal

of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 73(3): 445–53.



Schwartz, Seth J., Hilda Pantin, J. Douglas Coatsworth, and José Szapocznik. 2007. “Addressing

the Challenges and Opportunities for Today’s Youth: Toward an Integrative Model and its

Implications for Research and Intervention.” The Journal of Primary Prevention 28(2): 117–44.



Serna, Loretta A., Jean B. Schumaker, J. Stephen Hazel, and Jan B. Sheldon. 1986. “Teaching

Reciprocal Social Skills to Parents and their Delinquent Adolescents.” Journal of Clinical Child

Psychology 15(1): 64–77.
                                              732

Sexton, Thomas L., and James F. Alexander. 2000. Functional Family Therapy. Juvenile

Justice Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Office of

Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/184743.pdf



Shapiro, Arnold. 1978. Scared Straight! Santa Monica, CA: Pyramid Films.



Sharp, Stephen, and Engelina Davids. 2003. “Early Intervention in Behaviour: A Study of the

FAST-Track Programme.” Emotional and Behavioral Difficulties 8(3): 173–88.



Sheidow, Ashli J., W. David Bradford, Scott W. Henggeler, Melisa D. Rowland, Colleen

Halliday-Boykins, Sonja K. Schoenwald, and David M. Ward. 2004. “Treatment Costs for

Youths Receiving Multisystemic Therapy or Hospitalization after a Psychiatric Crisis.”

Psychiatric Services 55(5): 548–54.



Skiba, Russell J. 2002. “Special Education and School Discipline: A Precarious Balance.”

Behavioral Disorders 27(2): 81–97.



Slaby, Ronald G., and Nancy G. Guerra. 1988. “Cognitive Mediators of Aggression in

Adolescent Offenders: Part 1, Assessment.” Developmental Psychology 24(4): 580–8.
                                             733

Smith, Emilie Phillips, Deborah Gorman-Smith, William Quinn, David Rabiner, Patrick Tolan,

Donna-Marie Winn, and Multisite Violence Prevention Project. 2004. “Community-based

Multiple Family Groups to Prevent and Reduce Violent and Aggressive Behavior: The GREAT

Families Program.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 26(1), supp. 1: 39–47.



Snyder, Howard N., and Melissa Sickmund. 2006. Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 2006

National Report. Washington, D.C.: U. S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs,

Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.



Spence, Susan H., and John S. Marzillier. 1979. “Social Skills Training with Adolescent Male

Offenders: I. Short-term Effects.” Behavioral Research & Therapy 17(1): 7–16.



Spence, Susan H., and John S. Marzillier. 1981. “Social Skills Training with Adolescent Male

Offenders: II. Short-term, Long-term and Generalized Effects.” Behavioral Research & Therapy

19(4): 349–68.



Sperber, Dan, and Deirdre Wilson. 1995. Relevance: Communication and Cognition. Oxford:

Blackwell.



Sroufe, L. Alan. 1997. “Psychopathology as an Outcome of Development.” Development and

Psychopathology 9(2): 251–68.
                                             734

Steiner, Hans, Elizabeth Cauffman, and Elaine Duxbury. 1999. “Personality Traits in Juvenile

Delinquents: Relation to Criminal Behavior and Recidivism.” Journal of the American Academy

of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 38(3): 256–62.



Stormshak, Elizabeth A., Karen L. Bierman, Carole Bruschi, Kenneth A. Dodge, John D. Coie,

and the Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. 1999. “The Relation between Behavior

Problems and Peer Preference in Different Classroom Contexts.” Child Development 70(1): 169–

82.



Sutphen, Richard D., Bruce A. Thyer, and P. David Kurtz. 1995. “Multisystemic Treatment of

High-risk Juvenile Offenders.” International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative

Criminology 39(4): 327–34.



Tang, Tony Z., Robert J. DeRubeis, Steven D. Hollon, Jay Amsterdam, Richard Shelton, and

Benjamin Schalet. 2009. “Personality Change during Depression Treatment: A Placebo-

controlled Trial.” Archives of General Psychiatry 66(12): 1322–30.



Thornberry, Terence P., and Marvin D. Krohn. 1997. “Peers, Drug Use, and Delinquency.” In

Handbook of Antisocial Behavior, edited by David M. Stoff, James Breiling, and Jack D. Maser,

218–33. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.



Walsh, William J., Laura B. Glab, and Mary L. Haakenson. 2004. “Reduced Violent Behavior

following Biochemical Therapy.” Physiology & Behavior 82(5): 835–9.
                                             735


Washington State Institute for Public Policy. 1998. “Watching the Bottom Line: Cost-effective

Interventions for Reducing Crime in Washington.” Preliminary technical report, January.

Olympia, WA: Washington State Institute for Public Policy.



Werch, Chudley E., and Deborah M. Owen. 2002. “Iatrogenic Effects of Alcohol and Drug

Prevention Programs.” Journal of Studies on Alcohol 63(5): 581–90.



Wilson, Sandra Jo, Mark W. Lipsey, and James H. Derzon. 2003. “The Effects of School-based

Intervention Programs on Aggressive Behavior: A Meta-analysis.” Journal of Consulting and

Clinical Psychology 71(1): 136–49.



Wilson, Sandra Jo, and Mark W. Lipsey. 2007. “School-based Interventions for Aggressive and

Disruptive Behavior: Update of a Meta-analysis.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine

33(2), supp. 1: S130–S143.



Zelli, Arnaldo, L. Rowell Huesmann, and Daniel Cervone. 1995. “Social Inference and

Individual Differences in Aggression: Evidence for Spontaneous Judgments of Hostility.”

Aggressive Behavior 21(6): 405–17.
                                               736

Table 1: A comparison of cognitive, environmental, and non-cognitive predictors of different

criminality outcomes in selected studies.

           Predicting Moderate / Serious Delinquency in Males (Loeber et al., 2007)
Cognitive Factors (top five)
       High verbal IQ                                                           –.16
       Good performance on Continuous Performance task                          –.13
       Low delayed visual memory                                                 .12
       Low immediate visual memory                                               .11
High delayed verbal memory                                                      –.10
Child Factors (top five)
       High marijuana use                                                        .43
       High drug selling                                                         .42
       High truancy                                                              .39
       High alcohol use                                                          .37
       High tobacco use                                                          .34
Family Factors (top five)
       High parental supervision                                                –.22
       High parental stress                                                      .13
       Low positive parenting                                                    .12
Peer Factors
       High peer delinquency                                                     .36
Community Factors (top five)
Low community crime (youth report)                                              –.26
Good housing quality                                                            –.19
Low community crime (parent report)                                             –.18
Poor housing quality                                                             .07


               Predicting Desistance from Delinquency in Males (Loeber et al., 2007)
Cognitive Factors (top five)
       Low immediate visual memory                                               .12
                                              737

       High spatial IQ                                                           –.06
       Poor performance on Continuous Performance task                            .06
Child Factors (top five)
       High interpersonal callousness                                             .18
       High tobacco use                                                           .16
       High drug selling                                                          .14
       High alcohol use                                                           .13
       High perceived likelihood of being caught                                  .12
Family Factors (top five)
       High parental supervision                                                 –.07
       High parental stress                                                       .05
       High physical punishment                                                   .04
       High positive parenting                                                   –.03
Peer Factors
       High peer delinquency                                                      .18
Community Factors
       Low community crime (parent report)                                       –.10
       Poor housing quality                                                       .07
       High community crime (youth report)                                        .04
       High community crime risk (parent report)                                  .02


                  Predicting Recidivism (Meta-Analysis by Cottle et al., 2001)
Cognitive Factors (top five)
       Standardized achievement score                                            –.15
       Full scale IQ score                                                       –.14
       History of special education                                               .13
       Verbal IQ score                                                           –.11
       Performance IQ score                                                      –.03
Child Factors (top five)
       Nonsevere pathology (e.g., stress, anxiety)                                .31
       Conduct problems                                                           .26
                                             738

       Effective use of leisure time                                        .23
       Substance abuse                                                      .15
       Severe pathology                                                     .07
Family Factors
       Family problems                                                      .28
       History of abuse                                                     .11
       Single parent                                                        .07
       Parent pathology                                                     .05
Peer Factors
       Delinquent peers                                                      .20


                     Predicting Conduct Problems (Gerard & Buehler, 2004)
Cognitive Factors
       Scholastic achievement                                               –.24
Child Factors
       School detachment                                                     .33
       Self-esteem                                                          –.20
       Perceived prejudice by students                                       .08
Family Factors (top five)
       Family detachment                                                     .31
       Parent’s relationship quality                                        –.17
       Parent’s marital status                                              –.13
       Parental involvement                                                 –.13
       Household size                                                        .10
Peer Factors
       Trouble with peers                                                    .20
       Peer support                                                         –.17
Community Factors


       Neighborhood satisfaction                                            –.13
       Neighborhood safety                                                  –.09
                                             739

       Neighborhood quality                                                    –.07
       Neighborhood problems                                                    .07


        Predicting Stability of Conduct Problems from Personality (Miller et al., 2003)
Neuroticism (top five)
       Angry Hostility                                                          .30
       Impulsiveness                                                            .22
       Depression                                                               .15
       Self-Consciousness                                                       .02
       Vulnerability                                                            .03
Agreeableness (top five)
       Straightforwardness                                                     –.47
       Compliance                                                              –.37
       Altruism                                                                –.30
       Trust                                                                   –.24
       Tendermindedness                                                        –.12
Conscientiousness (top five)
       Deliberation                                                            –.35
       Dutifulness                                                             –.23
       Competence                                                              –.22
       Achievement striving                                                    –.15
       Self-discipline                                                         –.15
                                                                   740

Table 2: A framework for reviewing non-cognitive interventions.


                                                 Positive                                     Negative / Inconclusive

     Short-Term         School-based                                          Juvenile awareness programs
                        After-school programs                                 Scared Straight (-$17,470)
                        Social skills training                                Prison visits
                        Family interventions                                  Boot camps ($8,325)
                        Parent management training                            Incarceration
                        Functional family therapy ($49,776)                   Job and vocational training
                        Multisystemic therapy ($17,694)
                        Multidimensional treatment foster care ($88,953)
                        Health-based intervention

     Long-Term          Olweus Bullying Program                               Positive youth development
                        Life skills training*                                 Prison-based interventions
                        Seattle Social Development Program*                   Social cognitive skills training



Note: * indicates no viable information for either costs or benefits in the Drake et al. (2009) review.
