                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  INVESTIGATING THE DYNAMIC EFFECTS OF COUNTERFEITS WITH A RANDOM
             CHANGEPOINT SIMULTANEOUS EQUATION MODEL

                                                Yi Qian
                                                Hui Xie

                                        Working Paper 16692
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16692


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




The authors would like to thank the participants at the Marketing Science Conference at Michigan,
the seminar participants at Harvard Econometrics, UIUC, and UIC, especially to Gary Chamberlain,
Guido Imbens and Xuming He, for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Greg Allenby, Ulf B¨ockenholt,
Eric Bradlow, Yuxin Chen, and Karsten Hansen for valuable comments. Comments are welcomed
and can be sent to yiqian@kellogg.northwestern.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Yi Qian and Hui Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Investigating the Dynamic Effects of Counterfeits with a Random Changepoint Simultaneous
Equation Model
Yi Qian and Hui Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 16692
January 2011
JEL No. O34

                                              ABSTRACT

Using a unique panel dataset and a new model, this article investigates the dynamic effects of counterfeit
sales on authentic-product price dynamics. We propose a Bayesian random-changepoint simultaneous
equation model that simultaneously takes into account three important features in empirical studies:
(1) Endogeneity of a market entry, (2) Nonstationarity of the entry effects and (3) Heterogeneity of
the firms’ response behaviors. Besides accounting for the endogeneity of counterfeiting, the proposed
methodology improves the estimation of dynamic effects under heterogeneous response times by firms.
We identify both a temporary negative short-term effect and a stable positive long-term effect of counterfeit
sales on the authentic prices. Such effect estimates are biased in the OLS model and attenuated in a
standard IV model. The findings help to unify two strands of I.O. theories on the pricing effects of
competition. Finally, our analysis identifies considerable heterogeneity in authentic firms’ response
behaviors (both response time and magnitude), and the hierarchical structure of our model enables
a study of the drivers of the heterogeneity. This study casts managerial insights on effective brand
protection and management strategies that can be tailored to each type of firms. The method illustrated
provides a new approach to use field data to study the determinants of a firm’s response time, an important
dimension of management strategy. In particular, firms with more human capital or less diversification
from infringed markets were faster in responding and differentiating from counterfeits. The proposed
framework can be widely applied to study dynamic and heterogeneous causal effects of marketing
variables.


Yi Qian
Department of Marketing
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
yiqian@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Hui Xie
Department of Biostatistics
School of Public Health
University of Illinois at Chicago
huixie@uic.edu
1.    Introduction

Brand names have significant economic values and are vulnerable to counterfeiting. The
Federal Bureau of Investigation reports that U.S. companies lose $200-250 billion annually
due to worldwide copyright, trademark, and trade-secret infringements. Significantly, the
European Commission (EC) reckons that the value of counterfeiting as a percentage of world
trade is growing. Between 1990 and 1999, it doubled from 3.5 percent to 7 percent (Choate
2005). The World Customs Organization (WCO) estimates that over 500 billion Euro of
traded world merchandise in 2004 may have been counterfeits (WCO 2004). Most of the
counterfeits are charged at extremely low prices, e.g., $65 for a counterfeited LV handbag
whose original price is $1200, or $5 for Windows 95 software only after days it was introduced
in the U.S. for $85 (Choate 2005). The entry of counterfeiters with fractionally low prices can
have two opposite impacts on the authentic prices: On the one hand, their entry potentially
exerts competitive pressure on authentic prices. Authentic prices could also drop as a result
of limit (predatory) pricing strategy (Carlton and Perloff, 2005). On the other hand, their
entry may lead to increases in authentic prices due to the segmentation of price-sensitive
and insensitive consumers in the market, or due to authentic producers’ innovations and
self-differentiation mechanics to alleviate competition (Qian 2008). The former competitive
effect is likely to take place immediately upon entry, while the latter effect may arrive with
some lags. This lag differs from company to company due to inherent firm heterogeneity
in their ability to respond to market shakeups caused by counterfeit entry. Therefore, how
much and when authentic firms’ marketing norms (e.g. prices) change in response to the
counterfeit entry are both interesting and pertinent questions to address.
     In evaluating the causal effects of counterfeit entry on the authentic price outcome, it is
worth noting two important challenges. First, counterfeit entry is unlikely to be exogenous.
Counterfeiters are more likely to infringe upon a brand if the authentic product is easier


                                                2
to imitate, has a larger markup, or if the brand management is worse. Under such circum-
stances, counterfeit entry will be correlated with authentic prices and profits. However, a
causal link cannot be inferred from this correlation. Qian (2008) adopts the Instrumental
Variable (I.V.) identification strategy. Instrumental variables are correlated with the en-
dogenous treatment variable but uncorrelated with the outcome of interest conditional on
the treatment variable. One can subsequently use the instrumental variables to tease out
the exogenous component of the treatment variation and identify the causal effect. The I.V.
method is widely applied in economic and marketing studies.
   The second challenge arises because various authentic firms respond to their own coun-
terfeit entry with different time lags. It is natural for the authentic firms to take time to
analyze the changing business environment, design corresponding strategies, and implement
them in practice. The stable long-term effect follows only with some delay in time, which we
refer to as response time. Such delay in response is frequently observed. Robinson (1988)
noted a pattern of delayed responses by the incumbent firms based on studying 199 new
product entries in a start-up business database. Even defensive price reactions, which are
the easiest to implement, are also often delayed. Bowman and Gatignon (1995) also observed
delayed response in the PIMS database. In these scenarios, the effect of market change is
nonstationary in time in that a study unit (e.g., a firm) changes its state underlying the
outcome of interest (e.g., price) at a random time point. Such phenomenon is not restricted
to studies on firms, but is also prevalent in studies involving other marketing players, e.g.,
dynamic effects due to delayed response of consumers to marketing efforts (Kotler 1971).
Fader, Hardie and Huang (2004, hereafter referred to as FHH) highlight the importance
of taking the nonstationary consumer behavior process into account when forecasting new
product sales. In summary, the dynamic effect of a market change is a prevalent phenomenon
in practice and is an important subject to study.


                                              3
   A simple strategy to handle the dynamic effects is to pre-specify a common timepoint
where the short-term and long-term effects of the market change can be separated, and then
posit an econometric model that enables separate estimation of short-term and long-term
effects. This analytic strategy, albeit simple, has the following three limitations.
   First, pre-specifying the separating time point may not be easy and requires considerable
prior knowledge on the underlying marketing activities. It would be preferable to have a
data-driven approach to automatically select the timepoint that separate out the short- and
long-term effects of market change.
   Second and more importantly, it is often the case that there exists a significant amount
of heterogeneity among different units (e.g. firms) in their response times. For example,
Bowman and Gatignon (1995) documented a heterogeneous pattern of delayed responses
in the widely analyzed PIMS database: the defensive responses to new product entries
occurred after more than a year in 28.7% of the cases, between six months and a year in
18% of the cases, and immediately in only 13.4% of the cases. We also observe a pattern of
heterogeneous response time in our dataset. It is well known that heterogeneity is common
in emprical studies and modeling the heterogeneity can lead to improved prediction. For
example, FHH (2004) shows that modeling the changepoints that are heterogeneous among
consumers can substantially improve new product sales forecast. Similarly, when there exists
such heterogeneity among units in their response time, explicitly modeling the heterogeneous
response time can lead to substantially improved estimation of dynamic effects of a market
change, and consequently can have more accurate policy implications. For example, we find
in our study that ignoring the heterogeneity of response time can attenuate the effect estimate
of both short-term and long-term effects. Such attenuation is more serious in evaluating the
derterminants of firms’ differential response behaviors. We find in our study that the simple
strategy to investigate dynamic effects misassesses the effects of several factors on marketing


                                               4
responses and is not able to identify their significant effects.
   Third, in many cases, how fast a firm responds to a market change is an important
dimension of management strategy, and therefore questions such as what determines firms’
ability to respond to the market change are of considerable interest (e.g., Bowman and
Gatignon 1995). Specifying a common response time ignores this heterogeneity and as a
result provides no basis to study such questions. An alternative approach is to employ a
distributed lag regression model. However, prior information on response time is rarely
available and thus it can be difficult to specify a sensible lag function. Moreover, neither
of the above methods is satisfactory if one is interested in studying the individual response
times.
   Our solution to the above challenge is to explicitly model the unit-specific response time
as a changepoint problem. The general class of the changepoint model is well suited for
modeling parameter changes in econometric models. There has been extensive research on
the changepoint model with early applications in statistics and economics (e.g. Smith 1975,
Barry and Hartigan 1993, Carlin et al. 1992, Lange et al. 1992, Bai 1997, Chib 1998).
There are important innovations of changepoint modeling in recent marketing literature.
Böckenholt and Dillon (1997), Poulsen (1990) and Ramaswamy (1997) use the hidden Markov
Models to study the changes in segment memberships over time, which can be viewed as a
special case of more general changepoint process models. FHH (2004) develop a dynamic
changepoint model that allows the changepoint process itself to evolve over time. They
show that the dynamic changepoint model improves the new product sales forecasting. The
method has been further studied and extended by Schweidel and Fader (2009). Neelamegham
and Chintagunta (2004) and Van Heerde, Mela and Manchanda (2004) extend the Dynamic
Linear Model to model new product sales. Fong and DeSarbo (2007) study Bayesian variable
selection problems in multiple regression models with changepoints. Our approach is more


                                                5
similar to that of FHH (2004) in that we explicitly model the random changepoints which
are heterogeneous among the study units. However, unlike FHH (2004) which focuses on
forecasting new product sales, the focus of our study is on an accurate ascertainment of
dynamic and heterogeneous causal effects of a market change. As such, we must explicitly
deal with the endogeneity issue, an important feature in empirical studies. To the best of
our knowledge, the endogeneity issue in a changepoint model framework has not been dealt
with previously, although its importance has been discussed in FHH (2004).
   A key contribution of our study is to provide a tractable methodological framework to
achieve consistent and efficient estimation of the dynamic causal effects of an endogenous
treatment variable on marketing responses. Specifically, we propose a random-changepoint
simultaneous equation model (RC-SEM) to properly measure dynamic effects of an endoge-
nous treatment on the outcome. Our modeling approach jointly models the marketing re-
sponse, the endogenous treatment variable and the latent unit-specific response time. There-
fore the model extends the traditional changepoint model to allow for endogeneity. Another
useful feature of our model is that we extend the changepoint model to allow for covariates
explaining the inter-firm differences in their response times. Our analysis demonstrates that
the proposed model minimizes the bias on the entry effect estimates and can allow us to in-
vestigate the determinants of inter-firm difference in their response time. More specifically,
we summarize the features and benefits of our modeling framework below.
   First, it allows for an automatic and cleaner separation of different stages of the effects of
a market change. As explained above, failure to properly account for unit-specific response
times can lead to biased estimates of dynamic effects of a market change, thus leading to
considerable loss of power for detecting a change in the marketing response. Our approach
explicitly models the unit-specific changepoint, thereby providing a much cleaner assessment
of dynamic effects. We are able to delineate the short-term pricing responses to counter-


                                               6
feiting as well as the stabilized long-term effect, a feature that would have been washed out
without appropriately accounting for the heterogeneous response time. This methodological
advantage precisely enables us to unify two strands of IO literature and resolve the empirical
controversy in the pricing impacts and responses in the face of copycat entries (Pauwels
and Srinivasan 2004, Deleersnyder et al 2007 vs. Rao and Monroe 1996, Hoch and Banerji
1993). Furthermore, the changepoint model is a data-driven procedure that automatically
detects the changepoint in the outcome. This is particularly useful if there is no strong prior
belief on the possible positions of changepoints, and one would like to minimize the input of
researchers in this modeling aspect.1
    Second, it models the endogeneity of the treatment variable. As explained above, the
counterfeit entry is likely to be endogenous, and failure to account for the endogeneity can
lead to misleading assessment of dynamic causal effects of counterfeit entry. In our analysis
we integrate the changepoint model with a simultaneous equation model, thereby simulta-
neously accounting for both endogeneity and nonstationary effects of counterfeit entry. The
need to account for both endogeneity and nonstationarity is not limited to our dataset. For
example, as discussed in FHH (2004), both the distribution build and competitive effects
could lead to endogeneity issues in new product sales forecasting. Our model provides a
framework based on which the endogeneity of a market change is accounted for and there-
fore cleaner assessment of the dynamic causal effects of market change can be made. Given
that both the endogeneity and nonstationary effects of a market change are important and
prevalent in empirical studies, the extension would be a useful generalization.
    Third, our model enables recovery of individual-specific estimates of how much firms’
price respond to entry by counterfeits. We are then able to explore what are the firm
characteristics that drive such heterogeneity in pricing responses to counterfeiting. Discovery
1
  Of course, our Bayesian approach allows incorporating such prior belief, if it exists, through proper specification of model
priors.


                                                              7
of these moderating factors assists in understanding effective brand management strategies
that can be tailored to each type of firms. The findings are therefore of keen interests
to academics and practitioners and the framework can be applied to understand strategic
responses under other contexts, such as pricing of national brands upon entry of imitative
store brands.
    Fourth, the modeling framework allows us to study how fast firms respond to market
change, an important dimension of a reactive strategy, and to study the determinants of
response speed. Given the staggering patterns of defensive responses by incumbents as iden-
tified in prior literature (Robinson, 1988; Bowman and Gatignon, 1995; Qian, 2008), the
following questions naturally arise: Why do some incumbents choose to respond immedi-
ately to the competitive entry while others delay their responses? The response time likely
represents the heterogeneity of the units, such as firms, in their ability to adapt to the con-
stantly changing environment. Thus, the response time can be of great interest to identify
institutional features that prompt effective and swift business strategy. The importance of
response time as a key strategic issue in marketing has been emphasized in previous liter-
ature (Robinson 1988, Smith et al. 1989, Heil and Robinson 1991, Bowman and Gatignon
1995). As pointed out by the authors, the study of similar issues such as the competitor’s
response in other context can be very useful to design informed marketing strategies. The
previous studies typically use survey data to investigate the questions. For example, Bow-
man and Gatignon (1995) use survey data to study the determinants of competitor response
time to a new product introduction. The survey contains a question that asks a firm how
long each of a firm’s leading competitors took to respond in a visible manner when the firm
introduced new products. As noted by the authors, one methodological limitation of this
approach relates to various potential response biases in the dependent variable.2 Using our
2
  For example, the authors discusses that the interview question is on the firm’s customers but the respondent is the firm
introducing the new product. A threat to content validity is that the respondent does not have perfect complete knowledge of


                                                             8
proposed model, researchers have an alternative method that uses the field data to study the
similar question. Specifically the method uses the changepoint modeling technique to infer
latent response times from the trajectory of the marketing response observed over time. The
hierarchical modeling structure allows us to further study the determinants of firms’ response
times. We hope that the proposed method expands the set of tools that can be used by the
researchers to study similar questions.
    Another contribution of the study is the scope of the dataset, which is a large national
sample that includes 31 branded shoe manufacturing firms and their counterfeiters in China.
Both multinational brands in China and Chinese-originated brands are sampled through
the stratified random sampling method (Qian 2008). Twenty-two out of the total 23 large
branded firms in China are captured, together with a random sample of smaller ones. De-
tailed financial statements of each sampled company and their counterfeiters are obtained
from a 12-year window from 1993-2004. This is a unique dataset that overcomes severe
data limitations common in the underground economics. Our analysis here differs from Qian
(2008) in several important ways. First, we tackle a different research question. Qian (2008)
explores the overall impacts of entry by counterfeiters on a portfolio of marketing outcomes.
The study provides comprehensive first-cut analyses on the stabilized authentic quality, price,
sales, self-enforcement expenditure, and profits years after being infringed. It opens doors
to more detailed analyses like the current study, where we focus on the important pricing
strategies against counterfeits. We carefully analyze the longitudinal pricing responses by
the authentic brands and explicitly model the heterogeneous response times between firms.
The new methodology enables us to distinctively identify the negative short-term effect and
positive long-term effect of counterfeits on authentic prices. The empirical findings unify
two strands of theoretical predictions in the industrial organization and marketing litera-

its customer’s awareness.



                                              9
ture. Second, the explicit modeling of the latent response time also allows us to study how
fast firms respond to the entry of counterfeits, an important marketing strategy not yet
studied in Qian (2008). Third, using the hierarchical Bayesian method, we investigate the
heterogeneous effects of counterfeit entry on both the price outcome and firms’ response
time. This provides additional insights on the firm behavior when faced with the threat of
counterfeiting. This also sheds lights on the determinants of interfirm differences of their
response magnitudes and speed. Last but not least, we propose a new methodology to study
latent response times using field data and to delineate dynamic effects of an endogenous
marketing variables.
     The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the proposed model:
RC-SEM. Section 3 describes the model inference with more details given in Appendix. Sec-
tion 4 applies the RC-SEM to the Chinese Shoe Market Data. In Section 5 we conduct
a simulation study to evaluate the performance of the method. We then conclude with a
discussion in Section 6.



2.    Modeling Approach

In this section we develop the proposed methodology to investigate the dynamic effects
of counterfeit entry using a dataset of the Chinese shoe industry. The panel data consist
of annual average prices, costs and sales for 31 authentic branded companies and their
counterfeiters from the year 1993 to 2004. Qian (2008) includes more details of the dataset. In
this article, we focus on studying the dynamic and heterogeneous causal effects of counterfeit
entry and sales on the authentic product prices using the proposed RC-SEM framework. As
aforementioned, one question of great interest is to investigate the effects of counterfeit entry
on authentic firms’ pricing strategy. As a preliminary analysis, Figure 1 presents the time
plot of the average log deflated authentic high-end product prices. Specifically the figure


                                               10
plots the regression coefficients on a set of dummies indicating the number of years relative
to the year of counterfeit entry with the log deflated authentic price as the response variable.
The plot suggests the presence of dynamic effects of counterfeit entry on authentic prices:
there was a reduction in the average authentic prices within first two years of the counterfeit
entry, after which there was an increase in the average authentic prices.
   The above simple analysis, though informative and useful, has some important limita-
tions. Notably, the analysis has not yet accounted for the potential endogeneity issue of
counterfeit entry. Secondly, although the analysis reveals a potential changepoint in the
average price profile, it ignores the heterogeneity of the changepoint among the firms, and
assumes that all the authentic firms took the same amount of time to respond to their
counterfeit entries. As aforementioned and further demonstrated in the following sections,
ignoring the heterogeneity can attenuate the dynamic-effect estimates of counterfeit entry.
Bias also arises when assessing the effects of various factors on the marketing responses. Fur-
thermore, such preliminary analysis does not allow us to study what affects a firm’s response
time to counterfeit entry.
   In order to overcome the limitations of the preliminary analysis, we propose a random-
changepoint simultaneous equations model to investigate the dynamic effects of counterfeit
entry. Our modeling framework jointly models the panel price profiles of the authentic firms
evolved over time, the quantity of counterfeits faced by the authentic firms as well as the
latent random changepoints in the panel price profiles caused by the heterogeneous response
times of the authentic firms to the counterfeits products. The model accounts for several
important features in the data: endogeneity, heterogeneity as well as the nonstationary pa-
rameters due to changepoint. We describe the overall model in the following two subsections.




                                              11
2.1     Within-firm Model

      Let Y1 , ..., YN denote the outcome vectors on a random sample of N units (i.e. firms in
our application), where Yi = (Yi1 , ..., YiJ ) is a J-dimensional panel outcome vector for the
ith unit, i = 1, ..., N and N = 31, J = 12 in our application. 3 We assume that the vector
outcome Yi is generated from the following structural model with changepoint:
                    T
                     Xij β1i + UijT αi + WijT γ + ǫYij        j = 1 , ..., Ti − 1
         Yij =         T        T          T        Y                                                              (1)
                     Xij β2i + Uij αi + Wij γ + ǫij           j = Ti , ..., J,

where the covariate X includes variables that are believed to have potentially differential
short-term (β1i ) and long-term (β2i ) impacts on the outcome. In our application, X refers
to the quantity of counterfeit products in the market faced by the authentic firm i, divided
by the sale quantity of this authentic firm. It is clear from the model specification that the
commonly used static model is obtained by setting β1i = β2i . Therefore, our model nests
the commonly used static model as a special case. As discussed in the Introduction section,
we expect X to have dynamic effects on the outcome (i.e., β1i 6= β2i ). When β1i is differ-
ent from β2i , the static model can give misleading estimates about the effects of X on the
outcome Y . For example, when β1i and β2i are of opposite sign, it is likely that the static
model that assumes β1i = β2i would greatly attenuate the effect estimate. Therefore, our
model development will be based on the more general model that allows for the possibility of
dynamic effects. The other variables in the model, U and W , include those observed exoge-
nous variables. U includes those variables whose effects on Y are heterogeneous among the
firms. This may include the unit dummy variables to capture the time-constant heterogene-
ity across units that are unobserved to the researchers, e.g., the attributes of individual-firm
management, etc. W may include the time dummy variables to capture the common market
shocks to all the units at a given time.

3
  Although our dataset is a balanced data in which each firm has the same number of years of observations, the proposed
method is general and can be applied to unbalanced data as well.


                                                          12
   In our modeling framework, we allow X to be endogenous. We follow the approach of
Amemiya (1985) and introduce a latent variable Xij∗ as follows

                                             Xij∗          if Xij∗ ≥ 0
                                         
                              Xij =                                                       (2)
                                             0             if Xij∗ < 0
                              Xij∗ = δZij + ǫX
                                             ij ,                                         (3)

where Xij∗ is a latent variable that determines the observed variable Xij according to Equa-
tion (2), and Zij is a vector of exogenous instrumental variables that relate to Xij∗ . The
endogeneity of Xij is modeled by the correlation between the error terms ǫX       Y
                                                                          ij and ǫij , which

are assumed to follow a bivariate normal:
                                                                             
                         Y X                                      σ11 σ12
                         ǫij , ǫij ∼ N (0, Σǫ ),         Σǫ =                     .       (4)
                                                                    σ12 σ22

In this model, X is endogenous when σ12 is nonzero.
   In the above simultaneous equation model, we are primarily interested in measuring the
causal effects of changing X on the outcome Y using a panel data where at least some of the
units in the sample experienced the change of X value over the period under examination.
The model allows dynamic effects of changing X on Y : a short-term effect denoted by the
parameter β1i and a long-term effect denoted by the parameter β2i . The model assumes
that the latent time point at which two effects are separated for the ith firm is Ti ≥ Ti0 ,
where Ti0 is the time of counterfeit entry for the ith firm. Let τi = Ti − Ti0 , and then τi
denotes the time for the ith firm to respond: the time from the counterfeit entry to the
earliest time point when the long-term effect is manifested in the outcome variable. We
note here the one-to-one correspondence between τi and Ti . Furthermore, both τi and Ti are
unknown and will be inferred from the data using the changepoint modeling technique. It is
often the case that the long-term effect is very different from the short-term effect. Figure
2 represents two firms with different response times, τ1 and τ2 . An ad-hoc method that


                                                    13
specifies a common response time for both firms, say τc , ignores this heterogeneity and can
lead to biased estimates of the dynamic effects of X on Y , as will be shown later. Our model
aims to separate out these two effects more cleanly by explicitly modeling the underlying
unit-specific changepoint. An added benefit of doing this is to provide estimates of response
times and to be able to study what affects firms’ response times.
    To model the response time as a function of firm-characteristics, we assume that there
is a continuous response time variable, τi∗ , for the firm i. Because the observed value is
determined by the coarsened units of the outcome, e.g. years in our dataset, the response
time τi∗ is observed to fall in a certain interval with its actual value unobserved. Such data
often occurred in other studies, such as the length of time with the present employer or
duration of unemployment in survey studies. In our case, the grouped value τ is determined
by its underlying value τ ∗ according to the following set of rules:
                       
                        0              if τi∗ ≤ 0
                τi =       k            if k − 1 < τi∗ ≤ k, 1 < k ≤ J − Ti0                                                (5)
                           J − Ti0 + 1 if τi∗ > J − Ti0 .
                       

In the above model, τi = 0 implies that there is no short-term effect and long-term effect kicks
in immediately for this firm; τi = J − Ti0 + 1 implies that a long-term effect has not arrived
and we only observed a short-term effect over the study period. Both of these two cases are
unlikely in our dataset since (1) it usually takes time for a firm to design responding strategy
and (2) our panel spans twelve years and all firms, if infringed, have at least five years of
observations after counterfeit entry, which is long enough for firms to respond. However, for
model completeness, we include these two cases in our model development.
    We derive the likelihood for the above unit-level model as follows.
                                               Z X
             ∗
f (Yi , Xi |τi , β1i , β2i , αi , γ, δ, Σǫ ) =     f (Yi , Xi , Xi∗ , τi |τi∗ , β1i , β2i , αi , γ, δ, Σǫ )dXi∗
                                                  i τ
                                               Z X
                                          =              f (Yi , Xi , Xi∗ |τi , β1i , β2i , αi , γ, δ, Σǫ )f (τi |τi∗ )dXi∗ , (6)
                                                    τi


                                                            14
where the density function f (τi |τi∗ ) is
                       
                        I(τi = 0)           if τi∗ ≤ 0
        f (τi |τi∗ ) ∝   I(τi = k)           if k − 1 < τi∗ ≤ k, 1 < k ≤ J − Ti0                                  (7)
                         I(τ = J + 1 − Ti0 ) if τ ∗ > J − Ti0 .
                       

The conditional density function f (Yi , Xi , Xi∗ |τi , β1i , β2i , αi , γ, δ) is derived as follows:


(1) τi = 0
This corresponds to the case of immediate response from firm i. In our derivation, we write
the joint distribution of f (ǫYij , ǫX          X       Y X
                                     ij ) = f (ǫij )f (ǫij |ǫij ) as in Rossi et al. (2005). In this decom-
                                                                          2
                                                                         σ12
                          σ12 X      2             2
position, ǫYij |ǫX
                 ij ∼ N ( σ22 ǫij , σ1|2 ), where σ1|2 = σ11 −           σ22
                                                                             .   We then have the density function
as follows:
                                Y
f (Yi , Xi , Xi∗ |τi = 0) =       (I(Xij = 0, Xij∗ < 0) + I(Xij > 0, Xij∗ = Xij ))
                                 j
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                σ12 X     2             ∗
                                φ(Yij − Xij β2i −     UijT αi    −   WijT γ   −                   X
                                                                                   ǫ |0, σ1|2 )φ(ǫij = Xij − δZij |0, σ22 ) ,
                                                                                σ22 ij

where φ(·|µ, σ 2 ) stands for the density function for normal distribution with mean µ and
variance σ 2 .


(2) 0 < τi < J − Ti0 + 1
In this case, we have the density function as follows:
                             Y
f (Yi , Xi , Xi∗ |τi ) =                (I(Xij = 0, Xij∗ < 0) + I(Xij > 0, Xij∗ = Xij ))
                                       
                           j<Ti0 +τi
                                                                                                                     
                                                                          σ12 X     2             ∗
                           φ(Yij − Xij β1i −     UijT αi
                                                 −             WijT γ   −                   X
                                                                             ǫ |0, σ1|2 )φ(ǫij = Xij − δZij |0, σ22 )
                                                                          σ22 ij
                               Y 
                           ×         (I(Xij = 0, Xij∗ < 0) + I(Xij > 0, Xij∗ = Xij ))
                             j≥Ti0 +τi
                                                                                                                     
                                                                          σ12 X     2             ∗
                           φ(Yij − Xij β2i −     UijT αi   −   WijT γ   −                   X
                                                                             ǫ |0, σ1|2 )φ(ǫij = Xij − δZij |0, σ22 ) .
                                                                          σ22 ij

                                                           15
(3) τi = J − Ti0 + 1
In this case, we have the density function as follows:
                           Y
f (Yi , Xi , Xi∗ |τi ) =     (I(Xij = 0, Xij∗ < 0) + I(Xij > 0, Xij∗ = Xij ))
                            j
                                                                                                                   
                                                                        σ12 X     2             ∗
                           φ(Yij − Xij β1i −   UijT αi   −   WijT γ   −                   X
                                                                           ǫ |0, σ1|2 )φ(ǫij = Xij − δZij |0, σ22 ) .
                                                                        σ22 ij

Therefore, given each possible value of τi , we can construct the above likelihood. These
unit-level likelihood will be combined with the hierarchical prior distribution of unit-level
latent data to draw inference on the likely position of changepoints.


2.2     Between-firm Model

      In this subsection, we consider modeling the firm-level parameters and latent variables,
(αi , β1i , β2i , τi∗ ), as a function of firm-level characteristics. The purpose is to study the
determinants of the interfirm difference on the short-term effect, long-term effect, and the
firms’ response times to counterfeit entry. We use the following multivariate normal to model
the heterogeneity of these latent variables.
                                             
                                    αi         eα
                                  β1i       eβ1 
                                    = ΠZi +   ,                                                           (8)
                                  β2i       eβ2 
                                     ∗
                                    τi         eτ

where Π is a nr ×nz matrix containing the hyperparameters governing the population distrib-
ution of firm-level latent variables, nr is the number of these latent variables, nz is the number
of variables for firm characteristics (plus an intercept term), and e = (eα , eβ1 , eβ2 , eτ )T are
random residuals that are assumed to be jointly multivariate normal as

                                (eα , eβ1 , eβ2 , eτ ) ∼ MVN [(0, 0, 0, 0), Σe ] .                            (9)

                                                         16
There are two benefits of the between-firm model. One is that this provides a framework
for us to investigate the determinants of firms’ heterogeneous response behaviors in terms
of both their response magnitudes and response speed. Second, this allows one to leverage
strength from different firms in the estimation of firm-level models. In this approach, the
latent response time τi∗ is treated the same as the other firm-level latent characteristics,
(αi , β1i , β2i ). Therefore the model extends the traditional hierarchical model to incorporate
the latent response time as an additional dimension of the outcomes to study. These latent
variables are inferred from the observed data and the hierarchical model provide a framework
to study the determinants of the interfirm differences. In particular, the approach allows one
to use field data to study what might affect firms’ response times.


The above Equations (1),(2), (3), (4), (5), (8) and (9) specify a probability model describing
the data-generating process. The entire parameter vector is (Π, γ, δ, Σǫ , Σe ). The likelihood
for these parameters is as follows:


  L(Π, γ, δ, Σǫ , Σe ; X, Y )
                   YZ
               ∝           f (Yi , Xi |τi∗ , β1i , β2i , αi , γ, δ, Σǫ )f (αi , β1i , β2i , τi∗ |Π, Σe )dαi dβ1i dβ2i dτi∗ ,
                       i

where i = 1, ..., N , f (Yi , Xi |τi∗ , β1i , β2i , αi , γ, δ, Σǫ ) is specified in Equation (6) and
f (αi , β1i , β2i , τi∗ |Π, Σe ) is the density function of Equation (8) and (9).



3.   Inference

As shown above, the likelihood for the RC-SEM involves integration and summation over the
latent variables Xij∗ , αi , β1i , β2i , τi∗ and τi respectively, which renders inference based on the
direct Maximum Likelihood Estimation or Least Square method difficult or even intractable.
We use the Bayesian approach for inference. Specifically we use data augmentation technique

                                                             17
for the estimation of the model (Tanner and Wong 1987). We augment the parameter vector
by the latent data described above, and then sample from the joint posterior distribution of
model parameters and latent variables. Such a method does not require numerical evaluation
of integrals. Moreover, it is straightforward to make inferences on both the population
parameters and latent variables under the Bayesian framework. For example, their estimates
and the corresponding standard errors can be readily obtained from the posterior draws.
   To complete our model, we need to specify the priors for the parameters in the model.
Let Θ = vec(Π′ ). We assign priors for the model parameters as follows:

                         Θ ∼ N (µΠ , Λ−1                −2
                                      Π ), γ ∼ N (µγ , Aγ ),                       δ ∼ N (µδ , A−1
                                                                                                δ ).

                         Σǫ ∼ IW (νǫ , Sǫ ), Σe ∼ IW (νe , Se ),                                                       (10)

where IW (ν, S) stands for an inverse-Wishart distribution with ν degrees of freedom and
the scale matrix S. The above distributional forms are chosen for priors because these
are conjugate priors for deriving the conditionals in our Gibbs sampler described later.
In our analysis, the constants in the priors are chosen in a way so that these priors are
relatively diffuse. The assignment of values for the constants in these priors is described in
Appendix. With the above specified priors, model specification, and observed data X and Y ,
the posterior distribution of the parameters and latent data is as follows, up to a constant:

  π(Π, γ, δ, Σǫ , Σe , X ∗ , αi , β1i , β2i , τ, τ ∗ |Y, X) ∝
                N
                Y
                      f (Yi , Xi , Xi∗ |τi , αi , β1i , β2i , γ, δ, Σǫ )f (τi |τi∗ )f (τi∗ , αi , β1i , β2i |Π, Σe )
                i=1
                                    · π(Π|µΠ , Λ−1
                                                Π )π(γ|µγ , Aγ )π(δ|µδ , Aδ )π(Σǫ |νǫ , Sǫ )π(Σe |νe , Se ). (11)


Although the analytical expression of the posterior distribution is unavailable, we can ob-
tain draws from the posterior distribution of the parameters and the latent data through
simulation method. Detailed Gibbs sampler algorithm for model estimation is given in the

                                                                18
Appendix.



4. Empirical Analysis
4.1 A Bayesian Analysis using RC-SEM

   In this subsection, we apply the proposed RC-SEM methodology to analyze the dataset of
the Chinese shoe industry. In our empirical model, the outcome variable Yij is the logarithm
of the deflated prices for the ith authentic firm’s high-end product at year j. The explanatory
variable of main interest, Xij , is the quantity of counterfeit products in the market faced by
the ith authentic brand at year j, divided by the sale quantity of this authentic firm. The
covariate U in Equation (1) includes firm dummies and W includes year dummies. The year
dummies capture the effects of common shocks to the market that may vary by time. The
firm dummies capture the effects of unobserved firm-level time-constant characteristics.
   The entry of counterfeits is likely to be endogenous due to unobserved time-varying firm
characteristics. Ignoring the endogeneity, when present, will lead to erroneous inference
about its causal effect on the authentic firms’ pricing. To identify the effects of the coun-
terfeit entry, we adopt the same IV strategy as in Qian (2008). Qian (2008) documents
a natural experiment in which the exogenous shocks led to the loosening of the Chinese
government’s monitoring of footwear trademarks. The identification strategy exploits the
interaction between the unexpected enforcement change and the relationship between each
branded company and the government, as proxied by the number of days it took each com-
pany to pass the required International Standards (ISO) applications. This IV strategy
recognizes that branded companies that have better relationships with the government are
less affected by the sudden loosening of trademark enforcements, and hence face less threats
by counterfeit entry. The identification strategy uses variations in these IVs to tease out
the exogenous components of the counterfeit sales which is then used to identify the causal


                                              19
effect of counterfeit entry. More institutional details regarding the IV validity are discussed
in Qian (2008). In Equation (3), we use LOOSE, RELAT ION and LOOSE ∗RELAT ION
as the main instruments, where LOOSE is an indicator variable denoting the loosening of
Chinese government enforcement in monitoring the footwear trademarks, RELAT ION de-
notes the number of days it took the company to pass the required ISO applications, and
LOOSE ∗ RELAT ION is the interaction between these two variables.
   Authentic firms respond to their own counterfeit entry with various time lags. As a
result, the change in prices of their products are manifested in the data only after the
response time. In the analysis below, we will use RC-SEM to explicitly model the latent
heterogeneous response times among the authentic firms. One advantage of the RC-SEM is
that it automatically detects the presence and location of firm-specific changepoint in the
outcome variable time-series. For comparison purposes, we also fit three nested models of the
RC-SEM. The first one is the OLS with a pre-specified response time common to all firms.
This model specification recognizes the dynamic effects of the counterfeit entry, and thus it is
more realistic than a static OLS model that assumes time-invariant effect of counterfeit sales.
However, this analysis requires researchers to specify a common value of response times and
as a result ignores the potential heterogeneity in response times among firms. In our analysis,
we pre-specify the common response time to be two years, which is the value closest to the
posterior mean of response times estimated from our RC-SEM shown later. The second one
is a random-changepoint (RC) model. This model recognizes the heterogeneous response
time but ignores the endogeneity issue. The third one is the simultaneous equation model
(SEM) with a pre-specified response time common to all firms. The standard SEM accounts
for the endogeneity issue. However, like OLS, SEM also assumes common response time
with a value of two years.
   We first fit the models in which the covariate Zi in Equation (8) contains only the


                                              20
intercept. The analysis enables us to compare the performance of different models in a
relatively simple setting. All model fittings run the Gibbs sampler for 50,000 iterations and
discard the first 10,000 iterations as the burn-in period. We check the convergence of the
Markov chains to make sure that the chain converges to the stationary distributions after
the burn-in period via both visual traceplot inspections and the Geweke’s numeric diagnostic
statistics (Geweke 1992).
   The posterior means and standard deviations of the parameter draws from the Gibbs
sampler for all models are reported in Table 1. Under the RC-SEM, we are able to detect
the presence of response times that are heterogeneous among the authentic firms. Figure 3 (a)
and (b) plots the prior and posterior distributions of the latent response time τi∗ . As shown in
the figure, data provide a substantial amount of information so that the posterior distribution
of τi∗ is a much more condensed distribution as compared with its prior distribution. The
average response time is estimated to be 1.6 years with a standard deviation of 1.1. This
shows that the authentic firms took considerably different amounts of time to design and
implement counter measures against their counterfeits. In contrast, neither the OLS nor
SEM provides the estimates of the response times since both methods pre-specify them to
be a common value of two years.
   The results also show that the effect estimates of counterfeit sales are also different for
different methods. Because the covariate Zi in Equation (8) contains only the intercept, the
parameter estimates in Π are the population mean effects. As shown in Table 1, RC-SEM
shows that there is a negative (-0.34) short-term population mean effect and a positive (1.61)
long-term population mean effect of counterfeit entry on the authentic firms’ prices. The
95% credible intervals for both effects exclude zero. In comparison, the results from SEM
show attenuated effects for both the short-term and long-term effects. In particular, the
95% credible interval for the short-term effect under the SEM includes zero. This shows


                                               21
that ignoring the heterogeneous response times, like what a standard SEM does, can lead to
attenuated effect estimates and lose power to detect a change in the marketing response. RC
and OLS also yield different estimates of the effect estimates since they do not model the
endogeneous entry or heterogeneous response times.4 Table 1 shows a negative value of the
posterior mean of the covariance term σ12 . Figure 3 (c) and (d) plot the prior and posterior
distributions of the correlation coefficient, ρ =                 √ σ12 ,    and show that data provide strong
                                                                   σ11 σ22

evidence for the presence of a negative correlation, as compared with its prior distribution.
This implies that there were some unobserved factors that affected the price and counterfeit
entry in opposite directions. These factors could be a firm’s managerial skills that are
positively correlated with product prices and negatively correlated with the counterfeit entry.
It is also possible that higher prices are associated with higher quality products that are
harder to be imitated or counterfeited. The endogeneity issue, if not accounted for in the
modeling, will lead to inconsistent estimate of causal effects.
    We also conduct model comparisons using the logarithm of Bayes factors (Newton and
Raftery 1994). In our model comparisons, the RC-SEM is considered as the full model, and
the other three models (SEM, RC and OLS) can be considered as various nested models of
the RC-SEM.5 A general rule is that a log Bayes factor of larger than 5 provides strong evi-
dence against the null model (Raftery 1996). Our calculation shows that the log Bayes factor
for RC-SEM against SEM (null model) is 350.49 which provides overwhelming evidence for
the presence of heterogeneous random changepoints among firms. The log Bayes factor for
RC-SEM against RC (null model) is 121.78, which provides very strong evidence for the
presence of endogeneity of counterfeit entry. The log Bayes factor for RC-SEM against OLS

4
  In particular, both models significantly underestimate the long-term effect of counterfeit entry. Furthermore, as shown in
the next subsection, these two models also mis-assess the effects of several factors on marketing outcomes and are not able to
identify their significant effects.
5
  Because the RC and OLS use a single-equation approach, in order to make their marginal likelihood comparable with those
of the SEM-type models, we have added the contribution of the likelihood from an independent model for X in the calculation
of marginal likelihood for these two models.


                                                             22
(null model) is 398.63, which provides overwhelming evidence for the simultaneous presence
of both heterogeneous random changepoints among firms and the endogeneity of counterfeit
entry.


4.2 Investigating Factors Affecting Firms’ Responses

   In this subsection, we conduct a finer analysis to study factors affecting authentic firms’
responses to the counterfeit entry. The firms’ response behaviors studied here include both
their response magnitude in short term and long term as well as their response speed. Specif-
ically, we expand the RC-SEM model as specified above and include a set of observed firm
characteristics to explain the differential responses in the between-firm model as specified in
Equation (8). The descriptive statistics of the firm characteristics included in Z are summa-
rized in Table 2. All these variables take on the average of pre-entry values, and our analysis
is concerned with how various characteristics of the firms associate with their responses to
counterfeiting. In Table 3 we report estimates of the hierarchical parameters in Π for all
models considered. The covariates in Z are standardized before entering the hierarchical
model analysis for ease of interpretation. We will further explain these firm-level variables
and the corresponding results in the following paragraphs.
   The authentic product quality could moderate the counterfeiting effects in a subtle way.
Our hypothesis is that it will be easier for consumers to detect counterfeits from authentic
products when the authentic quality is higher. Since it is harder for counterfeiters to close
the quality gap, the short-term shock to the authentic branded company will be less severe.
The analyses do show that the authentic quality, as proxied by unit product costs, helps to
alleviate the negative impacts of counterfeit entry on prices in the short run (Column 2 of
Table 3).
   Market share is an obvious brand characteristics to consider as an influencing factor. On


                                              23
the one hand, a brand with a larger market share is likely to attract more counterfeiting
and face more competition that way. On the other hand, larger market share also implies
the brand enjoys more market power and stability, and can be less influenceable by fringe
competitions. Under our analyses of identifying the effects of plausibly exogenous entries, it
does appear that brands with larger market shares are less affected by counterfeiting, with a
less negative short-term effect and a smaller long-term entry effect by counterfeits (Column
3 in Table 3).
   To test whether the degree of diversification moderates the effects of counterfeiting, we
collected data on the number of sub-brands and percentage of the sales values for exports
each branded company had. There is no significant effect associated with the number of
sub-brands a branded company owns, possibly because counterfeiters infringe on all sub-
brands (Column 4 in Table 3). However, companies with larger percentage of sales value
for export are less affected by the entry of counterfeits, because they are more diversified
than the companies that rely primarily on the domestic market where counterfeits massively
entered. They correspondingly have less urgency to respond to counterfeiting and have a
longer response time (Column 5 in Table 3).
   In theory, the more innovativeness a company is, the faster it will come up with newer
product designs and innovations to differentiate from counterfeits. We use two alternative
proxies for innovativeness: annual R&D expenditures and patent application costs of each
branded company. R&D expenditures measure more of the inputs to innovation while patent
costs proxy for innovation outputs (Qian 2007). These two variables are highly correlated
(correlation coefficient = 0.97), so we include only the patent costs in the main specifications.
Robustness checks using R&D instead of patent costs yield similar results. As expected, the
companies with higher levels of patent costs or R&D responded to counterfeiting in a shorter
time-frame by introducing a higher priced high-end shoes, as compared to companies with


                                               24
lower levels of innovativeness (Column 6 in Table 3). This suggests that the innovative
companies not only innovate faster in the face of competition, but also innovate with better
products given that Qian (2008) has shown very high correspondence between these shoe
prices and their unit product costs as well as characteristics.
   We additionally have information on the annual advertising expenditure of each branded
company. While heavier advertising could imply that consumers are more familiar with the
branded products and possibly less confused by counterfeits, it could also present a larger
brand premium for counterfeiters to free ride on. It then becomes an empirical question
whether advertising moderates the effect of entry by counterfeiters. Column 7 of Table 3 show
that companies that are accustomed to heavier advertising raise their high-end product prices
more after they introduced new products to countervail counterfeits, potentially because
there is a higher brand premium to leverage or because there is a higher fixed cost to
recuperate via higher prices.
   Finally, we gathered data on human capital within companies to test whether and how
this factor moderates the effects of counterfeiting and brand responses. We include the
employment and total annual wages of the branded companies to proxy for brand-level
human resources. Wage is a proxy for skilled labor commonly used in the labor economics
literature. Columns 8 and 9 in Table 3 demonstrate that the more human resources a branded
company has, the shorter time it takes to respond to counterfeits by innovating.
   One important thing to note in the analysis is that the traditional SEM and OLS method
do not model the heterogeneous response times and therefore do not allow for the study of
what affects firms’ reaction speed. Furthermore, ignoring the heterogeneous response time
also lead to mis-assessment of the effects of firm characteristics. The RC model allows for
this feature but does not model the endogeneity issue. Their effect estimates are also differ-
ent from those from the RC-SEM.


                                              25
5.     A Simulation Study

In this section, we conduct a set of simulation experiments to evaluate the performance of
different models to estimate the dynamic effects in repeated samples. We follow the steps
below to simulate data with dynamic effects:

• For each simulation dataset, we set the number of units n = 30 and the number of
     observations per unit J = 12, similar to those in the Chinese Shoe Market Data.

• To simulate data for Yij , Xij∗ and Xij , we first set the mean parameters in the following
     equations:
                              Xij β1i + αi + WijT γ + ǫYij
                          
                                                                     j = 1 , ..., Ti − 1
                  Yij =
                              Xij β2i + αi + WijT γ + ǫYij           j = Ti , ..., J

     and

                                       Xij∗ = δZij + ǫX
                                                      ij
                                               ∗
                                                Xij if Xij∗ ≥ 0
                                       Xij =
                                                0     if Xij∗ < 0.

     In simulations, we set the short-term effect β1 = −0.4 and the long-term effect β2 = 1.0.
     The parameter vector γ includes the time fixed-effects that are simulated from N (0, 0.12 ).
     The firm effects αi is simulated from N (0, 0.12 ). In simulations, we include in Z an in-
     tercept and three instrumental variables. The first IV is 0 before J = 4 and 1 afterward,
     mimicking the occurrence of a natural experiment. The second IV is simulated from
     N(0.5,1), and the third IV is the interaction of the first two IVs. We set the parameter
     values for coefficients on the intercept and the IVs to be (−1, 2, 0, 0.5). We then randomly
     generated the response time τi∗ from N (2, 1.52 ) and form the grouped version of the re-
     sponse time τi according to Equation (5). The changepoint time Ti = Ti0 + τi , where Ti0
     is the first time that the treatment variable becomes positive.

                                                     26
• We generate the error terms (ǫX     Y
                                ij , ǫij ) from a bivariate normal distribution with mean 0

  and variance-covariance matrix
                                                      √        
                                              σ11     ρ σ11 σ22
                               Σǫ =          √                    ,
                                            ρ σ11 σ22   σ22

  where ρ is the correlation coefficient of two error terms. In simulations, we set σ11 = 0.152
  and σ22 = 0.52 , and we vary ρ in (0, −0.2, 0.2, −0.5, 0.5, 0.8, −0.8) to cover various strengths
  of endogeneity in both directions.

• We then generate Yij , Xij∗ and Xij given the above model parameters. We repeat the
  above steps for M = 50 times for each parameter setting. This will generate 7*M panel
  datasets because there are seven values of ρ specified in step 3.

• We fit each simulated dataset with four models: the RC-SEM, SEM, RC model and
  the OLS model. Note that RC-SEM model is the full model and the other models can
  be considered as reduced models of RC-SEM. The RC model assumes ρ = 0 (i.e. no
  endogeneity issue) but allows heterogeneity of response times across units. In both SEM
  and the OLS the response times are assumed to be the same for all units. Furthermore,
  this common response time is not to be estimated from the data in SEM and OLS, but
  rather needs to be pre-specified. In the simulation study, we assume this common response
  time is 2, which is the mean of the response time used in the simulation. This corresponds
  to a scenario that the best guess of the response time, under the assumption of common
  response time, is used.

• We compare the estimates for both the population temporary short-term effect β1 and the
  stable long-term entry effect β2 from these four models. The result is summarized in Table
  4. The columns “Bias”, “SD” and “RMSE” are the bias, standard deviation, and square
  root of Mean squared error, respectively, calculated from the resulting sample of Bayesian

                                                27
     estimates. We repeat the process for each value of ρ. The column “Coverage Rate” is
     the proportion of 95% credible intervals that contain the true values in the simulation
     experiments.

      The simulation study shows that the estimation algorithm under the RC-SEM model
recovers the true values of the temporary short-term β1 and stable long-term entry effect
β2 reasonably well. Its RMSEs are smallest among four models across different strength
of endogeneity. In addition, the coverage rates of the credible intervals are closest to the
nominal 95% rate, among all methods. The simulation study shows that both the SEM
model and OLS that ignores the heterogeneity in latent response times attenuate dynamic
entry effects. The attenuation bias could be as large as 50% reduction in the true effect size.
This shows that in the presence of heterogeneous response time, ignoring the heterogeneity
and specifying a common response time can lead to severely biased estimates of dynamic
effects. Moreover, the Bayesian estimator from the RC-SEM model has less variability (i.e.
smaller standard error) than that from the SEM, because the RC-SEM model provides better
model-fitting by taking into account the latent response times. The RC estimates are bi-
ased because of the endogeneity issue. The OLS estimate has serious bias, particulary when
the endogeneity is strong, and the 95% credible intervals hardly contain the true effect value.



6.     Discussion

In marketing and economics studies, measuring the causal relationships among variables
is of critical importance. In practical applications, however, the issues of nonstationary,
endogeneity and heterogeneity are frequently encountered and can potentially spoil inference
if not taken into account properly. In this paper, we have considered the modeling and
inference of a simultaneous equation model with random changepoints, and apply the model
to study the dynamic and heterogeneous causal effects of counterfeit entry on the authentic

                                              28
firm’s price. The set of incumbent responses to entry by counterfeiters provide an interesting
case study to demonstrate the applicability of the proposed methodology. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first study to propose and apply a tractable framework to account
for all the above issues. As shown in our application and simulations, because the proposed
method considers both the heterogeneous nature of marketing players’ response times and
the endogeneity issue, it minimizes the bias in the dynamic effect estimation. These more
accurate dynamic effect estimates are also beneficial for future welfare analyses and policy
experiments.
   An added benefit of our method is the automatic detection of changepoints across units
and the data-driven estimations of such changepoints (i.e., the authentic companies’ re-
sponse times in our application), which are interesting to study in their own rights. We
further study what affects the firms’ response times along with their response magnitudes
using the hierarchical Bayesian method. We find that firms that have more human resources
or less diversification from markets affected by trademark infringement are quicker to fire
sustainable long-term responses to new competitive threats by counterfeiters. As demon-
strated in the application, the proposed method provides marketing researchers with a new
approach to study similar questions on response times using field data.
   The empirical results in this paper help to unify two strands of Industrial Organization
literature on the entry effects on prices. In particular, the finding that the authentic prices
fell immediately upon the entry of counterfeiters can be explained by Fudenberg and Ti-
role (2000). That is, new entry imposes competitive pressure in the short-run. We further
identify that authentic prices rose substantially on average two years after counterfeit entry.
This positive effect could be resolved with the other strand of theories. Notably, Frank and
Salkever (1997) predicts that generic entry could steal away the price-sensitive consumer seg-
ment, leaving behind a more inelastic demand for the branded companies to re-optimize into


                                              29
                                                                                              30


 a higher price. In addition, Qian (2006) predicts that companies invest to differentiate their
 products from counterfeits through innovation, self-enforcement, vertical integration, as well
 as price signaling, and all these mechanics lead to price increases. It becomes apparent that
 these theories can better explain the long-term entry effects, and are complementary rather
 than contradictory to traditional economic theories that predict negative price shocks. The
 individual-level parameter estimates also uncover a set of firm characteristics that moderate
 the timing and magnitude of pricing responses to entry by counterfeiters. These results pre-
 scribe effective brand management strategies tailored to each type of firms. The empirical
 findings on the pricing effects of counterfeiting can also shed lights on the private label lit-
 erature, where imitation or copycat strategy accounts for more than 50% of the store brand
 introductions (Scott Morton and Zettelmeyer, 2004).
    There are also some possible extensions to the proposed model. Our modeling framework
 is well suited for studying two-stage dynamic effects with a temporary short-term effect and
 a stable long-term effect. Such a model provides a relatively parsimonious summarization of
 the dynamic effects of market changes on the responses. In other settings (e.g. FHH 2004),
 each study unit may have multiple changepoints in their panel responses. One could extend
 the model developed in this article to allow for such scenario. Second, our hierarchical model
 uses the standard multivariate normal model for unit-specific latent variables. One could
 exploit the usage of a more general second stage model, such as a multivariate−t distribution.
 In summary, the method proposed in this article is flexible and has potential to be expanded
 along these directions.



 References

Amemiya, T. (1985) “Advanced Econometrics,” Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bai, J (1997), “Estimation of a Change Point in Multiple Regression Models,” Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 79, 551–563.
Barry, D. and Hartigan, J.A. (1993), “A Bayesian Analysis for Change Point Problems,”
       Journal of the American Statistical Association, 88, 309–319.
Böckenholt, U. and Dillon W.R. (1997). “Some New Methods for an Old Problem: Model-
       ing Preference Changes and Competitive Market Structures in Pretest Market Data.”
       Journal of Marketing Research, 15, 130-142.
Bowman, D., H. Gatignon (1995). “Determinants of competitor response time to a new
     product introduction.” Journal of Marketing Research. 32 (February): 4253.
Carlin, B., Gelfand, A.E. and Smith, A.F.(1992), “Hierarchical Bayesian Analysis of Change-
       point Problems,” Applied Statistics, 41, 389–405.
Carlton D. and Perloff J. M. (2005), Modern Industrial Organization, 2nd Edition, Pear-
       son/Addison Wesley.
Chib, S. (1998) “Estimation and comparison of multiple change-point models,” Journal of
      Econometrics, 86, 221–241
Choate, P. (2005). Hot Property : The Stealing of Ideas in an Age of Globalization. West-
      minster, MD, USA: Alfred A. Knopf Incorporated, 2005.
Deleersnyder, Barbara, Marnik G. Dekimpe, Jan-Benedict Steenkamp and Oliver Koll (2007),
       “Win-win Strategies at Discount Stores”, Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services,
       14(5), 309-18.
Fader, P.S., Hardie, B.G.S. and Huang, C.Y. (2004), “A Dynamic Changepoint Model for
       New Product Sales Forecasting,”, Marketing Science, 23, 50–65.
Fong, D.K.H. and DeSarbo, W.S. (2007), “A Bayesian Methodology for Simultaneously De-
      tecting and Estimating Regime Change Points and Variable Selection in Multiple Re-
      gression Models for Marketing Research,”, Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 5,
      427–453.
Frank, R.G. and Salkever, D.S. (1997), “Generic Entry and the Pricing of Pharmaceuticals”,
       Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 6:1, 75–90.
Fudenberg, D. and Tirole, J. (2000), “Pricing a Network Good to Deter Entry”, The Journal
      of Industrial Economics, 48:4, 373–390.
Geweke, J. (1992), Evaluating the Accuracy of Sampling-based Approaches to Calculating Pos-
     terior Moments, Bayesian Statistics 4, Eds: Bernado, J.M., Berger, J.O., Dawid, A.P.
     and Smith, A.F.M., Clarendon Press: Oxford.
Heil, O., and Robertson, T.S. (1991), “Toward a Theory of Competitive Market Signaling: A
       Research Agenda,” Strategic Management Journal, 12, 403–418.
Hoch, Stephen and Shumeet Banerji (1993), “When Do Private Labels Succeed?” Sloan
      Management Review 34(4), 57-67.

                                             31
Kotler, P. (1971), “Marketing Decision Making: A Model Building Approach,” Holt, Rinehart
       & Winston.
Lahari, K and Schmidt, P. (1978), “On the Estimation of Triangular Structural models,”
       Econometrica,46, 1217–1221.
Neelamegham, R., and Chintagunta, P.K. (2004), “Modeling and Forecasting the Sales of
      Technology Products,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics,2, 195–232.
Newton, M. and Raftery, A. (1994) “Approximate Bayesian Inference by the Weighted Like-
     lihood Bootstrap,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 56, 3-48.
Pauwels, Koen and Shuba Srinivasan (2004), “Who Benefits From Store Brand Entry?”,
      Marketing Science, 23(4), 596-610.
Poulsen, C.S. (1990), “Mixed Markov and Latent Markov Modeling Applied to Brand Choice
      Behavior,” International Journal of Research in Marketing,7, 5–19.
Qian, Y. (2006), “Pricing and Marketing Effects of Entry by Imitators or Counterfeits”,
      Harvard Working Paper.
Qian, Y. (2007), “Do National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in a Global Patent-
       ing Environment? A Cross-Country Analysis of Pharmaceutical Patent Protection,
       1978-2002,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3), 436–453
Qian, Y. (2008), “Impacts of Entry by Counterfeiters,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      123(4), 1577–1609.
Raftery, A. E. (1996), Hypothesis Testing and Model Selection, Markov Chain Monte Carlo in
       Practice, Eds: Gilks, W.R., Richardson, S. and Spiegelhalter, D.J., Chapman & Hall:
       London.
Ramaswamy, V. (1997). “Evolutionary Preference Segmentation with Panel Survey Data: An
     Application to New Products,” International Journal of Research in Marketing. 14:
     57–80.
Rao, Akshay R. and Kent B. Monroe (1996), “Causes and Consequences of Price Premiums”,
      Journal of Business, 69, 511-35.
Robinson, W. T. (1988). “Marketing Mix Reactions to Entry.” Marketing Science. 7 (4):
      368–385.
Rossi, P., Allenby, G.M. and McCulloch, R.E. (2005), Bayesian Statistics and Marketing,
       Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Schweidel, D.A. and Fader, P.S. (2009), “Dynamic Changepoints Revisited: An Evolving
      Process Model of New Product Sales ,” International Journal of Research in Marketing,
      forthcoming.



                                             32
Scott Morton, Fiona and Florian Zettelmeyer (2004), “The Strategic Positioning of Store
      Brands in Retailer-manufacturer Negotiations”, Review of Industrial Organization, 24,
      161-94.
Smith, A.F.M (1975), “A Bayesian Approach to Inference about a Change-point in a Sequence
       of Random Variables ,” Biometrika, 62, 407–416.
Smith, K.G., Grimm, C.M., Chen, M., and Gannon, M. J. (1989), “Predictors of Response
      Time to Competitive Strategic Actions: Preliminary Theory and Evidence,” Journal
      of Business Research, 18, 245–258.
Tanner, M.A. and Wong, W.H. (1987), “The Calculation of Posterior Densities by Data
      Augmentation (with discussion),” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 82,
      528–550.
Van Heerde, H.J., Mela, C.F., and Manchanda, P. (2004), “The Dynamic Effect of Innovation
      on Market Structure,” Journal of the Marketing Research, XLI, 166–183.
World Customs Organization (2004), “Counterfeiting Congress Calls for Public-private Co-
      operation”. http://www.wcoomd.org/ie/En/Press/press.html, May 25, 2004.




                                             33
                                                                                                34


Appendix: Prior Specification and MCMC algorithm for the RC-SEM.

In this Appendix, we present the details of prior specification and the MCMC algorithm for
estimating the proposed simultaneous equation model with random changepoints (RC-SEM).
   Equation (10) presents the forms of the priors. In our analysis, we set the constants
in the priors as follows: µΠ , µγ , µδ are assigned as vectors of zeros. ΛΠ = 0.01 × Inr ×nz ,
Aγ = 0.01 × Inγ , Aδ = 0.01 × Inδ , νǫ = 5 and νe = nr + 3, Sǫ = νǫ Σǫ0 and Se = νe Σe0 , where
nr is the dimension of the square matrix of Σe , and nz is the number of columns of Z, nγ
and nδ is the length of γ and δ.
   When choosing the value for Σǫ0 and Σe0 , we follow the approach suggested in Rossi et
al. (2005). Because Σǫ0 is related to the mean of the prior for the variance-covariance matrix
of the error terms of the simultaneous equation model, we would like to take into account
the scale of the outcomes and the explanatory power of the regressors in the assignment
of its value. Rather than assigning an arbitrary value, such as an identity matrix, we set
Σǫ0 = Σ̂OLS
        ǫ   , where the diagonal entries of Σ̂OLS
                                              ǫ   are OLS estimates of error variances for Y
equation and X equation, separately, and the off-diagonal entries of Σ̂OLS
                                                                       ǫ   are zeros. The
choice of the prior is reasonable because the resulting prior is reasonably flat over a wide
range of plausible values of the correlation coefficient ρ between ǫX and ǫY , the measure
of the endogeneity strength. Figure 3 (c) displays the marginal prior distribution of the
correlation coefficient ρ =   √ σ12      given the choices of the above chosen prior. The histogram
                               σ11 σ22

is constructed from sampling 10000 iid draws from the priors of Σǫ , and then calculating
ρ for each draw. The histogram shows that for this prior, the distribution of correlation
coefficient ρ is centered at zero and reasonably spread out between -1 and +1. Similarly,
we have set the block in Σe0 for (αi , β1i , β2i ) as Σ̂OLS
                                                        e   . Because the OLS does not model the
heterogeneity of τi∗ , we set the corresponding entry in Σe0 to be one. Using a larger value (
e.g., 2) or a smaller value (e.g., 0.5) has little impact on the resulting estimation.
   Given the above prior and posterior distribution derived in Equation (11), we implement
a Gibbs sampler to obtain draws from the posterior distribution. The full conditionals of
model unknowns for each step of the Gibbs sampler are derived below.

  1. Draw β1i , β2i , αi |δ, γ, Σǫ , Ti , X ∗
     We decompose the joint bivariate normal distribution of the error term (ǫX     Y
                                                                              ij , ǫij ) as

     the product of the marginal distribution of ǫX
                                                  ij and the conditional distribution of
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                   σ12
                                                                           σ12 X
     ǫYij |ǫX                                               Y X
            ij . We note that the conditional distribution ǫij |ǫij is N ( σ22 ǫij , σ11 −         σ22
                                                                                                       ).   We
                                                                                 2
                                                                                σ12
                     σ12 X
     write ǫYij =       ǫ
                     σ22 ij
                              + eij , where eij ∼ N (0, σe2 ), σe2 = σ11 −      σ22
                                                                                      and eij ⊥ǫX
                                                                                                ij . Given δ,
                           ∗
     the error term ǫX
                     ij = Xij − δZij . To make notation more compact at the unit level, let

     Yi = (Yi1 , ..., YiJ ), ǫX     X          X
                              i = (ǫi1 , ..., ǫiJ ), ei = (ei1 , ..., eiJ ). Then at the unit level, we have:
                                                                                
                                                                             β1i
                                                     σ12 X
                                 Yi − WiT γ −            ǫ     = Hi  β2i  + ei ,
                                                     σ22 ij
                                                                             αi

     where the design matrix for the ith unit Hi is:
                                                                                      
                                                   Xi1                  0        Ui1
                                                 .                     .        ...   
                                                                                      
                               T        T T
                                                 Xi,Ti −1              0        ...   
                      Hi = (Hi1 , ..., HiJ ) =  0
                                                                                       ,                   (12)
                                                                       Xi,Ti    ...   
                                                                                       
                                                 .                     .        ...   
                                                   0                    Xi,J     UiJ

     and Ti = Ti0 + τi . We rewrite the variance-covariance matrix, Σe , in the distribution
     of the latent variables (β1i , β2i , αi , τi∗ ) in Equation (9) as follows,
                                                                   
                                                        Σe,11 Σe,12
                                                Σe   =                                                      (13)
                                                        Σe,12 Σe,22

     where Σe,11 and Σe,22 are variance-covariance matrix of (β1i , β2i , αi ) and τi∗ , respectively,
     and Σe,12 is covariance matrix between these two blocks of parameters. The prior



                                                       35
    distribution of (β1i , β2i , αi )|τi∗ is N (µ1|2,i , A−1
                                                          1|2 ) where


                                         µ1|2,i = µ1i + Σe,12 Σ−1     ∗
                                                               e,22 (τi − µ2i )

                                          A−1                   −1
                                           1|2 = Σe,11 − Σe,12 Σe,22 Σe,21 ,


    and µ1i and µ2i are the prior means of (β1i , β2i , αi ) and τi , respectively, and (µ1i , µ2i ) =
    ΠZi . Then the conditional draws of (β1i , β2i , αi ) can be obtained from the following
    normal distribution:
                 T            T
                                                  HiT Hi
                                                                
                   Hi Hi   −1 Hi Ri                          −1
             N ( 2 + A1|2 ) ( 2 + A1|2 µ1|2,i ), ( 2 + A1|2 )
                     σe        σe                  σe
                                         σ12 X
    where Ri = Yi − WiT γ −                 ǫ .
                                         σ22 i




2. γ|δ, β1i , β2i , αi , Σǫ , T, X ∗
    Given the prior distribution for γ as N (µγ , A−1
                                                   γ ), we have the conditional draw of γ as
                                         T γ
                    WiT Wi                                 WiT Wi
                                                                          
                                   −1 Wi Ri                             −1
               N (          + Aγ ) (          + Aγ µγ ), (        + Aγ )     ,
                       σe2              σe2                  σe2
    where Riγ = Yi − Hi [β1i , β2i , αi ]T −       σ12 X
                                                      ǫ .
                                                   σ22 i




3. Xij∗ |β1i , β2i , αi , γ, δ, Σǫ , T
    If Xij > 0, then Xij∗ = Xij . If Xij = 0, then Xij∗ is drawn from a truncated normal
                                                                                  σ2
    distribution with the mean Zij δ+ σσ11
                                        12 Y
                                           ǫij and the variance σ22 − σ12
                                                                       11
                                                                          , where the truncation
    is to (−∞, 0).



4. δ|β1i , β2i , αi , γ, Σǫ , T, X ∗
    Following Lahari and Schmidt (1978) and Rossi et al. (2005), we re-express the tri-
    angular system specified in Equation (1), (3) and (4) as a SUR model for making

                                                       36
    conditional draw of δ. Let Yi∗ = Yi − Hi (β1i , β2i , αi )T , where Hi is given in Equation
    (12). We then have the likelihood of the triangular system the same as that of the
    following SUR model:

                                     Yij∗                                                     ǫYij
                                                                                              
                                                             Wij              γ
                                                     =                                +
                                     Xij∗                          Zij        δ               ǫXij


    where Yij∗ is the jth component of Yi∗ , Wij is the jth row in the design matrix Wi . Let
                          
              Wij
    Mij =                    . Then (γ, δ) has a likelihood as that from a multivariate normal
                     Zij
    with the mean
                                                    !−1                 ∗ !
                                   X                      X             Yij
                    (γ̄, δ̄) =         MijT Σ−1
                                             ǫ Mij            MijT Σ−1
                                                                    ǫ
                                                                        Xij∗
                                               i,j                          i,j


    and the variance-covariance matrix
                                                                                        !−1
                                         Ωγγ Ωγδ                     X
                                                              =            MijT Σ−1
                                                                                 ǫ Mij
                                         Ωδγ Ωδδ
                                                                     i,j


    Then given γ, the likelihood for δ is a multivariate normal with mean µδ|γ = δ̄ +
    Ωδγ Ω−1                                                           −1
         γγ (γ − γ̄) and variance-covariance matrix Ωδ|γ = Ωδδ − Ωδγ Ωγγ Ωγδ . Thus given

    the a normal prior N (µδ , A−1
                                δ ) for δ, we can draw δ from a normal distribution with

    mean (Aδ + Ω−1   −1         −1                             −1 −1
                δ|γ ) (Aδ µδ + Ωδ|γ µδ|γ ) and variance (Aδ + Ωδ|γ ) .




5. Σǫ |β1i , β2i , αi , γ, δ, T, X ∗
                                                                                                                   ǫYij
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                              (ǫYij , ǫX
                                                                                                         P
    The conditional draw of Σǫ follows IW (νǫ +N ×J, Sǫ +S), where S =                                                                 ij ).
                                                                                                         i,j       ǫXij




6. τi∗ , τi |β1i , β2i , αi , γ, δ, Σǫ , X ∗
    Given other parameters and latent data, we can calculate the vector Ri = Yi −
    σ12 X
       ǫ .
    σ22 i
                For the ith response time τi , we have its conditional distribution given by

                                                              37
multinomial (1, [pi (0), ..., pi (J − Ti0 + 1)]), where
                                      f (Ri |τi = m)p(τi = m)
                        pi (m) = PJ−Ti0 +1
                                  m′ =0    f (Ri |τi = m′ )p(τi = m′ )
for m = 0, ..., J−Ti0 +1 and f (Ri |τi = m) is a density function for M V N (Hi,m (β1i , β2i , αi )T +
                               2
                              σ12
Wi γ, σe2 IJ ), σe2 = σ11 −   and Hi,m is:
                              σ22
                                                                      
                                     Xi1              0          Ui1
                                   .                 .          ...   
                                                                      
                                   Xi,m+Ti0 −1       0          ...   
                          Hi,m =  0
                                                                       .
                                                     Xi,m+Ti0   ...   
                                                                       
                                   .                 .          ...   
                                     0                Xi,J       UiJ
The prior distribution p(τi = m) is calculated from the conditional distribution of
(τi∗ |β1i , β2i , αi ), using the fact that τi is grouped from the underlying continuous vari-
ables τi∗ . Thus p(τi = m) has the following probabilities
                                    −1
                    Φ(0|µ2|1,i , A2|1 )                            if m = 0
                   
                                     −1                       −1
 p(τi = m) =          Φ(m|µ2|1,i , A2|1 ) − Φ(m − 1|µ2|1,i , A2|1 ) if 0 < m < J − Ti0 + 1
                      1 − Φ(m − 1|µ2|1,i , A−1
                                             2|1 )                  if m = J − Ti0 + 1,
                   

where Φ(·|µ2|1,i , A−1                                                             −1
                    2|1 ) is the cumulative probability function from N (µ2|1,i , A2|1 ) and


                       µ2|1,i = µ2i + Σe,21 Σ−1                     T
                                             e,11 ((β1i , β2i , αi ) − µ1i )

                        A−1                   −1
                         2|1 = Σe,22 − Σe,21 Σe,11 Σe,12 ,


and µ1i and µ2i are the prior means of (β1i , β2i , αi ) and τi∗ , respectively, and (µ1i , µ2i ) =
ΠZi . Given the draw of τi , we can draw τi∗ from a truncated normal from N (µ2|1,i , A−1
                                                                                       2|1 )

with the following lower, a, and upper bound,        b,
                             
                              (− inf, 0] if         m=0
                 (a, b) =        (m − 1, m] if       0 < m < J − Ti0 + 1
                                (m − 1, inf) if      m = J − Ti0 + 1.
                             




                                            38
7. Updating Π, Σe |β1i , β2i , αi , Zi .
   Let Λ = Σ−1
            e . We follow the standard approach (Gelman et al. 2004, Rossi et al. 2005)

   to obtain the conditional draws as follows:
                                                        N
                                                         X        −1 
                                 p(Λ|Θ) = W νe + N, Se +   ei e′i      ,
                                                            i=1

   where ei = βi − ΠZi , βi = (αi , β1i , β2i , τi ), and
                                                                   
                              p(Θ|Λ) = N ΣΠ (Λ ⊗ Inz )Hzβ + ΛΠ µΠ , ΣΠ ,

                                                    −1
   N is the number of subjects, ΣΠ = (Λ ⊗ Hzz ) + ΛΠ , and
                                                           
                                                      Hzβ1
                                  XN                 Hzβ 
                                          ′               2 
                           Hzz =      Zi Zi , Hzβ =  ..  ,
                                                    
                                  i=1
                                                     . 
                                                      Hzβnr
                  PN
   and Hzβj =        i=1   Zi βij , for j = 1, ..., nr .




                                                      39
Table 1: Estimation Results Under RC-SEM and Reduced Models When Z Contains Only
Intercept.
Note: The table lists the posterior means and standard deviations of model parameters. log(df ph): the logarithm of deflated
authentic high-end prices in Chinese Yuan, using the Consumer Price index published in the World Bank World Development
Indicators (WDI) (Year 1995 was set as the base year in the database, i.e. CPI=100 in 1995). f ksh: the quantity of counterfeit
products in the market faced by the corresponding authentic firm, divided by the sale quantity of this authentic firm. f kshST
and f kshLT refer to its short-term and long-term effects, respectively. RC-SEM: the simultaneous equation model with random
changepoints. SEM: the standard simultaneous equation model with a common response time of two years. RC: random-
changepoint model. OLS: the standard OLS model with a common response time of two years. All models use year fixed
effects. “*” indicates that 95% credible interval excludes zero.


   Explanatory Variable                   RC-SEM                 SEM             RC      OLS
                                    log(df ph) f ksh log(df ph) f ksh log(df ph) log(df ph)
   CONST                               1.36∗              1.34∗                 1.41∗    1.36∗
                                      (0.12)              (0.10)                (0.11)  (0.11)
                                            ∗                                        ∗
   fkshST                             -0.34                -0.05                -0.57   -0.24∗
                                      (0.08)              (0.17)                (0.10)  (0.07)
                                           ∗                   ∗                     ∗
   fkshLT                              1.61               1.02                  1.24     0.75∗
                                      (0.25)              (0.24)                (0.27)  (0.11)
   ResponseTime                        1.57∗                NA                  1.65∗     NA
                                      (0.11)                NA                  (0.13)    NA
   LOOSE                                            0.59∗               0.53∗
                                                   (0.10)               (0.09)
   RELATION                                         0.000               0.001
                                                  (0.001)             (0.001)
   LOOSE*RELATION                                  0.003∗              0.003∗
                                                  (0.001)             (0.001)
   σ11                                      0.01∗               0.02∗           0.01∗    0.02∗
                                           (0.001)             (0.002)         (0.001) (0.002)
   σ12                                     -0.011∗             -0.008∗           NA       NA
                                           (0.002)             (0.002)           NA       NA
                                                  ∗                   ∗
   σ22                                      0.026               0.025            NA       NA
                                           (0.003)             (0.003)           NA       NA
   No. of Obs.                                372                 372            372      372




                                                              40
[hp]


                                           Table 2
       Definition and Summary Statistics of Marketing Variables of the Authentic Firms.

Variable         Definition                                          Mean            SD
Cost             Unit Product Cost of High-end Product (US $)        33.53          19.14
Mkshare          Market Share (%)                                     2.9            3.7
BrandNo          The Number of Sub-brands                             1.45           0.85
Export           Percentage of Sale Values for Export (%)             18.1           12.5
PatCost          Patent Application Costs (US $)                    2453.6         1560.1
Ads              Annual Advertisement Expenditure (US $)           1,497,700      2,724,200
Employ           The Number of Employees                             813.7          482.6
AW               Total Annual Wages (US $)                           482.8          272.2




                                              41
     Table 3: Estimation Results Under RC-SEM and Different Reduced Models When Z Contains Explanatory
     Variables.
     Note: The table lists the posterior means and standard deviations of model parameters. log(df ph): the logarithm of deflated authentic high-end prices in
     Chinese Yuan, using the Consumer Price index published in the World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI) (Year 1995 was set as the base year in
     the database, i.e. CPI=100 in 1995). f ksh: the quantity of counterfeit products in the market faced by the corresponding authentic firm, divided by the sale
     quantity of this authentic firm. f kshST and f kshLT refer to its short-term and long-term effects, respectively. RC-SEM: the simultaneous equation model
     with random changepoints. SEM: the standard simultaneous equation model assuming a common response time of two years. RC: random-changepoint
     model. OLS: the standard OLS model assuming a common response time of two years. “*” indicates that 95% credible interval excludes zero.


        Attribute                      Constant        Cost       Mkshare        BrandNo         Export       PatCost         Ads        Employ         AW

                                                                           (1) RC-SEM

        Constant (αi )                   1.40∗         0.52∗         0.07            0.01          -0.05          0.06        -0.04       -0.13∗       -0.09∗
                                         (0.04)        (0.05)       (0.06)          (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.04)
        fkshST (β1i )                    -0.25∗        0.14∗         0.17            -0.01          0.02          0.02        -0.13        0.07          0.15
                                         (0.08)        (0.06)       (0.10)          (0.04)        (0.07)        (0.08)       (0.15)       (0.08)       (0.12)
        fkshLT (β2i )                    1.90∗           0.21       -0.80∗           0.23          -0.27          0.23       0.75∗        -0.36∗         0.29
42




                                         (0.21)        (0.18)       (0.25)          (0.17)        (0.15)        (0.23)       (0.36)       (0.17)       (0.31)
        ResponseTime (τi∗ )              1.51∗          -0.03        -0.01           -0.15        0.41∗          -0.19        -0.06       -0.32∗        -0.26
                                         (0.14)        (0.12)       (0.17)          (0.12)        (0.12)        (0.11)       (0.17)       (0.13)       (0.20)

                                                                              (2) SEM

        Constant (αi )                   1.33∗         0.54∗         0.07            -0.00          0.02          0.06        0.06        -0.14∗       -0.10∗
                                         (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.07)          (0.04)        (0.05)        (0.07)       (0.08)       (0.05)       (0.05)
        fkshST (β1i )                     0.08          0.06          0.01            0.03         -0.02          0.07        0.19          0.09        -0.15
                                         (0.10)        (0.06)       (0.10)          (0.06)        (0.07)        (0.08)       (0.17)       (0.07)       (0.12)
        fkshLT (β2i )                    1.16∗          0.05         -0.09          0.19∗          -0.08         -0.15        0.36         -0.07        0.16
                                         (0.15)        (0.11)       (0.16)          (0.09)        (0.11)        (0.15)       (0.28)       (0.12)       (0.21)
        ResponseTime (τi∗ )               NA            NA            NA              NA            NA            NA          NA            NA           NA
                                          NA            NA            NA              NA            NA            NA          NA            NA           NA

                                                                                                                              continued on next page
                                                 Table 3: continued

     Attribute             Constant   Cost     Mkshare     BrandNo    Export   PatCost   Ads      Employ    AW
                                                         (3) RC

     Constant (αi )         1.45∗     0.54∗      0.11         0.02     -0.05     0.03     -0.06   -0.13∗   -0.11∗
                            (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.07)      (0.04)    (0.05)   (0.07)    (0.07)   (0.05)   (0.05)
     fkshST (β1i )          -0.61∗      0.10     0.21∗       -0.04     -0.02     0.06     -0.18     0.13     0.16
                            (0.11)    (0.07)    (0.10)      (0.07)    (0.07)   (0.09)    (0.14)   (0.08)   (0.11)
     fkshLT (β2i )          1.24∗       0.12    -0.48∗        0.18     -0.16     0.23    0.76∗     -0.23     0.19
                            (0.20)    (0.15)    (0.21)      (0.14)    (0.15)   (0.19)    (0.27)   (0.17)   (0.27)
     ResponseTime (τi∗ )    1.52∗      -0.12     0.03        -0.15    0.25∗     -0.15     -0.08   -0.25∗    -0.15
                            (0.10)    (0.10)    (0.12)      (0.09)    (0.09)   (0.13)    (0.15)   (0.11)   (0.18)

                                                         (4) OLS
43




     Constant (αi )         1.41∗     0.54∗      0.08        0.01      0.02     0.05      -0.02   -0.14∗   -0.11∗
                            (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.07)      (0.04)    (0.05)   (0.07)    (0.08)   (0.05)   (0.05)
     fkshST (β1i )          -0.21∗     0.01       0.02       0.04      -0.13    0.04       0.16     0.06    -0.12
                            (0.09)    (0.07)    (0.10)      (0.06)    (0.07)   (0.08)    (0.17)   (0.07)   (0.12)
     fkshLT (β2i )          0.96∗      0.04      -0.15      0.21∗      0.02     0.04      0.44     -0.07    0.15
                            (0.15)    (0.11)    (0.16)      (0.09)    (0.11)   (0.15)    (0.31)   (0.13)   (0.20)
     ResponseTime (τi∗ )     NA        NA         NA         NA         NA      NA         NA       NA       NA
                             NA        NA         NA         NA         NA      NA         NA       NA       NA
             Table 4: A simulation study on the comparison of performance of four models on estimating the dynamic entry
             effects.
             RC-SEM: the simultaneous equation model with random changepoints. SEM: the standard simultaneous equation model assuming a common response time
             of two years. RC: random-changepoint model. OLS: the standard OLS model assuming a common response time of two years. “Bias” and “SD” in the
             table are the bias and standard deviation of the estimates (posterior means), respectively, over all the replicates. “RMSE” denotes the root mean squared
             error. “CR” denotes the coverage rate.


       ρ               RC-SEM                                        SEM                                          RC                                       OLS
            Bias      SD RMSE             CR          Bias      SD     RMSE          CR          Bias      SD      RMSE         CR          Bias      SD    RMSE         CR

                                                                 Short-term effect (True value= -0.4)
       0    -0.01    0.12      0.12       92%         0.16      0.14    0.21    66%     -0.01 0.10    0.10                      92%         0.16      0.13      0.20     72%

     0.2    0.04     0.10      0.11       88%          0.22     0.13      0.25       52%         0.11      0.09      0.14       76%         0.27      0.12      0.30     32%
     0.5    0.03     0.10      0.11       92%          0.25     0.15      0.29       46%         0.20      0.10      0.23       34%         0.38      0.16      0.41     18%
     0.8    0.01     0.09      0.09       90%          0.25     0.14      0.27       42%         0.30      0.13      0.33       18%         0.45      0.16      0.48     8%

     -0.2   0.01     0.10      0.10       98%          0.18     0.14      0.22       62%         -0.05     0.09      0.11       88%          0.12     0.13      0.18     78%
44




     -0.5   0.02     0.10      0.10       92%          0.15     0.14      0.20       70%         -0.15     0.10      0.17       60%          0.03     0.14      0.15     84%
     -0.8   0.00     0.09      0.09       94%          0.10     0.12      0.15       74%         -0.26     0.09      0.27       16%         -0.10     0.11      0.15     84%

                                                   Long-term effect (True Value=1.0)
       0    -0.01    0.08      0.08       94%        -0.16 0.10     0.18   54%     -0.01                   0.06      0.07       94%         -0.17     0.09      0.18     46%

     0.2     0.00    0.09      0.09       92%         -0.13 0.10          0.16       66%         0.07      0.09      0.12       74%         -0.07 0.10          0.12     80%
     0.5     0.00    0.08      0.08       98%         -0.11 0.09          0.14       80%         0.18      0.08      0.20       24%          0.03 0.10          0.10     90%
     0.8    -0.01    0.09      0.09       86%         -0.09 0.08          0.12       80%         0.30      0.10      0.31       4%          0.12 0.10           0.17     60%

     -0.2   -0.01    0.09      0.09       92%         -0.18 0.11          0.21       50%         -0.09 0.07          0.12       80%         -0.25 0.10          0.27     16%
     -0.5    0.01    0.09      0.09       88%         -0.19 0.10          0.21       46%         -0.17 0.08          0.19       36%         -0.33 0.10          0.34      6%
     -0.8   -0.01    0.06      0.06       98%         -0.24 0.08          0.25       20%         -0.31 0.08          0.31       2%          -0.45 0.07          0.45     0%
                                       0.4
     Coef. Estimates on time dummies
                                       0.2
                                       0.0
                                       −0.2




                                              −4   −2               0            2   4

                                                        Year relative to entry

Figure 1. Average log deflated authentic price versus the years relative to the counterfeit
entries. −−: the regression coefficient estimates on a set of time dummies denoting the
number of years relative to the counterfeit entries with the log deflated price for high-end
product as the response variable. −△−: prediction based on the pre-entry price trend.




                                                               45
                                                    τc

                                               τ1
                                    T10                  T1



                                        τ2
                                    T20 T2




Figure 2. A graph illustrating that ignoring heterogeneity of response times can lead to
misleading estimation. The graph shows two hypothetical firms that experience a market
change (e.g. counterfeit entry) at time T10 and T20 , respectively. Their latent changepoints
in marketing response outcome are T1 and T2 and the corresponding response time are τ1
and τ2 . Pre-specifying a common τc ignores this heterogeneity and can lead to incorrect
analysis of the dynamic effects of the market change on the response outcome. In contrast,
the changepoint model allows for firm-specific changepoint and therefore is well suited for
studying heterogeneity of response times across study units.




                                             46
[hP]
                                   (a) Prior Distribution of τi*                                         (c) Prior Distribution of ρ
                  0.015




                                                                                          0.6
                  0.010
       Density




                                                                                Density

                                                                                          0.4
                  0.005




                                                                                          0.2
                  0.000




                                                                                          0.0



                          −100       −50        0         50         100                        −1.0      −0.5       0.0       0.5       1.0

                                                τi*                                                                  ρ



                                 (b) Posterior Distribution of τi*                                     (d) Posterior Distribution of ρ
                                                                                          5
                  0.3




                                                                                          4
       Density




                                                                                Density

                                                                                          3
                  0.2




                                                                                          2
                  0.1




                                                                                          1
                  0.0




                                                                                          0




                          −100       −50        0         50         100                        −1.0      −0.5       0.0       0.5       1.0

                                                τi*                                                                  ρ



                 Figure 3. Comparison of Prior and Posterior Distributions of τi∗ and ρ.




                                                                           47
