NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BUCK STOPS WHERE? THE DISTRIBUTION OF AGRICULTURAL SUBSIDIES
Barry K. Goodwin
Ashok K. Mishra
François Ortalo-Magné
Working Paper 16693
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16693

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

We thank our discussant, Gilbert Metcalf, for his insightful comments. We are also grateful to Erzo
G.J. Luttmer, Jim Shilling and Fred Sterbenz for useful discussions and comments on an earlier draft.
Goodwin is William Neal Reynolds Professor in the Departments of Economics and Agricultural and
Resource Economics at North Carolina State University. Mishra is Professor in the Department of
Agricultural Economics and Agribusiness at Louisiana State University AgCenter and Louisiana State
University. Ortalo-Magné is Robert E. Wangard Chair in Real Estate at the University of Wisconsin.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Barry K. Goodwin, Ashok K. Mishra, and François Ortalo-Magné. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Buck Stops Where? The Distribution of Agricultural Subsidies
Barry K. Goodwin, Ashok K. Mishra, and François Ortalo-Magné
NBER Working Paper No. 16693
January 2011
JEL No. Q18
ABSTRACT
The U.S. has a long history of providing generous support for the agricultural sector. A recent omnibus
package of farm legislation, the 2008 Farm Bill (P.L. 110-246) will provide in excess of $284 billion
in financial support to U.S. agriculture over the 2008-2012 period. Commodity program payments
account for $43.3 billion of this total. Our paper is concerned with the distribution of these benefits.
Farm subsidies make agricultural production more profitable by increasing and stabilizing farm prices
and incomes. If these benefits are expected to persist, farm land values should capture the subsidy
benefits. We use a large sample of individual farm land values to investigate the extent of this capitalization
of benefits. Our results confirm that subsidies have a very significant impact on farm land values and
thus suggest that landowners are the real benefactors of farm programs. As land is exchanged, new
owners will pay prices that reflect these benefits, leaving the benefits of farm programs in the hands
of former owners that may be exiting production. Approximately 45% of U.S. farmland is operated
by someone other than the owner. We report evidence that owners benefit not only from capital gains
but also from lease rates which incorporate a significant portion of agricultural payments even if the
farm legislation mandates that benefits must be allocated to producers. Finally, we examine rental
agreements for farmers that rent land on both a cash and share basis. We find evidence that farm programs
that are meant to stabilize farm prices provide a valuable insurance benefit.

Barry K. Goodwin
Departments of Economics and Agricultural
and Resource Economics
North Carolina State University
Box 8109
Raleigh, NC 27695
barry_goodwin@ncsu.edu
Ashok K. Mishra
Department of Agricultural Economics
and Agribusiness
Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
211 Ag. Administration Bldg.
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
AMishra@agcenter.lsu.edu

François Ortalo-Magné
School of Business
University of Wisconsin, Madison
5259 Grainger Hall
975 University Avenue
Madison, WI 53706-1323
fom@bus.wisc.edu

The Buck Stops Where?
The Distribution of Agricultural Subsidies
1

Introduction

A 2002 news report posed the following question. What do former basketball star Scottie
Pippen, publisher Larry Flynt, and stockbroker Charles Schwab all have in common? The
surprising answer is that all are recipients of farm program subsidies.1 Other notable payment
recipients include nine U.S. Members of Congress; David Rockefeller, former chairman of
Chase Manhattan and grandson of oil tycoon John D. Rockefeller, who received 99 times
more in subsidies than the median farmer; Ted Turner, the 25th wealthiest man in America,
who received 38 times more subsidies than the median farmer; and the late Kenneth Lay,
the ousted Enron CEO and multi-millionaire. (Reidl, 2004). Several Fortune-500 companies
have also received substantial farm program payments, including John Hancock Mutual
Insurance ($2.5 million in 2002), the Chevron corporation, and the Caterpillar corporation.
In arguing for program reforms, U.S. Senator Amy Klobuchar (D-MN) stated that “$3.1
million in farm payments went to the District of Columbia, $4.2 million has gone to people
living in Manhattan, and $1 billion of taxpayer money for farm payments has gone to Beverly Hills 90210.”2 The fact that support for U.S. “farmers” is often directed to individuals
and corporations that seem to be some distance from the farm has been the topic of considerable debate in recent years, in particular since congressional support for U.S. agriculture
continues to expand. The 2008 Farm Bill (P.L. 110-246) will provide in excess of $284 billion
in financial support to U.S. agriculture over the 2008-2012 period. Commodity program
payments account for $43.3 billion of this total.
To the extent that eligibility for government benefits is tied to the ownership or operation
of certain assets, the market values of these assets will reflect expected future benefits.
1
“Farm Subsidies Help Those Who Help Themselves,” a Fox News report by William LaJeunesse, July
15, 2002. This article is available from http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,57602,00.html. These
statistics are all drawn from the Environmental Working Group’s farm subsidy database (www.ewg.org).
2
December 12, 2007 Senate floor statement of Senator Amy Klobuchar.

1

Such is the case with farmland. Considerable variation exists in agricultural land values
across the U.S. (see Figure 1). USDA statistics indicate that 45.3% of U.S. farmland is
operated by someone other than the owner (USDA-NASS, 1999). Mishra et al. (2002)
report that, contrary to conventional wisdom, most agricultural landlords (57%) are nonfarm corporations or individuals that work in or are retired from nonfarm-related activities.
In light of these facts, a fundamental question arises regarding the distribution of farm
support programs and the extent to which those who operate the farms actually receive the
benefits. This is a critical issue, not only for policymakers but also for farm operators who
should understand the extent of their gain from the various programs they tend to support.
The relevant question is, of course, who are the policies intended to benefit? The capture
of agricultural benefits by farmland values is problematic if the policies aim to support
farmers and these farmers do not own their land when the policies are announced. To the
extent that (young) expanding farmers are paying for the expected policy benefits in the
farm assets they acquire, the present value of future benefits is captured by the (old) sellers.
New owners only benefit from surprise increases in public transfers. Given the large share of
U.S. farm land that is operated by tenant farmers, the extent to which lease rates capture
program benefits is also important to the distribution of these benefits.
The concern with the capture of agricultural policy benefits by the initial land owners
is not new. A number of papers have attempted to estimate the capitalization of aggregate
agricultural transfers into farmland values.3 These papers suffer from a number of shortcomings which we are able to address here through an empirical analysis of a unique set of
farm-level data. We contribute to the understanding of the distribution of farm subsidies in
several ways. First, we are able to investigate the differential impact of the principal farm
programs because we are able to observe the breakdown of government payments at both the
farm and the county level. Second, because we know the location of each farm, we are able
3
See Barnard et al. (1997), Goodwin and Ortalo-Magné (1992), Ryan et al. (2001), Shertz and Johnston
(1997), Shoemaker et al. (1990), and Weersink et al. (1999). These papers only examine aggregate policy
effects on land values, thus ignoring the myriad effects of different programs. In addition, the extraction of
policy benefits through lease arrangements has not been widely investigated. Important exceptions exist in
the recent studies of Kirwan (2009) and Patton et al. (2008), which we discuss below.

2

to control for non-agricultural pressures on the land and determine how they affect its value.
Third, we observe not only land values but also the terms of lease arrangements and rates.
This puts us in a unique position to be able to assess directly the extent to which owners and
farmer operators share the benefits of various agricultural programs, a useful complement to
the indirect assessment we obtain from investigating land values. Finally, variations in the
difference between cash lease rates and share lease rates enables us to investigate the extent
to which the market values the insurance features built into some farm programs, a feature
ignored by the literature.
Our analysis makes use of a data set drawn from an annual survey of approximately
10,000 farms per year over the 1998-2005 period. This period was characterized by a variety
of different farm programs, including some which were not connected in any way to market
conditions or production, at least in theory. At the other extreme are output price-support
payments which are intimately tied to contemporaneous market conditions. We find that
payments that are decoupled from output and are supposed to be transitory yield the smallest
effects on land values. Payments that may signal future benefits, even in cases where they
are not a permanent part of farm legislation, have stronger effects. Price-support payments
have the strongest effects.
U.S. farm legislation typically intends benefits to be “shared” between the owner and
operator of a farm. Under cash lease arrangements, the entire subsidy is sent to the operator. However, the law does not regulate lease rates; they are set by the market. Our
empirical analysis indicates that owners extract a large proportion of farm benefits from tenants through the lease rates. From the study of lease rates, we also find that programs with
strong insurance objectives, such as output-price support payments, significantly affect the
gap between cash and share lease rates. In particular, the share rate premium is significantly
diminished by programs that serve to lower the risk associated with uncertain farm earnings.
This finding provides direct evidence of the land market pricing the insurance component of
agricultural policy.

3

Accounting for the benefits of decreased earnings volatility raises two issues with the
traditional approach to the assessment of the contribution of agricultural policy to farm
land values. First, the insurance feature of several governmental programs raises questions
about the traditional implicit assumption that a dollar of transfer today conveys the same
information about future transfers, regardless of market conditions and local agricultural
output characteristics. Instead, a low price support payment this year may be due to high
market prices and thus in no way indicates a decrease in the expected stream of long run
benefits from the price support program. Second, those government transfers whose level
are negatively correlated with farm earnings from the market decrease the volatility of farm
land returns. They must therefore decrease the discount rate required to hold farm land and
thus the discount rate applied to earnings from the market. Hence, regression estimates of
the contribution of market earnings to the value of land depend on the policy environment.
In particular, it is wrong to assume that such estimates would not change to reflect a more
volatile environment if price support programs were to be dismantled.
We have noted that the empirical literature has largely been focused on policy effects
on land values and the incidence of policy benefits in rental arrangements—which is an
increasingly prominent feature of US agriculture—has not received the same level of scrutiny.
Two important exceptions lie in the recent analysis of Kirwan (2009) and Patton et al. (2008),
who both evaluated the effects of policy benefits on land rental rates. Kirwan (2009) used
farm-level panel data taken from the 1992 and 1997 Agricultural Censuses to evaluate the
incidence of policy benefits in farmland rental arrangements. However, the census data only
included rents for land leased on a cash or free basis and he therefore largely ignored the
potentially important role of share lease contracts. In the sample of farms evaluated in this
analysis, 63.6% of the farms reported renting land and, of those that rented land, 36.3%
reported leasing land on a share basis. As Kirwan points out, to the extent that a significant
share of rented land is leased under share arrangements, this may raise an errors-in-variables
problem that results in biases if the measurement error is correlated with policy benefits.
Kirwan undertook an analysis intended to demonstrate that the biases raised by ignoring

4

share lease arrangements were modest. To do so, he used a single year of data from a related
survey, the Agricultural Economics Land Owners Survey (AELOS) in 1999, to investigate
the extent to which the measurement error in rental rates arising from the omission of share
rents resulted in biases in his estimates of benefit incidence. On the basis of results for this
single year, he concluded that the biases were small and generally positive. While these
arguments are persuasive, the reliance upon a single year of data in a case where policy
benefits are very dependent upon market conditions in any given year may make it hard to
generalize his results. Further, as we argue below, it may be important to segregate benefits
across different policy types since the effects on land values and rents may vary substantially
for different types of policies—a point demonstrated by Goodwin, Mishra, and Ortalo-Magné
(2003b).
An important point of relevance is the significant variety of agricultural programs used
by policymakers to convey support to the farm sector (see Appendix Table 1 below). Kirwan
(2009) argues that policy benefits after the 1996 Farm Bill were exogenously determined by
underlying program parameters. As we discuss in greater detail below, this is not entirely
the case since a wide range of policies are used to convey benefits to agricultural producers.
Although certain payments were exogenously determined by Congressional mandate and
were known with certainty over the life of the legislation, other significant benefits, including
price supports, disaster payments, and market loss payments were not exogenously known
prior to the year in which they were received.
Patton et al. (2008) draw a careful distinction between payments that are “coupled” and
“decoupled.” Although disagreement exists over what constitutes coupling of payments, a
formal definition is afforded by Annex 5 of the 1996 WTO Uruguay Agreement on Agriculture
(URAA), which defines a decoupled payment as one that is not dependent upon production
or price in the year in which it is made. Patton et al. (2008) adopt an instrumental variables
approach to recognize the fact that payments are not known with certainty at the time
rental contracts are determined and thereby represent expected values of policy benefits
by using instruments. We follow a similar approach in certain portions of our analysis.

5

Their results indicate that different types of agricultural policy benefits have different effects
on rental rates, thereby confirming the earlier assertions of Goodwin, Mishra, and OrtaloMagné (2003a) that predicted such differential effects. Patton et al.’s (2008) results also
raise important questions regarding the validity of the assumed operation of agricultural
programs and modeling of benefit incidence presented by Kirwan (2009).
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. The next section gives a brief
overview of the history and nature of U.S. farm programs. We are particularly concerned
with providing a careful description of the different mechanisms commonly used to convey
policy benefits to U.S. agricultural producers. Section three discusses issues pertaining to
model specification, estimation, and measurement of the relevant variables. The fourth
section presents the results of our empirical analysis and discusses their implication for the
distribution of agricultural policy benefits. The final section offers some concluding remarks.

2

A Brief Overview of U.S. Farm Policy

Most U.S. farm programs have their origins in the New Deal legislation of the Great Depression. A variety of price and income support programs have been used over time to increase
and stabilize farm earnings. These programs are revised approximately every 5 years by
an omnibus “Farm Bill” package of legislation. In addition to this major package of farm
programs, support is provided through a number of other legislative channels. This is the
case with farm programs such as crop insurance and conservation measures. On a regular
basis, agriculture also benefits from ad hoc support (though emergency bills) that is not a
part of any budgeted legislation.
Over most of its history, U.S. agricultural policy has used price supports coupled with
production controls, with the declared objective to provide income support to the farm
sector. Some support was made on the basis of a need for “parity” with the high relative
agricultural prices of 1910.4 In more recent times, support was provided only to program
4
Though any link with market and production conditions in 1910 would seem difficult to make, arguments
in favor of such “parity” pricing are still heard on occasion in farm policy debates.

6

crops (corn, wheat, cotton, rice, grain sorghum, rye, barley, and oats). Deficiency payments,
determined by the difference between market and target prices, were paid to producers on
the basis of their “base” acreage and yields. This base reflected historical production (in
most cases, acreage and yields during the 1980s). The fact that price supports were tied to
historical production patterns implied a lack of planting flexibility for producers. In addition,
soybeans, a major U.S. crop, was largely omitted in provisions for support due to the fact
that it was not an important crop when most farm programs began.
In 1996, Congress agreed to what was intended to be a major overhaul of U.S. farm
policy—the Farm and Agricultural Improvement and Reform (FAIR) Act. This Act is also
known as the “Agricultural Market Transition Act” or AMTA. The nomenclature “Reform”
and “Market Transition” was meant to indicate a major shift in policy away from government
involvement and toward market oriented policies. Eligibility for price support was no longer
based upon historical production—producers were free to plant whatever crops they desired
and prices were supported at a legislatively-determined loan rate. Soybeans were made
eligible for price supports, which were now provided through the “Loan Deficiency Payment”
(LDP) program. LDP payments were made on the basis of the difference between market and
support prices (the loan rates). The rhetoric accompanying the Act implied, in principle at
least, that the legislation signaled a transition to an environment with limited government
support. A program of direct payments to those producers with base acreage (historical
rights to program benefits) was instituted to compensate producers over this transition, at
least in theory. These payments were known as AMTA or Production Flexibility Contract
(PFC) payments. By design, AMTA payments were completely decoupled from the market—
the only requirement for receiving AMTA payments was that the producer (or landowner)
had to have base acreage. Eligibility for such payments in no way depended upon current
production patterns. In some cases, payments were made on land no longer in production.
The AMTA payments were set to decline each year until the FAIR Act expired in 2002.
Of course, the extent to which such payments were perceived to be temporary is a subject
of debate, especially since the payments were continued (and even increased) in the 2002

7

and 2008 Farm Bills. Further, the 2002 Farm Bill allowed landowners the option to update
their base acreage using production and yields over the 1998-2001 period. Many critics of
U.S. farm programs have argued that this updating made it much harder to characterize the
payments as decoupled, since farmers and landowners may factor such updating possibilities
into their future production decisions.
Over its history, U.S. farm policy has provided benefits through three general channels—
price supports (sometimes tied to acreage restrictions) that are tied to production (i.e.,
benefits are provided on a per-unit basis), decoupled income support, which has no production requirements, and disaster or market assistance payments, which provide benefits
intended to offset poor production or bad market conditions. Since the 1996 Farm Bill,
U.S. agricultural policy has been characterized by three specific program mechanisms, together with a large collection of various minor programs. These mechanisms include the
aforementioned direct payments (PFC and fixed, direct payments), market loss assistance
and counter-cyclical payments (payments that are triggered by low prices but are not tied
to current production), and loan deficiency payments and marketing loans, which use loan
rates to support market prices. Each of these policies functions in unique ways to provide
support.
Direct payments were introduced in 1996 and were specified for the subsequent 7 years.
Payment recipients knew in advance exactly what their payments would be since they were
determined exogenously. However, other major components of farm program benefits are not
known in advance. Market loss assistance and its successor—counter-cyclical payments—are
triggered by low market prices. The market loss assistance program which was introduced
in 1999 was entirely ad-hoc and was determined outside of the farm bills. Its successor,
counter-cyclical payments, formally brought these price supporting payments into the farm
legislation. In both cases, these programs are triggered by market prices falling beneath a
legislatively defined target price. Because market prices are not realized until after harvest,
agents do not know what payments will be in advance.

8

Figure 2 illustrates the evolution of these three types of payment programs over the last
20 years. Note that coupled price supports and counter-cyclical payments are very volatile
from year to year. This is because they are based on market prices.5 The fixed, decoupled
payments, which were known in advance over the life of the legislation, began in 1996 and
are much less variable by design.
The important point regarding these payment programs is that, contrary to arguments
advanced in the literature (e.g., Kirwan 2009), the bulk of farm program payment benefits is
not predetermined by legislation and payments are not known in advance because they are
triggered by market conditions. Such arguments simply mischaracterize the basic operation
of farm programs. Agents’ actions and the effects of policy on asset values and rental
agreements will therefore be based upon expectations of such payments—a point well noted
by Goodwin, Mishra, and Ortalo-Magné (2003b) and Patton et al. (2009). Further, the
level of support varies substantially from year to year and thus any analysis that focuses on
one or two years (e.g., the 1992 and 1997 Census years or the 1999 AELOS survey year) is
faulty since benefits will most certainly reflect market conditions in those two years, which
are volatile over time but highly systemic in nature, and therefore highly correlated in the
cross-section.
Ad hoc disaster assistance has been a fixture in U.S. agricultural policy for many years.
Periods of drought or poor market conditions frequently trigger ad hoc assistance labeled as
disaster payments. Under provisions of other farm legislation (the Crop Insurance Reform
Act of 1994), Congress stated an intention to make subsidized insurance the only mechanism
for providing disaster relief.6 However, localized droughts and low market prices led Congress
to rapidly retreat from this position and conclude that the support provided to farmers under
the FAIR Act was not sufficient. Ad hoc assistance, in the form of yield compensations
and the aforementioned payments for low market prices (market loss assistance), were then
5
This degree of volatility increases substantially when one considers individual commodities and support
at lower levels of aggregation (i.e., the state or county).
6
As an aside, an interesting policy situation exists for crop insurance, which recently has returned about
$2.00 in indemnity payments for every dollar of premiums paid by farmers. This program, also in existence
since the 1930s, runs hand-in-hand with ad hoc disaster assistance—a form of free insurance. Note that
disaster assistance is an obvious impediment to a well-functioning insurance program.

9

instituted. Again, such support cannot be perfectly anticipated since it is based upon random
production and market conditions.
A number of other programs have been important to agricultural policy. For example, a
considerable amount of farm land (approximately 35 million acres) has been removed from
production through the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP). The CRP pays producers
annual rents to place their land in reserve under a ten-year lease agreement. In order to be
eligible for the CRP program, land must be “erodible” and environmentally fragile. Such
land is typically of a lower value in terms of crop production.
In spite of rhetoric to the contrary, congressional support for U.S. agriculture continues
to expand. President Bush signed an omnibus package of farm program support on May
13, 2002 that was scored at $190 billion. The Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008
(P.L. 110-246) was enacted into law on June 18, 2008. These two packages of farm programs
did not make substantial changes to farm policy. Notable is the fact that direct, decoupled
payments were maintained in both farm bills, thereby eliminating any doubt regarding the
extent to which these payments were transitory. One important exception to this general lack
of change in programs occurred in the introduction of “counter-cyclical payments” (CCPs)
in the 2002 Farm Bill. These payments formally brought the ad-hoc market loss assistance
support that characterized the late 1990s into farm legislation. The CCP program established
target prices for program commodities. If market prices fall beneath a target, payments are
made on the basis of the price deficiency and the base yield and acreage. The CCP program
was continued with little modification in the 2008 Farm Bill.7
Congressional debate over the 2008 farm legislation and the generous level of support
that emerged from these deliberations have made clear Congress’s intent to continue taxpayer support for agriculture. The most recent policy debate centered on means-testing
for payment eligibility and limits on the amount of payments any individual could receive.
Under the 2002 Farm Bill, individuals with an adjusted gross income over $2.5 million were
7

The 2008 Farm Bill did introduce an optional alternative to the CCP program—the Average Crop
Revenue Election (ACRE) program. Enrolling farmers agreed to cuts in some program benefits and the
elimination of CCP payments in order to obtain a crop revenue guarantee. Only about 12.8% of eligible
acreage was enrolled in the ACRE program.

10

ineligible for payments unless more than 75% of this total came from agriculture. Payments
to an individual farm were limited to $360,000, although price support payments made on
actual production were essentially unlimited due to program loopholes. The 2008 Farm
Bill essentially removed payment limits on coupled support and provided limited income
limitations on some payments.8
In all, support for agriculture remains strong in the U.S. Congress. A wide variety of
programs are used to convey significant benefits to the farm sector. The latest omnibus
farm bill is projected to cost U.S. taxpayers nearly $300 billion to provide agricultural and
nutritional support.

3

Modeling Framework

3.1

The Income Approach to Farm Land Valuation

All government transfers help the farmers in at least one of two ways: by raising the returns
to farming and by decreasing the volatility of these returns. The LDP and DP programs
have major insurance components. The AM T A payments are lump sum transfers determined
by farmers’ activities prior to their implementation. The same is true with CRP payments;
they are lump sum additions to the return of farming that are uncorrelated with present or
future earnings from the market. In addition to all these transfers, farm land also gives the
farmer the opportunity to generate non-agricultural earnings. The jackpot is to own land
in an area under strong urban pressure with friendly zoning authorities, hence providing
the opportunity to realize substantial capital gains by converting the land to residential or
commercial use.
The value of a parcel of land is the present discounted value of expected cash flows from
agricultural activities plus the value of the option to convert the land to non-agricultural
8
In particular, a person or legal entity with adjusted farm gross income of over $750,000 is not eligible
for direct (decoupled) payments. A person or entity with average adjusted gross non-farm income in excess
of $500,000 is not eligible for any program payments. However, the legislation allowed a husband and wife
to allocate income as if they had filed separate returns, essentially doubling these limits.

11

use.
V0 = E0

"∞
X

#

M KTt + LDPt + DPt + AMTAt + CRPt
+ CON V0 ,
(1 + r)t
t=1

(1)

where M KT and DP denote earnings from the market and from disaster payments, CON V
is the value of the conversion option, and r is the discount factor. The discount factor reflects
the risk of the overall portfolio of individual streams of cash flow. This risk is not simply the
sum of the individual risks because of the non-zero covariance, by design, between M KT
payments, LDP and DP .
As mentioned earlier, AMTA and CRP are, for the most part, lump sum transfers whose
levels are independent of current and future earnings from M KT , LDP and DP , and from
each other. We can therefore rewrite equation (1) as
V0 = E0

"∞
X

#

AMTAt
CRPt
M KTt + LDPt + DPt
+
+
+ CON V0 ,
t
t
(1 + r1 )
(1 + r2 )
(1 + r3 )t
t=1

(2)

where r1 , r2 and r3 denotes the discount factors for output related earnings, AMTA payments,
and CRP payments, respectively.
Implicit in equation (2) is the assumption of a constant discount rate. If we are willing to
assume that farm land buyers and sellers expect the various earnings to grow at a constant
rate, then the regression coefficients we will obtain will be the inverse of the capitalization
rates, or cap rates. The valuation formula can indeed be re-arranged as


V0 = E0

M KT1 LDP1 DP1 AMTA1 CRP1
+
+
+
+
+ CON V0
κ1
κ2
κ3
κ4
κ5


(3)

where the cap rates are denoted by κ. . It is easy to check that if a stream of cash flows is
expected to grow at the constant rate g and is discounted at the constant rate r, then the
cap rate κ satisfies κ = r − g.
To estimate the contribution of each source of value in equation (3), we need estimates of
expected next period cash flows for each source of agricultural earnings. This raises a serious
measurement issue. As mentioned above, it has been largely ignored in the literature which
tends to rely on current payments as an indicator of future payments. This is the issue to
which we now turn.
12

3.2

Measuring Expected Cash Flows

Let us suppose that agents correctly assess the true determinants of land values but the
econometrician, working with actual realizations of policy outcomes from year to year, is unable to observe these determinants. Instead the econometrician relates the observable annual
realizations of market and policy outcomes to land prices. In this case, the econometrician is
confronted with the classical errors in the explanatory variables problem. Errors-in-variables
results in an attenuation bias that forces coefficients toward zero and thus yields inconsistent estimates.9 This problem is compounded by the fact that the government operates more
than one program of payments, hence suggesting that traditional empirical approaches suffer
from multiple explanatory variables observed with error.
A complicating factor arises in that the errors applying to observed policy benefits may be
correlated in a typical sample. This correlation may assume two different forms—correlation
of the errors across different programs (for a given farm) and correlation of errors across
different farms in a sample. Both circumstances are likely to exist when one considers a
pooled cross-section of farms (as is the case in our empirical analysis). Consider a case of
two programs—price supports and market loss assistance payments. The extent of support
provided from the government is likely to vary considerably from year to year according to
market conditions. Low price years realize larger payments for both programs. Thus, the
errors associated with using realized benefits are likely to be highly correlated across the
programs. The correlation could also be negative. Consider the case of yield disaster relief
and price supports. In low yield years, market prices are likely to be high and thus price
support payments will be low, though disaster benefits will be higher to compensate for the
production shortfalls.
Another form of correlation is likely to be relevant when a pooled sample of individual
farms is considered. Since realized program benefits are dependent upon aggregate market
conditions, the errors are likely to be highly correlated across observational units (farms) in
9
This problem is analogous to the standard omitted variable problem, where the omitted factor is the
difference between what is observed and the true, latent value.

13

a given year. In a sample consisting of only a few years of data, the correlation across farms
increases the estimation error and may further exaggerate the bias; year-to-year shocks may
not average out when only a few years are observed.
Furthermore, if realizations are highly correlated across units within a year, parameter
estimates may shift considerably from year to year. If only a few years are observed, the
estimates from a pooled sample may be sensitive to events in the years observed and thus
may vary substantially across years and be more variable in a pooled analysis.10
The standard approach to addressing this problem is to obtain instruments or proxy
variables for those latent variables that are measured with error. An instrument should be
correlated with the variable of interest but uncorrelated with the error pertaining to the
observation. We represent the expected payment benefits by constructing average values
of each relevant policy variable over the preceding four years. This approach raises one
complicating factor. As we discuss in detail below, our data set is not a true panel in that
a different set of farms is sampled each year—meaning that repeated observations for an
individual farm are not available.
To represent expected payment benefits, we utilize the four-year average value of real
payments per farm acre in the county where the individual farm is located.11 We argue that
this is a superior measure of long-run expected benefits as compared to realized payments
because values in the county more closely represent the long-run potential benefits associated
with agricultural policy. Payments on an individual farm, in contrast, may reflect individual
policy choices and characteristics of the farm operation. Transfer of the land to a new
operator may result in different subsidy realizations (for example, because of a different crop
mix) which are better represented using county-level averages.12
10

See Goodwin, Mishra, and Ortalo-Magné (2003b) for a quantitative assessment of this issue in the farm
land valuation context.
11
A standard instrumental variables estimation approach is also feasible, though the fact that payment
realizations in any given year may be very weakly tied to long run expected benefits makes the utility of such
an approach limited. This problem is exacerbated in a short sample when realizations are highly correlated
in the cross section, as is true in our application.
12
Observations for an individual farmer in a particular year might reflect crop rotation patterns. We
expect county level acreage to be more reflective of the expected crop mix.

14

We adopt a number of different historical averages to represent expected policy benefits.
We use a four year average of county level total payments in our aggregate policy models.
In contrast, because LDPs were not the main instrument for providing price support prior
to the 1996 Farm Bill, we use a two-year average for LDP payments at the county level. We
should note that this errors-in-variables problem does not apply to all sources of government
subsidies. Subsidies provided through AMTA payments and rents earned on land enrolled
in the CRP program are known with certainty a priori. It is only those payments that are
triggered by market and production events (price supports and disaster payments) that must
be proxied.

3.3

Data

The primary source of our farm-level data is a data set collected from a large sample of farms
through the USDA’s National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) Agricultural Resource
Management Survey (ARMS) project. The ARMS survey is a large probability-weighted,
stratified sample of about 8,000-20,000 U.S. farms each year. The survey collects detailed
government payments information for individual farm program benefits as well as extensive
farm and operator characteristics. We focus on data collected over the years 1998-2005.
Thus, our empirical analysis focuses on these years. All monetary values in our sample were
adjusted to 2005 equivalent real values by deflating by the consumer price index. Given the
relatively short nature of our sample, such deflation had only minor effects on the results.
Besides detailed farm earnings, the survey also reports farm land value. Farm operators
are asked to estimate the market value as of December 31 of the preceding year of their land,
dwellings, and other farm buildings and structures. We restrict our attention to the value of
land only (excluding trees and orchards).13
In order to eliminate hobby and retirement type farms and to focus on commercial agricultural operations, we eliminated any farm of less than 50 total acres. We also excluded
13

Confidentiality of responses is maintained and farmers do not have any incentive to distort their response
to the survey.

15

farms located in counties with less than 100 total farm acres, thereby excluding urban counties that have no production agriculture. We excluded farms for which incomplete data were
available. This left us with a small number of extreme outlier observations (land values
less than $200 per acre or those exceeding $20,000 per acre). Such extreme observations
represent non-typical agricultural properties, such as vineyards and properties with characteristics (e.g., river-side properties) not recorded in the survey. Only a very small number of
observations (less than 1%) were excluded on this basis. In the portion of our analysis that
addresses rental markets, we excluded any observation for which a share or cash lease rate
in excess of $1,000 per acre was reported. Again, such outliers occurred in only a very small
number of cases.
A variety of sources were used to collect county-level observations on crop acreage
and state level prices (unpublished USDA-NASS statistics) and data relevant to county
population and trends (unpublished U.S. Census data). Aggregate (county-level) agricultural market performance (total sales and production costs) and population statistics were
taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) “Regional Economic Information System”
(REIS). Total farm acres for each county were taken from the 1997, 2002, and 2007 Agricultural Censuses. We used linear splines to interpolate between census years. In that these
values evolve slowly over time but vary significantly in the cross-section, such interpolation
should provide valid estimates in non-census years. Unpublished data on calendar-year total
program payments at the county level for individual farm programs were collected from the
Farm Service Agency (FSA) of the USDA.
Our empirical approach involves consideration of farm-level observations of land values,
cash rental rates, and share rental rates. We use explanatory variables that are measured
at the farm level as well as at a more aggregate county level. It is important to note that
this is not analogous to analysis at the county level as the left-hand-side variables in our
empirical models are measured at the farm-level. Further, in our models of actual realized
payment benefits, the right-hand-side explanatory factors are also measured at the farm

16

level. In the case of models that utilize aggregate averages of payment benefits, right-handside explanatory factors are constant across all farms within a county while the dependent
variables of interest vary within and across counties. It is relevant to note that, because the
ARMS is a national survey, it is uncommon for a large number of farms to be sampled in a
single county. In our estimation sample, each county had an average of 1.15 farms each year
and the number of farms sampled per county ranged from 1 to 7.
Summary statistics and definitions for the key variables of our analysis are presented
in Table 1. To the variables aimed at capturing expected cash flows from farming, we
added three factors intended to represent the additional value of land in areas facing nonagricultural pressures. First, to represent non-agricultural demand pressures, we included the
population growth rate in each county. We also include a series of discrete indicator variables
(obtained from the USDA) that represent the extent of urbanization for each county. The
ordinal ranking ranges from 1=rural to 4=urban. Finally, we considered the ratio of total
population to total farm acres to again capture the effects of residential and non-agricultural
commercial demands for farm land.
We are interested in evaluating the differential effects of benefits provided by the government versus those returns generated by the market. Of course, a risk-neutral farmer will not
care where a dollar comes from, though alternative sources of revenue may have different
levels of risk, thus affecting the preferences of a risk-averse farmer. We acknowledge at the
outset that any representation of market earnings should not be interpreted as a measure
of the market returns that would be generated in the absence of farm policy. Returns in
such a situation are difficult to assess, especially in light of the long history of government
involvement in U.S. agriculture. Likewise, the relevance of such a consideration is limited—it
is unlikely, to the authors at least, that the U.S. government will completely remove policies
that currently support agriculture. Having acknowledged these limitations, we construct
a measure of net returns from the market using county-level averages of the difference in
total agricultural sales receipts (exclusive of government payments) and total production
costs (dollars per acre of farm land). We considered using measures of market returns from

17

individual farm records. However, farm-level financial records are highly volatile across individual years and individual farms due to any number of idiosyncratic factors and therefore
we use the county-wide average to represent market returns.
A few final aspects of the construction of our sample merit discussion. The ARMS survey
is conducted annually from a stratified random sample of farms. Strata are defined by farm
size, sales class, and area. While it is possible that individual farms may be sampled in
multiple years, the identity of any individual farm is unknown (at least to the researcher),
though we do know the county in which the farm was located. Thus, it is impossible to
track an individual farm across time and, ever if such identification were possible, it is likely
that farms would be sampled infrequently and without regularity. This fact complicates
inferences in that unobserved heterogeneity concerns and endogeneity of key variables may be
difficult to address using standard econometric practices. Our use of county-level aggregates,
which should be exogenous to individual farm observations, alleviates these concerns in many
cases.14
A second point of relevance pertains to the timing of production decisions, including
rental agreements, and the administration of the survey. In most cases, rental agreements
are set prior to planting and in some cases may be long-term agreements that extend across
multiple years. Such agreements are therefore clearly based upon expected values of returns
and policy benefits. A subtle difference exists in the case of land values. Farm operators are
asked to assess the value of their land holding as of December 31 of the previous year. Such
an assessment would be made with full knowledge of realized returns and policy benefits.
However, in that returns and program payments are very time-dependent, observed returns
and payments may not accurately reflect the long-run expected values that influence land
values and rental rates—a point demonstrated by Goodwin, Mishra, and Ortalo-Magné
(2003a). We therefore use an average of the preceding five years for individual program
payments and county-level market returns. The extent to which a five-year historical average
accurately represents long-run expected values is debatable but such a measure should control
14

Approaches to directly addressing endogeneity and unobserved heterogeneity remain important topics
for future research.

18

for year-specific effects that may move realized benefits in any given year far from expected
values.15

4

Empirical Results

Our empirical analysis utilizes three distinct approaches to modeling policy effects on land
values and rental rates. The first simply considers the effect of farm-level, realized payments
on farm-level land values and rental rates. This approach is analogous to that adopted in
many studies (see, for example, Kirwan(2009)) and ignores the fact that payment benefits are
largely unknown at the time asset values and rental arrangements are determined. A second
approach constructs explicit measures of expected policy benefits by considering an average
of historical county-level aggregates. A third approach adopts an instrumental variables
model in which the aggregate measures of policy benefits are used to form instruments
that represent expected payments in a generalized method of moments (GMM) context. In
the case of standard regression models, we also considered clustered and robust standard
error estimation techniques. We allowed for clustering among regions, states, counties, and
population weights. Controlling for clustering generally produced larger standard errors but
did not alter the overall conclusions of the analysis. We present conventional standard errors
in the results contained below.
We first consider the relationship between land values and agricultural policy benefits.
As we have noted, our individual farm-level data are collected using a complex survey design. The individual strata used in collecting the data are not identifiable, again reflecting
confidentiality considerations. This precludes efficiency gains that could be achieved from
incorporating information about the construction of strata. However, we can observe population weights for each farm and thus have pursued both weighted and unweighted regression
methods. In every case, the weighted and unweighted results were quite similar and thus we
15

Consider, for example, basic price supports. These programs (e.g., deficiency payments) support prices
by making a payment any time market prices fall beneath a target support level. In a year of strong prices,
no payments may be made. However, in light of the considerable volatility of basic commodity prices, a
subsequent year may realize substantial payments due to low prices.

19

only present unweighted results.16 However, the unweighted results which follow should be
interpreted as applying to this sample of farms only and should not be directly extended to
the entire population.
Our analysis of the determinants of land values is conducted in three segments. In the
first, we consider models that aggregate all program payments into a single category. Such
a model is useful in that it provides a summary of the impacts of additional federal subsidy
dollars on land values at the margin. This analysis also permits a straightforward comparison
to the large literature on this topic. Two versions of this model are considered. The first uses
actual, observed payments for each farm. The second uses county-level historical averages to
assess the total, expected per-acre receipts from farm program payments. Note again that
expected payments are represented using the county average over the preceding five year
period. The results are presented in Table 2.
The model using actual observed farm-level payments (Model 1) indicates that $1 of farm
payments tends to add $2.93 per-acre to the value of farm land. The effect, though highly
statistically significant, is unreasonably low and suggests a very high rate of discounting
payment benefits (approximately a 30% rate of discounting). Such a high rate of discounting
would necessarily imply that land market agents either anticipate the elimination of such
benefits or that considerable uncertainty exists regarding the future of agricultural programs.
Neither explanation seems persuasive in light of the previous 70 years of generous support
for U.S. agriculture.
It is interesting to compare the effects of government payments on land values to the
effects of market returns. The results indicate that an additional $1 obtained from the
market would raise land values by $3.14, a figure very similar to what is implied for subsidy
payments. The results reflect the expected influences of urban pressures on land values, with
more highly populated and less rural areas having higher land values. Although these urban
effects are interesting in their own right, it is important that they be accounted for (a step
16
Because strata are defined using size and sales class, dropping very small farms from our sample mitigates
bias concerns resulting from the non-random sampling, at least to a degree. Weighted regression results are
available from the authors on request.

20

that has generally been neglected in previous analyses) in order to obtain accurate measures
of the policy effects on land values.17 Land in the most rural areas tends to be values at
$1,395 per acre less than that in the most urban areas, other things constant. Population
growth and a greater population relative to agricultural land in a county also both positively
contribute to land values.
We have argued that the use of observed payments may result in an attenuation bias
that forces the implied capitalization rates toward zero. As an alternative, we have argued
that a measure of expected payments may be preferred. Model 2 replaces the total realized
payment measure with the five-year average measure noted above. As expected, the results
suggest much larger and more reasonable effects of agricultural policy benefits on agricultural
land values. An additional $1 of government payments raises land values by $13.13 per acre.
Such a finding implies a much more reasonable capitalization rate of policy benefits into
agricultural land values. The effect of historical average market returns is quite similar
across the alternative models, with an additional $1 of net market returns corresponding
to an increase of $3.45 in land values. The fact that market returns appear to be much
more heavily discounted than is the case for government payments may seem puzzling at
first glance. However, an examination of the historical patterns of returns and payments
may help to explain this finding. Figure 3 below illustrates the patterns of net returns
(given by total marketings less total production costs) and total government payments over
the 1970-2006 period. Three different levels of aggregation are presented—the entire U.S.,
Iowa (a major agricultural state), and Kossuth County Iowa (a major agricultural county
in Iowa). In each case, the diagram illustrates the fact that real net farm market returns
have been falling over time and that market returns are much more volatile than government
payments. In many cases, net returns from the market are actually negative. Aggregation
conceals much of the volatility in returns that is actually present at the farm level. This
is demonstrated by the increased level of volatility across the successively less aggregated
statistics. At the individual farm level, at least to the extent that individual risks are not
17

Hardie et al. (2001) estimate the effects of urban pressure on agricultural land. They are not concerned,
however, with the contribution of agricultural policy to the returns from land.

21

perfectly correlated across farms, one would expect an even higher level of variation in net
market returns.
In light of the observed behavior of market returns over time, a high degree of discounting by risk averse agents is not unexpected. Of course, one cannot fully decouple
market returns from government payments, since most agricultural programs are intended
to provide counter-cyclical benefits intended to offset decreases in market earnings. Such
counter-cyclical behavior is evident in the diagrams in that benefits are higher when market
returns fall. It is important to again emphasize that it is not our intention to interpret the
full or average impact of payments and thereby to make inferences about the total impact of
payments on land values. Such inferences may be impossible given the fact that payments
are so deeply embedded in asset markets and are so closely tied to market swings. Rather,
our intent is to examine marginal impacts of changes in payments and market returns on
land values—the effects that are represented by our model coefficients.
A second segment of the analysis breaks out the overall government payments into their
individual components, generated from different programs. We have argued that it is likely
that different policies, which operate through widely varied support mechanisms, may have
different effects on land values. Models 3 and 4 use actual payment receipts and our measure
of expected payments (historical averages), respectively. We segment payments into four
different components. The first consist of LDP payments, which includes marketing loan
gains and deficiency payments in years prior to 1996. These payments are directly tied
to production and are intended to support the price of actual production of commodities.
A second component of payments is direct payments. This is comprised of payments that
are not tied to production but rather are based upon historical “base” acreage and yield,
which was largely established in the early 1980s.18 These payments include direct, decoupled
payments, market loss assistance, and counter-cyclical payments. Although these payments
are all based upon historical base production and are not tied to current production and
acreage, the market loss and counter-cyclical payments are triggered by market prices and
18

The 2002 Farm Bill gave landowners the option of updating their base using 1998-2001 production and
acreage records.

22

thus may not be known in advance.19 Ad-hoc disaster payments are also identified separately
and are included in the disaggregated regression. A distinction between the aggregate and
disaggregate segmentation of payment data should be noted at this point. The ARMS survey
collected market loss assistance data jointly with disaster payments whereas the aggregate
FSA data groups counter-cyclical payments (the successor to the market loss assistance
program) together with fixed, direct payments. In light of this fact, we group together direct
and counter-cyclical payments for the disaggregated data and direct payments, market loss
assistance, and counter-cyclical payments for the aggregate data. Finally, we have a category
of all other payments which consists of conservation payments, state and local government
benefits, and any other miscellaneous government subsidies.
The model of observed payments suggests that an additional dollar of LDP payments
(direct price supports) will increase land values by only $2.38 per acre. When realized
payments are replaced by the five year average at the county level, the LDP effect rises to
$21.07, again perhaps reflecting the attenuation biases inherent in using observed payments
in any given year on an individual farm. The significantly higher value of an additional
dollar of price support is consistent with expectations and suggests a reasonable discounting
rate close to 5%.
Disaster payments tend to exhibit a large effect on agricultural land values, especially in
the model using aggregate data. These payments are largely ad hoc by design and encompass
a wide range of Congressional objectives. Expectations regarding the impacts of aggregated
disaster payments are unclear since so many different programs are of such an ad hoc nature
and are included in this category (see Appendix Table 1). However, direct monetary subsidies
may certainly be expected to raise the returns to ownership of an asset and thus should
increase land values. On the other hand, disaster relief is often targeted to higher risk,
marginal areas. Thus, it would not be unexpected to see disaster payments being correlated
with lower land values. Our results suggest that additional support in the form of disaster
payments does indeed increase asset values in agriculture. An additional $1 of disaster relief
19

This particular grouping of payments was dictated by the available FSA data.

23

raises land values by $5.02 in the case of the realized payments model (Model 3) and by
$31.10 in the model based upon long-run average values of disaster payments. The 1990s
were a period that experienced significant ad hoc disaster relief and thus may certainly have
had significant impacts on farmland values.20
Direct payments also exert a significant effect on agricultural land values. An additional
dollar in payments raises land values by $2.00 per acre in the model using realized payments
and $5.35 per acre in the model based upon long-run average values. If land market agents
truly believed that these payments were transitory, as the 1996 legislation seemed to imply,
these impacts would seem to be larger than expected.21 It is likely that these payments
were a signal of future benefits to be paid on a decoupled basis. Indeed, in its generosity,
Congress not only continued these payments under the 2002 and 2008 farm legislation,
but also expanded and enhanced the benefits. More importantly, the new Farm Bill made
soybean acreage eligible for direct payments in 2002. Thus, our results suggest that agents
anticipated such legislative actions— any implicit threats to terminate this avenue of support
with the expiration of the 1996 legislation were heavily discounted.
Similar values of the impacts of market returns and non-agricultural demands for farmland are revealed in the disaggregate policy models. A larger impact of market returns is
exhibited in the model using the long-run average value of historical returns than occurs in
the case of realized returns in the year of the survey. Urban pressures again play an important role in determining agricultural land values. In every case, the effects are statistically
significant.
In all, the results confirm that government payments exert a significant effect on land
values. The (marginal) rates of capitalization suggest that in the current policy context, a
dollar in benefits typically raises land values by $13-$30 per acre, with the response differing
substantially across different types of policies. This response certainly suggest that agents
20
A 2006 report from the Environmental Working Group (EWG, 2006) reports that U.S. taxpayers provided
nearly $26 billion in emergency agricultural disaster aid to more than two million farm and ranch operations
over the 1985-2005 period, with payouts exceeding one billion dollars in 11 of the 21 years.
21
Cynics often note that, beyond naı̈ve academics, few farm policy observers believed these so-called
transition payments were temporary. The empirical evidence has confirmed such suspicions.

24

expect these benefits to be sustained for some time. In terms of the implications for the
distribution of farm program benefits, our results confirm that a substantial share of the
benefits is captured by landowners. Recall that, in many cases, landowners may be a very
different entity than farmers. Farmers wishing to expand or enter production will realize
much smaller benefits than the policy rhetoric tries to substantiate. An important finding
is that market returns, which are much more volatile than government payment benefits,
tend to have a much lower influence on land values. Such returns have often been negative
over the last several years and the degree of volatility increases at less aggregate levels of
measurement.
The results on farm land values provide evidence that land captures policy benefits as
land values are enhanced by the subsidies. When the farm operator owns the land, the
transfers go to him. Likewise in the absence of effective limits on payments (there are none)
the larger a farm is the greater will be total payment benefits.22 However, as we have noted
above, about 45% of U.S. farmland is operated by someone other than the owner.
This raises the important question—how do the generous provisions for support of agriculture affect the significant share of farmers that rent the land used in production? Likewise,
how much of the support goes to landowners? Again, the stated intent of the legislation is
a “fair and equitable” sharing of program payments, with an owner that shares no risk (i.e.,
rents under cash lease arrangements) receiving none of the benefits. The real answer to this
question lies in an evaluation of the terms of lease arrangements—do lease rates reflect policy benefits? If, as we have demonstrated, the value of land is increased by policy transfers,
given that value of land is a present discounted value of expected cash flows plus an option
to convert, one would expect that lease rates reflect payments from the government. Lease
rates provide direct evidence on the proportion of farm payments passed on to landlords,
something much more difficult to assess from land values.
22
The extent to which farm program payments should be limited was an important point of considerable
debate in recent farm bill deliberations. Any support based on production (such as LDP payments) will
naturally favor larger producers. In the end, any limits on benefits tied directly to production were eliminated
in 2008 and very loose income “means-tests” were imposed. Goodwin (2008) investigated the likely impacts
of binding payment limits and found that, for the vast majority of producers, limits have no impact on
production.

25

For those farmers in our sample that were engaged in renting land, we were able to obtain
the rental rates paid per acre for land rented under both share and cash arrangements. This is
an important distinction since both types of rental arrangements are common. In our sample,
65.6% of farm operators reported renting some land and of those that rented, 84.6% used
cash leases, 37.8% used share leases, and 22.4% used both cash and share leases. Previous
research (e.g., Kirwan 2009) has focused on analysis of cash rental agreements in evaluating
the incidence of benefits among tenants and landlords.
It is likely that some frictions exist in lease arrangements for farm land, since these
arrangements may not be negotiated every year. In this light, it may take some time for lease
markets to respond to increases or decreases in the level of support provided to producers,
in particular for cash leases. On the other hand, we should expect share lease payments to
reflect the ex-post contribution of every single source of agricultural earnings. Share rents
are indeed paid at the end of the season, once all uncertainty has been realized. Share lease
payments are supposed to reflect the agreed proportion of cash flows from all sources of
earnings related to the farming of the land, including government payments, though again
share arrangements may be subject to the terms set through individual negotiations. In both
share and cash leases, the terms of the lease are set in advance of the realization of farm
earnings and program benefits, at least in most cases. Thus, it is again the case that rental
rates will be based upon expectations of returns and further that the terms of the lease are
set prior to the realization of these returns.
A subtle distinction exists in the role of expectations in our analysis of land values
and rental rates. The data are collected early in the year following the survey year. At
this point, survey respondents have full knowledge regarding realized payment benefits and
market returns and are free to factor such knowledge into their assessment of land values.
However, as we have noted, it is not realized payments in the preceding year but rather
long-run payment expectations that will influence land values. In the case of rental rates,
realized returns and policy benefits are not known at the time lease terms are determined.
In the end, the distinction does not alter the fundamental analysis in that a measure of

26

expectations of payments and market returns is necessary. To this end, we again utilize
the historical five-year average value of the payment variables and of market returns. In
addition, we adopt an approach similar to that used by Patton et al. (2008) and utilize
the generalized method of moments approach of Hansen and Singleton (1982) and utilize
instrumental variables to model expectations. We choose instruments available in agents’
information sets at the time rental terms are defined.
We considered regressions of cash and share rents, respectively, against the factors expected to be relevant to land values and rents, including the indicators of expected payments.
The results are presented in Tables 4-7. We consider both aggregate policy benefits (for all
programs at the farm level) and the alternative specification which distinguishes benefits
from different types of policies. Table 4 presents estimates from a regression of farm-level
cash rental rates on aggregated, historical payment benefits (Model 5) and the GMM estimates that are based upon instruments that include lagged payment variables, pre-planting
futures prices, annual fixed effects, and lagged county-level market returns (Model 6).
The key question is the extent to which higher government payments are reflected in
higher cash rental rates. Kirwan (2009) found that the incidence of subsidy benefits fell
mainly upon tenants, who received about $0.79 of each $1 of total payments. Put differently,
cash rents tended to increase by $0.21 for each $1 of payments. However, as we have noted
above, these estimates may be subject to measurement error biases due to the ignorance
of share leases and the assumption that payment benefits are pre-determined by exogenous
policy parameters. It is again important to note that payments are delivered to farmers
through many different mechanisms and in most cases are unknown until after harvest.
Our analysis reveals a substantially higher share of payments being distributed to landlords engaged in cash rental arrangements with farmer tenants. For each $1 of aggregated
payments (across all program types), landlords claim $0.32 in benefits, other things constant. When actual payment receipts are used within an IV-GMM context (Model 6), this
amount rises to $1. This does seem unreasonably high but both results are indicative of a
situation somewhat counter to the results of Kirwan (2009) in which landlords are effective

27

at extracting payment benefits through higher cash leases. Table 5 presents results for disaggregated programs. The results again indicate that landlords are effective in extracting a
large share of payment benefits through higher cash rental rates. In the model using historical average payments (Model 7), cash rents rise anywhere from $0.73-$1.64 for each $1 of
payments received, depending on the program mechanism used to deliver these payments.
Direct payments, which are not tied to production and which, at least in part, were known
with certainty over the period of study, raise rents by $0.73 for each additional $1 of payments. Disaster payments are actually correlated with lower cash rents, a result that is not
consistent with our earlier findings regarding land values. However, disaster payments are,
by definition, directed toward more marginal areas of production and therefore may be correlated with lower productivity and lower rents. The results again indicate a relatively low
incidence of market returns on cash rental rates. The GMM estimates (Model 8) imply even
larger impacts of payments on cash rents, though the general implications of the analysis
are the same—landlords are effective at extracting policy benefits through higher cash rental
rates.
Table 6 repeats the analysis for share rental rates. An important point regarding the
construction of share rental rates should be noted. These rental rates include payments
going directly to the landlord. This allows a direct comparison with cash rental rates. If
the landlord’s direct share of payments were removed from the calculation of rental rates,
one would expect coefficients to be zero if the landlords were unable to extract additional
benefits through higher share rates. The results are largely similar to those for cash rental
rates, with an additional $1 of total payments raising share rental rates by $0.50-$1.16 per
acre. This again indicates that landlords are likely able to extract additional policy benefits
beyond those received directly, though if the rental agreements are on a 50-50 share basis,
the lower estimate would suggest no additional benefits for landlords over those that they
receive directly.23 Again, significant differences in rental impacts of policies are apparent
across different policy types. Disaster payments tend to lower share rental rates, though the
23

Legislation mandates a “fair and equitable” allocation of policy benefits, which in share leases typically
corresponds to the overall terms of the share lease.

28

effect is statistically significant only in the case of the GMM estimates (Model 12). This is
consistent with expectations in that share lease rates are usually considered to carry a risk
premium over cash rental arrangements. To the extent that disaster payments lower risk as
they are designed to do, they should lower share rental rates. Each additional $1 in direct
payments raise share rental rates by $0.33-$0.70, again indicating a significant benefit for
landlords.
The typical approach to the assessment of the total contribution of agricultural policy
to land values relies on the coefficient from the land value regressions. This is problematic
for two reasons. The first one, usually mentioned in the literature, is due to the fact that
regressions yield the effects of the marginal dollar for each type of policy. The literature has
however overlooked the second reason. If we think about land as a portfolio of securities
each delivering its stream of cash flow, it is obvious that the risk of the portfolio depends
on the covariance of the various underlying securities. Therefore, eliminating one or more
of the underlying securities will affect the risk of the portfolio. In terms of the analysis of
the policy contribution, this implies that eliminating a policy which provides an insurance
benefit will not only decrease expected returns, it will also increase the volatility of the
remaining (market) returns. In other words, we should expect the coefficient on market
earnings to decrease in response to an increase in uncertainty. The capitalization rate of
earnings will be lower reflecting the higher opportunity cost of capital for an asset with more
volatile earnings.
This raises the following question: if there is a theoretical argument in favor of an insurance component to the contribution of agricultural policy to land, can we find evidence
from the market that it matters quantitatively? Unfortunately, there are no counties targeted by the ARMS survey that exempt all farmers from the benefits of agricultural policy.
However, as we have noted above, farm land is rented under both cash lease and share lease
arrangement. Cash lease rate are set ex-ante while the share payment depends upon the
actual earning of the parcel, thus implying a risk sharing arrangement.

29

The main programs designed to reduce the variability of farm earnings and insure the
cash flow to farmers are price supports and disaster payment programs. If the insurance
component matters, we should find that higher payments should be correlated with a lower
risk premium on rental arrangements. By committing to an ex-ante fixed payment, the
farmer provides insurance to his landlord for which we should expect him to be rewarded
(unless we observe cash rents only when the farmer is not risk averse).
To evaluate this risk premium, for the subset of 11,227 farms that have both cash and
share rental agreements in place, we consider the impact of different policies on the sharecash rental rate differential. These results are presented in Table 8. We find that disaster
payments do indeed tend to exhibit an insurance benefit effect in that they lower the sharecash rental rate differential. In contrast, LDP payments tend to increase the differential. The
insurance properties of disaster payments are obvious but reason for the positive relationship
between LDP payments and the risk premia is less clear. Because LDP payments tend to
be higher for crops and regions that experience more price volatility, this may reflect the
greater price risk associated with such crops and regions. The category of “other payments”
appears to lower the share-cash differential, likely reflecting the insurance benefits provided
by this large grouping of payments, which includes conservation program payments.

5

Concluding Remarks

Policy rhetoric often justifies Farm Bill expenditures with the argument that impoverished
farmers are in need of governmental support to remain in business. This view is pervasive
outside of Washington. For example, consider the annual “Farm Aid” events intended to
draw attention to the plight of the American farmer. Our analysis challenges this view. We
demonstrate that land owners capture substantial benefits from agricultural policy. This is
particularly problematic given that in many cases land owners are distinct from the farmers
whose plight we are told we should be concerned with.

30

Of course, many farmers are also landowners and thus have an important stake in maintaining agricultural policy benefits. A farmer that purchased land which reflected the value
of anticipated benefits would certainly suffer a damaging capital loss if such support were
to be withdrawn. Furthermore, all farmers have a strong interest in congressional surprises
whereby more transfers are allocated than anticipated by the land market. As owners they
benefit from the unexpected capital gains. The 2002 and 2008 Farm Bills, with their large
increases in support expenditures, may have been such nice surprises.
Tenants also gain from positive surprises as long as lease rates do not adjust instantaneously. However, the 2002 Farm Bill seems to have shut down this avenue for a temporary
increase in the share of transfers captured by farm operators. One valuable provision of the
bill is that it offers to farmers the opportunity to update the factors which determine the
level of some of the payments they receive. The power to decide whether or not to update
has been given to the owners of the land, not the operator. Not surprisingly, tenant farmers
complained that land owners used this opportunity to impose a renegotiation of the existing
leases that did not foresee the generosity of the 2002 Farm Bill. No base updating provisions
were included in the 2008 legislation. However, the precedent for such updating has been
established and agents most certainly have some expectation, however much it is discounted,
that such future opportunities will again be presented.

31

References
Barnard, C.H., G. Whittaker, D. Westenbarger and M. Ahearn. “Evidence of Capitalization of
Direct Government Payments into U.S. Cropland Values.” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 79(1997):1642-1650.
Environmental Working Group (EWG), “After Two Decades of Agricultural Disaster Aid A
Chronic Dependency Takes Root,” EWG Research Report, September 25, 2006, published
online at http://www.ewg.org/book/export/html/22592.
Goodwin, B. K. “The Incidence and Implications of Binding Farm Program Payment Limits,”
Review of Agricultural Economics Volume 30(2008):554 - 571.
Goodwin, B. K. and F. Ortalo-Magné. “The Capitalization of Wheat Subsidies into Agricultural
Land Values.” Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics 40(1992):37-54.
Goodwin, B. K., A. K. Mishra, and F. Ortalo-Magné. “Explaining Regional Differences in the
Capitalization of Policy Benefits into Agricultural Land Values,” Chapter in Government
Policy and Farmland Markets: Implications of the New Economy, Eds. C. Moss and A.
Schmitz, Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, 2003.
Goodwin, B. K., A. K. Mishra, and F. Ortalo-Magné. “What’s Wrong with Our Models of
Agricultural Land Values?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 85(2003), pp.
744-752.
Hansen, L.P. and K.J. Singleton, “Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation of Nonlinear
Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica, 50(1982):1269-86.
Hardie, I. W., T. A. Naryan and B. L. Gardner. “The Joint Influence of Agricultural and Nonfarm Factors or Real Estate Values: An Application to the Mid-Atlantic Region,” American
Journal of Agricultural Economics 83(2001):120-132.
Kirwan, B. “The Incidence of U.S. Agricultural Subsidies on Farmland Rental Rates,” Journal
of Political Economy, 117(2009):138-164.
Mishra, A. K., H. S. El-Osta, M. J. Morehart, J. D. Johnson, and J. W. Hopkins. “Income,
Wealth, and the Economic Well-Being of Farm Households,” USDA, Economic Research
Service, Agricultural Economic Report No. 812, July 2002.
Patton M. P, Kostov, S, McErlean,and J Moss. “Assessing The Influence Of Direct Payments
On The Rental Value Of Agricultural Land,” Food Policy, Volume 33, Issue 5, October 2008,
Pages 397-405.

32

Reidl, B. “Another Year at the Federal Trough: Farm Subsidies for the Rich, Famous, and
Elected Jumped Again in 2002,” Heritage Foundation Backgrounder No. 1763, May 24,
2004.
Ryan, J., C. Barnard, R. Collender, and K. Erickson. “Government Payments to Farmers
Contribute for Rising Land Values,” Agricultural Outlook June-July, 2001, pp. 22-26.
Shertz, L. and W. Johnston. “Managing Farm Resources in the Era of the 1996 Farm Bill,”
Staff Paper No. AGES 9711, December 1997, Washington, USDA-ERS.
Shoemaker, R., M. Anderson, and J. Hrubovcak. “U.S. Farm Programs and Agricultural Resources,” Agriculture Information Bulletin No. 1990, September 1990, Washington, USDAERS.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistics Service (USDA-NASS), 1999
Agricultural Economics and Land Ownership Survey (AELOS), Washington, DC 1999.
Weersink, A., S. Clark, C. G. Turvey, and R. Sarker. “The Effect of Agricultural Policy on
Farmland Values,” Land Economics 75(August 1999):425-39.

33

34

Total Payments
Average Total Payments
Land Value
Cash Rent
Share Rent
Share-Cash Difference
LDP Payments
Direct Payments
Disaster Payments
Other Payments
Average LDP Payments
Average Direct Payments
Average Disaster Payments
Average Other Payments
Average Market Returns
Aggregate Market Returns
Population Growth
Urban1
Urban2
Urban3
Urban4
Population / Farm Acres

Variable
Total government payments operator and landlord ($/farm acre)
County average payments over previous 5 years ($/farm acre)
Land value for owned land ($/acre)
Cash rental rate ($/acre)
Share rental rate, including payments to landlords ($/acre)
Share-cash differential ($/acre) on farms with both lease types
Loan deficiency payments ($/acre)
Direct payments (including countercyclical payments) ($/acre)
Diaster payments (including market loss assistance) ($/acre)
All other federal and state government payments ($/acre)
County average loan deficiency payments ($/acre)
County average direct payments (includes countercyclical and market loss payments) ($/acre)
County average disaster payments ($/acre)
County average of all other payments ($/acre)
County average cash crop and livestock sales less costs ($/acre)
Current year county average sales less costs ($/acre)
Annual population growth rate (percentage change year t − 1 to t)
Urban indicator variable 1 (most rural counties)
Urban indicator variable 2
Urban indicator variable 3
Urban indicator variable 4 (most urban counties)
Ratio of county population to farm acres

Definition

Table 1. Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

29.4142
23.1093
2, 258.4700
76.7523
99.8997
11.8615
6.5507
10.9385
5.0161
11.0282
7.1304
13.6405
2.3527
3.4808
36.3074
37.6490
0.4069
0.6660
0.1043
0.0902
0.1395
0.6648

Mean

49.1946
20.6402
2, 485.6500
89.1673
109.1717
41.5512
17.8325
22.8224
25.7740
29.1607
8.4403
14.0972
2.8248
4.4062
145.0764
168.9909
1.5293
0.4717
0.3057
0.2865
0.3465
13.3475

Std. Dev.

Table 2. Aggregated Policy Models of Land Value Determinants:
Parameter Estimates and Summary Statistics

a

Model 1
Model 2
Variable
Estimate
t-Ratio
Estimate
t-Ratio
Intercept
2995.9138
131.69
2679.4802
107.68
(22.7502)
(24.8831)
Total Payments
2.9304
17.62
13.1309
32.19
(0.1664)
(0.4080)
Market Returns
3.1442
64.00
3.4549
58.92
(0.0491)
(0.0586)
Population Growth
385.1069
70.40
408.7445
73.49
(5.4701)
(5.5623)
Urban1
−1395.2725
−58.38
−1290.0735
−53.57
(23.8995)
(24.0821)
Urban2
−931.7608
−28.70
−879.6743
−27.00
(32.4653)
(32.5752)
Urban3
−667.5923
−19.97
−626.3230
−18.69
(33.4375)
(33.5112)
Population / Farm Acres
0.4298
0.76
15.9674
11.62
(0.5657)
(1.3747)
........................................................................................
Observations Used
83, 936
83, 790
2
R
0.1766
0.1758
a

Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Model 1 uses current year realized values for
payments and market returns. Model 2 uses the historical average values of payments and
market returns over the preceding 5-year period to represent expected values.

35

Table 3. Disaggregate Policy Models of Land Value Determinants:
Parameter Estimates and Summary Statistics

Variable
Intercept

Model 3
Estimate
2911.0958
(27.3840)
3.1634
(0.3747)
2.3818
(0.6015)
2.0045
(0.5056)
5.0215
(0.3602)
2.7420
(0.0639)
350.4934
(6.5988)
−1414.6055
(28.6454)
−936.4743
(38.9550)
−631.2550

t-Ratio

Model 4
Estimate
t-Ratio

2649.6005
104.40
(25.3794)
Other Payments
8.44
−0.9048
−0.49
(1.8495)
LDP Payments
3.96
21.0658
11.58
(1.8189)
Direct Payments
3.96
5.3529
4.71
(1.1370)
Disaster Payments
13.94
31.1035
10.36
(3.0022)
Market Returns
42.88
3.3864
56.48
(0.0600)
Population Growth
53.12
403.5037
72.22
(5.5875)
Urban1
−49.38
−1242.8038
−50.91
(24.4121)
Urban2
−24.04
−849.7788
−26.01
(32.6728)
Urban3
−15.84
−607.3020
−18.07
(33.6108)
Population / Farm Acres
−0.2463(0.5744)
−0.43
36.9117
20.16
(0.4041)
(1.8312)
........................................................................................
Observations Used
53, 542
83, 135
2
R
0.1645
0.1786
a

106.31

Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Model 3 uses current year realized values for
payments and market returns. Model 4 uses the historical average values of payments and
market returns over the preceding 5-year period to represent expected values.

36

Table 4. Aggregate Models of Cash Rental Rate Determinants:
Parameter Estimates and Summary Statistics

Variable

Model 5
Estimate
t-Ratio

Model 6
Estimate
t-Ratio

Intercept

74.7981
68.02
56.4471
47.51
(1.0997)
(1.1882)
Total Payments
0.3207
39.76
1.0137
52.89
(0.0081)
(0.0192)
Aggregate Market Returns
0.0785
30.98
0.1159
38.42
(0.0025)
(0.0030)
Population Growth
3.6276
13.31
5.5842
20.31
(0.2726)
(0.2750)
Urban1
−15.3141
−13.22
−12.9287
−11.28
(1.1581)
(1.1460)
Urban2
−14.7203
−9.4
−13.3325
−8.61
(1.5652)
(1.5482)
Urban3
−17.2977
−10.78
−15.6342
−9.85
(1.6046)
(1.5869)
Population / Farm Acres
0.7389
8.96
0.8131
8.87
(0.0825)
(0.0917)
........................................................................................
Observations Used
50, 611
50, 571
2
R
0.0601
0.0806
a

Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Model 5 uses current year realized values for
payments and market returns. Model 6 uses the historical average values of payments and
market returns over the preceding 5-year period to represent expected values.

37

Table 5. Disaggregate Models of Cash Rental Rate Determinants:
Parameter Estimates and Summary Statistics

Variable

Model 7
Estimate
t-Ratio

Model 8
Estimate
t-Ratio

Intercept

58.4650
48.8
54.9059
17.21
(1.1981)
(3.1901)
Other Payments
0.9007
10.72
2.2508
7.27
(0.0840)
(0.3098)
LDP Payments
1.6367
20.93
2.9856
8.84
(0.0782)
(0.3379)
Direct Payments
0.7295
14.73
0.6020
3.22
(0.0495)
(0.1867)
Disaster Payments
−2.1341
−15.28
−4.2835
−8.74
(0.1397)
(0.4904)
Market Returns
0.1287
42.17
0.1574
21.53
(0.0031)
(0.0073)
Population Growth
6.0780
22.14
4.3409
7.22
(0.2745)
(0.6013)
Urban1
−12.2037
−10.6
−12.9420
−5.1
(1.1510)
(2.5388)
Urban2
−13.0745
−8.48
−12.1397
−3.58
(1.5424)
(3.3888)
Urban3
−15.9286
−10.07
−18.5700
−5.52
(1.5814)
(3.3651)
Population / Farm Acres
0.9721
11.99
1.2248
6.87
(0.0811)
(0.1783)
........................................................................................
Observations Used
50, 115
32, 526
2
R
0.0962
0.0336
a

Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Model 7 uses the historical average values of
payments and market returns over the preceding 5-year period to represent expected values.
Model 8 uses GMM-IV estimation methods to incorporate expectations of current period
values.

38

Table 6. Aggregate Models of Share Rental Rate Determinants:
Parameter Estimates and Summary Statistics

Variable

Model 9
Estimate
t-Ratio

Model 10
Estimate
t-Ratio

Intercept

98.0877
48.34
81.5600
37.65
(2.0291)
(2.1665)
Total Payments
0.4978
31.64
1.1635
35.94
(0.0157)
(0.0324)
Aggregate Market Returns
0.0527
7.25
0.1421
16.26
(0.0073)
(0.0087)
Population Growth
5.4354
11.14
−22.6754
−10.66
(0.4878)
(2.1265)
Urban1
−23.7259
−11.09
−8.5924
−3.07
(2.1400)
(2.8032)
Urban2
−7.8767
−2.79
−11.2415
−3.81
(2.8187)
(2.9505)
Urban3
−12.9986
−4.38
7.0523
14.44
(2.9671)
(0.4884)
Population / Farm Acres
−0.3355
−1.53
−0.2611
−1.20
(0.2189)
(0.2177)
........................................................................................
Observations Used
23, 627
23, 601
2
R
0.0594
0.0716
a

Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Model 9 uses current year realized values for
payments and market returns. Model 10 uses the historical average values of payments and
market returns over the preceding 5-year period to represent expected values.

39

Table 7. Disaggregate Models of Share Rental Rate Determinants:
Parameter Estimates and Summary Statistics

Variable

Model 11
Estimate
t-Ratio

Model 12
Estimate
t-Ratio

Intercept

84.3849
37.18
65.8711
9.77
(2.2697)
(6.7400)
Other Payments
−0.2209
−1.04
6.8322
6.35
(0.2124)
(1.0758)
LDP Payments
2.4906
21.08
0.0008
0.00
(0.1182)
(0.6939)
Direct Payments
0.3302
4.45
0.6957
2.57
(0.0741)
(0.2703)
Disaster Payments
−0.2583
−0.85
−4.5738
−5.55
(0.3030)
(0.8248)
Market Returns
0.1390
15.88
0.1772
7.48
(0.0088)
(0.0237)
Population Growth
6.6198
13.58
3.4059
3.41
(0.4876)
(0.9993)
Urban1
−21.6807
−10.14
−26.8882
−6.51
(2.1379)
(4.1282)
Urban2
−8.5882
−3.08
−10.1961
−1.87
(2.7916)
(5.4412)
Urban3
−11.7639
−4.00
−13.5427
−2.32
(2.9416)
(5.8366)
Population / Farm Acres
−0.2124
−0.98
−0.0287
−0.05
(0.2167)
(0.6288)
........................................................................................
Observations Used
23, 466
15, 143
2
R
0.0852
0.0352
a

Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Model 11 uses the historical average values of
payments and market returns over the preceding 5-year period to represent expected values.
Model 12 uses GMM-IV estimation methods to incorporate expectations of current period
values.

40

Table 8. Analysis of Share-Cash Rental Rate Differentials:
Parameter Estimates and Summary Statistics

Variable

Model 13
Estimate
t-Ratio

Model 14
Estimate
t-Ratio

Intercept

13.5978
10.38
26.9354
4.50
(1.3106)
(5.9900)
Other Payments
−0.1328
−1.04
−2.7560
−2.29
(0.1282)
(1.2040)
LDP Payments
0.0966
1.36
2.1743
3.00
(0.0713)
(0.7236)
Direct Payments
0.0660
1.40
−0.1708
−0.94
(0.0471)
(0.1827)
Disaster Payments
−0.7841
−3.95
−2.1911
−2.85
(0.1985)
(0.7698)
Market Returns
−0.0214
−3.39
0.0184
0.93
(0.0063)
(0.0197)
Population Growth
0.2551
0.88
0.0415
0.07
(0.2908)
(0.6037)
Urban1
−2.9239
−2.35
−0.8763
−0.34
(1.2449)
(2.5514)
Urban2
−3.4084
−2.12
−1.4991
−0.45
(1.6064)
(3.3340)
Urban3
1.8332
1.11
1.4492
0.42
(1.6534)
(3.4305)
Population / Farm Acres
0.0189
0.20
−0.5210
−1.21
(0.0960)
(0.4293)
........................................................................................
Observations Used
11, 227
7, 514
R2
0.0069
0.0021

a

Numbers in parentheses are standard errors. Model 13 uses the historical average values of
payments and market returns over the preceding 5-year period to represent expected values.
Model 14 uses GMM-IV estimation methods to incorporate expectations of current period
values.

41

42
Figure 1: US Agricultural Land Values

43

$Millions (Real 2008)

1994

1996

2000

Fiscal Year

1998

Market Loss and CC Payments

2002

2004

2006

2008

Decoupled, Direct Payments

Figure 2: US Farm Program Payments by Category (Real $2008)

-5000

1992

Coupled Price Support

1990

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

Real $Billion (2006 Basis)

A. US Total
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-201970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2000

2005

2000

2005

Year
Net Revenue

Govt. Payments

B. Iowa Total
Real $Billion (2006 Basis)

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-21970

1975

1980

1985

-4

1990

1995

Year
Net Revenue

Govt. Payments

C. Kossuth County Iowa
Real $Billion (2006 Basis)

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1970
-0.1

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Year
Net Revenue

Govt. Payments

Figure 3: Net Revenues and Government Payments for US, Iowa, and Kossuth County Iowa
44

Appendix Table 1. USDA Program Payments by Category:
Outlays, and Number of Recipients (1990-2005)
Program

Total

No. Recipients

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Coupled Payments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Acreage Grazing Payments
11,475,210
9,386
Barley Assessment Deficiency
37,303,627
89,793
Cotton Deficiency
3,434,395,526
694,440
Crop Special Grade Rice LDP
4,719,159
285
Feed Grain Deficiency
15,328,664,623
6,072,369
LDP, Non-Contract PFC Growers
85,305,152
58,536
Loan Deficiency
29,732,547,354
5,192,213
Market Gains
4,476,129,696
633,196
Rice Deficiency
3,338,380,074
218,421
Rice Marketing
34,014,757
20,274
Wheat Deficiency
7,923,366,487
3,223,695
Winter Wheat Deficiency
682,864,667
248,373
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Direct Payments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Amlap - Apportioned
94,934,998
7,647
Apple Market Loss Assistance
166,373,534
13,160
Dairy Market Loss Assistance
968,612,817
187,732
Direct And Counter Cyclical
25,068,153,272
4,218,971
Lamb Meat Adjustment Assist
86,071,348
71,706
Marketing Loss Assistance
18,260,407,458
5,366,287
Oilseed Program
950,113,825
1,184,806
Peanut Marketing Assistance
119,010,211
27,094
Peanut Marketing Asst Pgm III
53,924,599
17,277
Production Flexibility
35,210,684,603
9,667,805
Suplemental Oilseed Payment Program
418,811,924
586,572
Supplemental Tobacco Loss
127,461,626
335,871
Tobacco Loss Assistance
346,044,295
361,113
WAMLAP II - Apportioned
18,637,475
20,985
WAMLAP III - Apportioned
16,730,874
20,974
Wool and Mohair Market Loss Asst.
10,228,857
18,629
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Disaster Payments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
01-02 Crop Disaster Assistance
2,547,849,688
389,516
2000 Florida Nursery Losses
29,437
3
AILFP – Apportioned
6,480,878
1,180
American Indian-Livestock Feed
12,458,007
2,389
Apple and Potato Quality Loss
34,199,943
1,681
Avian Influenza Indemnity Prog
52,980,294
163
Cattle Feed Program
136,401,954
49,580
Citrus Losses In California
2,154,433
987
Crop Disaster Program
3,060,477,581
555,263
Crop Loss Disaster Assistance
1,857,480,163
249,555

45

Appendix Table 1. (continued)
Program

Total

No. Recipients

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Disaster Payments (continued) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dairy Disaster Assistance
7,495,444
1,161
Dairy Indemnity
2,450,691
456
Disaster
5,532,181,025
1,504,547
Disaster – Non-Program Crops
42,215
29
Disaster – Program Crops
-112,369
74
Disaster Reserve Assistance
145,110,728
85,247
Emergency Conservation
312,905,164
124,459
Emergency Conservation Program
70,106,623
26,205
Emergency Feed
-1,029,779
1,303
Flood Compensation Program
706,144
38
Idaho Oust Program
4,888,638
71
Karnal Bunt Fungus Payment
38,897,325
912
LIP - Contract Growers
1,031,180
1,229
Livestock Compensation Program
1,096,133,267
578,840
Livestock Emergency Assistance
1,550,736,935
781,983
Livestock Indemnity Program
305,696
164
NAP-Supplemental Appropriation
3,917,572
1,379
Noninsured Assistance Program
672,291,473
170,099
Nursery Losses - Florida
7,316,930
195
Pasture Flood Compensation
20,387,735
12,252
Pasture Recovery Program
52,971,866
35,093
Poultry Enteritis Syndrome
1,768,271
136
Quality Losses Program
148,615,562
35,246
Sugar Beet Disaster Program
45,636,494
2,745
Tobacco Disaster Assistance
2,696,981
343
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Payments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Additional Interest
56,214
279
Agricultural Conservation
1,132,520,907
739,873
Agricultural Management Assist
5,752,517
796
Animal Waste Management
256,368
26
Arkansas Beaver Lake
2,464,632
477
Auto Ag Cons Pg Env. Long Term
402,632
109
Auto Ag Con Pg Env. Annual
1,163
1
Auto Ana-Conservation Annual
1,875
2
Auto CRP - Cost Shares
353,698,363
143,683
Auto EQIP
173,468,007
37,592
Auto LTA-Conservation Long Term
704,059
164
Clean Lakes
9,999
1

46

Appendix Table 1. (continued)
Program

Total

No. Recipients

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Other Payments (continued) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colorado River Salinity
31,832,222
1,992
Cotton Diversion
-15,095
22
CRP Annual Rental
24,695,070,732
5,701,530
CRP Cost-Shares
840,994,086
429,665
CRP Incentives
483,637,540
219,732
Dairy Termination
237,026,377
19,893
Environment Quality Incentives
477,768,620
126,317
Extended Farm Storage
171,409,332
72,879
Extended Warehouse Storage
44,481,468
18,694
Feed Grain Diversion
-395,250
4,040
Finality Rule
1,007,752
1,403
Forestry Incentive - Annual
51,322,552
25,100
Forestry Incentive - Long Term
12,254,173
6,120
Fresh Market Peaches Program
783,991
126
Grasslands Reserve Program
9,275
4
Hard White Winter Wheat
3,517,590
3,301
Interest On CCC-6’S
1,624
38
Interest On NAP Payment
4,678
184
Interest Payments
29,003,888
1,046,365
Klamath Basin Water Program
-4,299
4
Milk Diversion
30,576
20
Milk Inc Loss Contr Transition
547,209,081
73,836
Milk Income Loss Contract
1,403,354,665
247,585
Milk Marketing Fee
265,896,171
249,035
National Wool Act
895,921,293
442,720
NRCS EQIP
283,707,027
32,930
Options Pilot Program
39,762,496
4,128
Payment Limitation Refund
-6,983,394
2,411
Peanut Quota Buyout Program
1,220,640,857
80,080
Potato Diversion Program
20,263,929
1,222
Rice Diversion
-12,567
11
Rural Clean Water
3,126,831
618
Small Hog Operation Program
121,376,613
57,952
Soil/Water Conservation Assist
10,358,605
2,383
Sugar PIK Diversion Program
180,690,205
15,126
Tobacco Payment Program
50,887,278
297,921
Water Bank - Annual
43,879,235
30,317
Water Bank-Practice Cost/Share
11,046,258
7,682
Wetlands Reserve
34,315,395
1,830
Wheat Diversion
-2,237
85

47

