                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS IN CHINA:
                 FISCAL INSTITUTIONS AND GOVERNMENT BEHAVIOR

                                         Roger H. Gordon
                                             Wei Li

                                       Working Paper 16694
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16694


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2011




We would like to express our gratitude for the comments and suggestions that we received from Joseph
Fan, Alex Gelber, Hua Li, Zhigang Li, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung and participants at presentations
at Tsinghua University, the NBER pre-conference in Cambridge MA, and the NBER-CUHK conference
in Hong Kong on “Capitalizing China.” We would like to thank CKGSB for its hospitality and financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Roger H. Gordon and Wei Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Provincial and Local Governments in China: Fiscal Institutions and Government Behavior
Roger H. Gordon and Wei Li
NBER Working Paper No. 16694
January 2011
JEL No. H7,O17,O38,O53,P16,P2,P43

                                               ABSTRACT

What are the incentives faced by local officials in China? Without democratic institutions, there is
no mechanism for local residents to exercise “voice”. Given the hukou registration system, local residents
have little opportunity to threaten “exit” if they are unhappy with local taxes and spending. This paper
explores an alternative source of incentives, starting from the premise that local officials aim to maximize
the jurisdiction’s fiscal residual (profits), equal to local tax revenue minus expenditures on public services.
In a Tiebout setting with mobile households, this objective should lead to efficient provision. What
happens, though, if firms and economic activity but not people are mobile? The paper examines the
incentives faced by local Chinese officials in this context, and argues that the forecasted behavior helps
to explain both the successes and the problems arising from local government activity in China.


Roger H. Gordon
Department of Economics 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
rogordon@ucsd.edu

Wei Li
Darden School of Business Administration
University of Virginia
100 Darden Boulevard
Charlottesville, VA 22903
wl9d@virginia.edu
       Provincial and Local Governments in China:
       Fiscal Institutions and Government Behavior
                     Roger H. Gordon, UCSD, NBER and CKGSB ∗
                     Wei Li, Darden School of Business and CKGSB

                                              June 2010


    Provincial and local (hereafter “local”) governments in China play an important role
in the overall economy. To begin with, local budgetary revenue in recent years is around
8% of GDP, extra-budgetary revenue (largely income from land) comes to another 3% of
GDP, budgetary expenditures are close to 14% of GDP, and extra-budgetary expenditures
adds another 2.5% of GDP (see Table 1). This scale of activity is broadly comparable to
that of state and local governments in the United States, where own tax revenue is around
13% of GDP and expenditures are 16% of GDP. Local governments in both settings have
primary responsibility for education, local infrastructure, and local public services.
    The similarity largely stops there, however. In the United States, local governments are
mainly financed by property taxes and user fees, and state governments by a combination
of personal income taxes and sales taxes. In China, until 1994, local governments were
mainly financed through a tax on the profits and sales of non-state firms. Since then,
they have received a fraction of the VAT and corporate profits tax collected in their
jurisdictions, and all the revenue from personal income taxes, business taxes, and (until
recently) taxes on agriculture.1
    Chinese local governments also play a much more central role in the local economy
than do local governments in the United States, controlling the allocation of land, and
in the past, exercising substantial controls over the allocation of bank credit. The initial
growth in China at the beginning of the economic reforms in fact is largely attributed to
the initiative of local governments in setting up township and village enterprises (TVEs)
and other non-state firms (Gordon and Li, 2005).
   ∗
     We would like to express our gratitude for the comments and suggestions that we received from Joseph
Fan, Alex Gelber, Hua Li, Zhigang Li, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung and participants at presentations
at Tsinghua University, the NBER pre-conference in Cambridge, MA, and the NBER-CUHK conference
in Hong Kong on “Capitalizing China.” We would like to thank CKGSB for its hospitality and financial
support.
   1
     See Gordon and Li (2005) and Hussain and Stern (2008) for more discussions on the evolving public
finance in China.



                                                   1
    Oversight over local government in China is also far different than in the United
States. In the United States, oversight occurs through both voice and exit. Local officials
are elected by residents, so they can be removed from office if residents are not satisfied
with outcomes. In addition, local residents can vote with their feet and leave a poorly per-
forming jurisdiction, putting pressure on local officials to keep current residents satisfied.
In China, by contrast, neither voice nor exit plays a major role in affecting the incentives
faced by local officials. There are no local elections above the village level,2 so officials
face no threat of being voted out of office.3 The threat of exit is also constrained, since
Chinese are subject to the hukou system, a registration system that ties individuals to
their current location. In addition, farmers are tied to their land, since there is not a well
functioning market for selling or leasing this land, due to their lack of legal ownership of
the land.
    If neither voice nor exit serve to provide incentives to local officials in China, what
does affect their incentives? Oversight from the central government certainly plays an
important role, as emphasized by Xu (2010). Local officials are appointed by higher levels
of government and are evaluated by the central government based on a range of criteria.
The central government also mandates that certain intergovernmental transfers from the
central government be matched by provincial and local funds and then be used for specific
purposes, e.g. education and health care, which constrains the choices of local officials.
    In practice, though, local officials still have substantial discretion. For example, even
if monetary expenditures on particular tasks can be monitored, it is difficult to monitor
the quality of the resulting services. The country is large, and the resources available to
the central government to oversee subnational governments are very limited. Even when
oversight exists, the effects of this oversight on the chance of promotion (or demotion)
of local officials carries much weight only for the very best and very worst officials, as
judged by the observed criteria, since most officials are neither promoted nor demoted. In
addition, mandated use of funds, or explicit standards of performance, have the drawback
that these standards may not be well suited for many jurisdictions, given the tremendous
variation in conditions over a large and diverse country. The information used in making
these decisions can also be manipulated by local officials, undermining the effectiveness of
these incentives.
    In practice, therefore, the quality of the remaining incentives faced by local officials
inevitably plays an important role. How well designed are these incentives? The better
these incentives are designed, the greater the decentralization of decision-making that can
   2
     Since the 1980s, villagers have been allowed to experiment with various forms of self-government,
often by electing village management committees, to fill the vacuum left after the demise of the People’s
Communes (O’Brien and Li, 2000). In 1998, village elections and village self-government were codified into
law. However, elected village officials often enjoyed little fiscal autonomy. Democratic choice of officials
has not to date been extended to higher levels of government.
   3
     In the official hierarchy in China, village officials are not considered government cadres, even though
they are often on the government payroll.



                                                     2
comfortably be undertaken. The focus of this paper is then on the range of incentives
faced by officials beyond direct oversight from the central government.
     Our key hypothesis is that the welfare of local officials is heavily dependent on the
amount of government revenue collected in their jurisdiction, minus the amounts they
need to spend to provide services to local residents. These residual fiscal profits are under
the control of local officials and can easily be used for their personal benefit. The size of
these residual profits is affected by the allocation choices made by local officials, so they
implicitly serve as an incentive contract. If local revenue depends on the profits of local
firms, for example, then officials have a personal incentive to increase these profits.
     Given existing tax structures and existing sources of extra-budgetary revenue, what
economic incentives do local officials face? What economic choices would local officials
then be expected to make, given these incentives? When incentives have changed over
time, what changes in behavior would we expect to see? What are the key sources of
inefficiency in the allocation of resources by local government forecast based on existing
financial incentives? What would be the forecasted effect of possible fiscal reforms on the
efficiency of the allocation decisions made by local officials?
     The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 1 summarizes briefly the role of
voice and exit in affecting the incentives faced by local officials in the United States, as
explored in the past academic literature. Section 2 develops an alternative model in which
the incentives faced by officials depend on the tax revenue they receive minus whatever
they need to spend on local public services. We develop this model using the institutions
that have existed in China during the reform period. In section 3, we then examine how
these incentives changed over the course of the reform period, as the tax law changed and
as market reforms were introduced. Section 4 then examines the additional incentives
faced by officials due to national government control over their possible promotion or
demotion. Section 5 considers how a range of policy reforms would affect the incentives
faced by local officials, and section 6 provides a brief summary.


1    Traditional models of government oversight
We begin with a summary of the U.S. literature on the forms of oversight of local officials,
and why on paper we would then expect to see officials making choices that are largely in
the best interests of residents.
     One source of oversight is the election process. Each potential official proposes a plat-
form to voters. Voters choose that candidate whose proposed platform provides them the
highest utility. If candidates simply care about being elected and voters are homogeneous,
then, in equilibrium, each candidate’s platform will maximize the utility of voters. In-
efficiencies can arise due to differences in the preferences of the median voter compared
with the overall costs versus benefits of a project, as emphasized by Buchanan and Tullock
(1962). Candidates, though, have their own preferences, and can be influenced by special


                                              3
interests. They are not obliged to follow through on their campaign promises. Voters also
face a free rider problem, having no personal incentive to vote or to be informed about the
candidates. The quality of oversight through the voting process is therefore uncertain on
net. Banerjee and Duflo (2006), for example, find in India that voters provide surprisingly
poor oversight over officials.
    More central to the literature on fiscal federalism is the Tiebout model. Under this
model, officials propose a tax structure and spending package and gain utility from any tax
revenue left after financing promised expenditures.4 Residents then choose where to live
and firms where to locate, with land prices adjusting to generate an equilibrium residential
allocation. Competition among communities, if sufficiently intense, pushes net fiscal profits
down to zero, induces officials to provide the package of public services residents are willing
to pay for, and forces them to finance these expenditures with user fees (or head taxes if
all residents benefit equally from the spending) and to provide the services at minimum
cost. This competition is most intense if residents are costlessly mobile, if they can carry
their income with them, and if there are many competing communities. In equilibrium,
when competition is intense, fiscal outcomes should be efficient.
    Officials in China, though, are not subject to either voting pressures or much pressure
from the mobility of potential residents, given the hukou system. Even though people are
not mobile, however, economic activity is mobile: Local firms face intense competition
in the (inter)national economy. The aim of this paper is to make use of the Tiebout
framework to explore what outcomes would be expected when officials act to maximize
net fiscal profits, as defined based on the existing institutions in China, given that economic
activity, but not people, are mobile across jurisdictions.


2       Incentives created by the source of tax revenue: general
        model
In this section, we focus on how the available sources of revenue affect the incentives faced
by Chinese officials. Our setup follows the structure of the Tiebout model in that the
utility of officials depends on their net “fiscal profits”: tax revenue, profits from firms
owned by the local government, plus income generated by land rents minus expenditures
on public services.
    We begin by laying out a general model with the following stylized institutional fea-
tures. With the hukou system in place, we assume that labor is not mobile across jurisdic-
tions (Wang and Zuo, 1999),5 but it can freely move between jobs within the jurisdiction.
We assume for now that capital cannot move across jurisdictions.6 Land is owned by the
    4
     We will refer to government revenue minus expenditures as net fiscal profits.
    5
     Economic reforms have gradually increased labor mobility, an issue we discuss in Section 3.
   6
     Economic reforms have relaxed control over the allocation of capital. In section 3, we presume local
government control over the allocation of capital until 1994 and market allocation after 1994.



                                                   4
government. Farmers have been given use rights for their plots and must be compensated
if the government shifts this land to other uses. Use rights on other land can be allocated,
rented, or sold to firms and households for a finite number of years. In the next section,
we then relate these more general assumptions to the particular institutions that existed
during various time periods under the reforms in China.
     Firms can be privately owned or owned by local governments.7 Privately-owned firms
in each industry i located in the jurisdiction face a tax at rate τi on their profits, denoted
πi , an excise tax at rate si on their sales, plus an implicit tax denoted by κi on their
capital. Here, πi = pi (1 − si )Qi − wLi − (r + κi )Ki − ni Ai − ui G, where pi is the output
price (which the jurisdiction takes as given), Qi = Qi (Li , Ki , Ai ; G, R) is local output
produced in industry i using labor (Li ), domestic capital (Ki ), and land (Ai ), with local
infrastructure G aiding production and local regulations R affecting productivity. Here,
w is the local wage rate, r is the interest rate charged by banks on loans to the firm (set
nationally), and ni is the implicit rent the government charges industry for use of land,
while ui is a fee (if any) charged for use of G, which at most equals the marginal product
of G. Depending on the time period, officials may control the allocation of domestic
capital across local firms through their oversight of the local banks. Not only do tax rates
differ by industry, but they also may differ by type of firm, with the national government
receiving all the revenue from state-owned firms that it controlled, but local governments
at times receiving all the tax revenue from both private firms and firms set up by the local
government.
     For government-owned firms, the government receives not only the tax revenue from
the firms, but also the after-tax profits, (1 − τj )πj . In total, it therefore simply receives
the entire pre-tax profits from these firms. We assume that the government has designed
the incentives faced by firm managers so that they make allocation decisions to maximize
the government’s objective function.
     Depending on the time period, officials may also receive revenue from agriculture, both
through explicit taxes and through requiring farmers to sell output to the government at
a below-market price. Assume for simplicity that the tax revenue from agriculture equals
σpf F , where σ is the implicit tax rate, pf is the market price for agricultural output, and
F is the quantity produced, with F = F (Lf , Kf , Af ; Gf , Rf ). Here, Gf is another set of
public services aimed at agriculture, provided at a user charge of uf , while Rf represents
regulations affecting agriculture.
     Farmers have use rights for an area of land A0f without paying explicit rent. If officials
reallocate some of this land to industrial or residential uses, they must compensate farmers
by paying them the marginal product of land used in agriculture, an amount we denote
by c ≡ (1 − σ)pf FA , where FA = ∂F/∂Af is the marginal product of land.8 Similarly, the
wage rate firms must pay to attract local workers satisfies w ≡ (1 − σ)pf FL . To simplify
   7
     In this analysis, we ignore firms owned by the national government, since allocations to these firms
are largely controlled by the national government. For simplicity, we also ignore foreign subsidiaries.
   8
     Throughout, we use subscripts of a function to denote partial derivatives.


                                                   5
the subsequent notation, assume that all units of output are redefined so that pi = pf = 1.
    The government provides services to each household, Gh , which the household in part
pays for through a user fee uh . Let nh denote the rent received per unit of land Ah
                                                                                       P
allocated to housing. Market-clearing rents can be expressed by nh = q(Ah , w i Li ),
where q is decreasing in Ah and increasing in the income of workers.
    For simplicity, we start by assuming a fixed total supply of each factor to the jurisdic-
tion, e.g., i Ai + Af + Ah = AT , where the superscript T signifies the total amount of
            P

a factor available in the jurisdiction. Given the lack of mobility, total factor supplies are
clearly fixed for labor and land. For the moment, we assume that the supply of capital to
the jurisdiction is fixed as well, based on the deposits under the control of local banks. We
also assume that factors are fully employed, so for any given allocation of factors to indus-
tries, the agricultural output is simply F (LT − i Li , K T − i Ki , AT − i Ai −Ah ; Gf , Rf ).
                                                 P           P           P

    Assume that firms with i ∈ IP are privately owned while firms with j ∈ IG are owned
by the government. The objective of officials is to maximize the sum of tax revenue from
privately owned firms, profits from government-owned firms, agricultural taxes, and land
rents, minus compensation to farmers and minus the net cost (net of user fees) of public
expenditures on local infrastructure and minus the implicit cost of effort expended on
regulations:9

   X                                           X
          (τi πi + κi Ki + si Qi + ni Ai ) +          (Qj − wLj − rKj ) + σF + qAh − c(A0f − Af )
   i∈IP                                        j∈IG
                                  X
                       − G(1 −          ui ) − Gf (1 − uf ) − N T Gh (1 − uh ) − e(R) − ef (Rf ) (2.1)
                                 i∈IP

Here, N T is the size of the local population. Officials then allocate land and capital and
choose how much to spend on each form of public service to maximize expression (2.1).
Local wage rates and labor allocation are determined by the local labor market.
    We assume that officials maximize this expression over the time period they are in
office, so that each expression implicitly reflects the present value of taxes and expenditures
during this time period, and A0f measures the amount of land used by farmers when the
official takes office. Decisions clearly are affected by the official’s time horizon, since some
effects of policy changes show up quickly whereas other effects may materialize only after
the official leaves office.10 We also ignore any agency problems that may exist within
the local government, and assume that all decisions are based on the above objective.11
Another apparent omission is side payments from firms or individuals that aim to change
   9
     For simplicity, we assume that Gand Gf are local public goods, so that costs or quality of service do
not depend on the number of users.
  10
     If the official can “sell” his position to his successor, though, then the price paid can capture these
future effects of policy changes, implicitly giving officials a longer time horizon.
  11
     Since an official may be removed from office if those reporting to him are unhappy with his performance,
an official faces a strong incentive to align his interests with those of others in the local government.


                                                         6
government decision. As argued by Grossman and Helpman (1994), such side payments
would ideally be designed so that officials take full account of how their decisions affect
the profits/utility of the firm/individual paying the bribe. If a private firm makes such
payments, for example, then the official would take into account the effects of any decision
on the firm’s pre-tax profits, as is the case for firms owned by the local government.12
    What decisions are then forecast, given this objective function for local officials? Con-
sider first the allocation of labor to government-owned firms in industry j. The first order
condition satisfies

                        QjL = w + σFL − qL Ah − (1 − σ)FAL (A0f − Af ),                             (2.2)
where the subscripts in Qj and F denote first-order and second-order partial derivatives
with respect to capital, labor, and/or land.13 With full employment as assumed, the extra
labor allocated to industries has to be taken from agriculture, raising the marginal cost
of labor to the government by an amount equal to the foregone agricultural tax revenue
σFL . In addition, extra industrial workers lead to greater rental income from residential
housing, and lower compensation payments to farmers due to any drop in the value of
land when farmed less intensively.
    Note that managers of these firms, if they instead made hiring decisions to maximize
after-tax firm profits, would seek a labor force satisfying QjL = w/(1 − sj ). Local gov-
ernments have financial incentives to force managers of government-owned firms to hire
more workers than they would otherwise choose to as long as w + σFL − qL Ah − (1 −
σ)FAL (A0f − Af ) < w/(1 − sj ). This condition holds as long as sj > σ. In this case, excise
taxes unduly discourage employment in government-owned firms relative to agriculture,
while extra government employment provides various added benefits to the government’s
budget. Managers of government-owned firms certainly claim that they are forced to
employ many more workers than they would wish to.
    Consider next the allocation of domestic capital to government-owned firms in industry
j. The first order condition satisfies

                            QjK = r + σFK − (1 − σ)FAK (A0f − Af ),                                 (2.3)
Given the local resource constraint, the extra capital can be viewed as coming from agri-
culture. Now r is paid by the government rather than by farmers, introducing one cost.
The next term reflects the foregone tax revenue from agriculture due to the drop in capital
there. The final term measures the gain due to the fall in land values in agriculture from
  12
     Private firms were at times referred to as “wearing a red hat,” perhaps reflecting the fact that side
payments existed so that local officials treated these firms equivalently to government-owned firms.
  13
     In general, wage rates can adjust. For simplicity here and later, we ignore changes in wage rates, on
the grounds that there has been enough surplus labor in agriculture that any such changes are too small
to matter.




                                                    7
the drop in use of capital there, resulting in less compensation being paid to farmers for
any land shifted out of agriculture to industry.
    Efficient allocation of capital requires that QjK = FK . In contrast, we conclude that
QjK < FK , implying too much investment in industry than in agriculture on efficiency
grounds, as long as r is small and σ < 1.
    Note that investment in agriculture increases when σ increases. With a higher tax
rate, the benefits to the government of investment in the sector rise, leading to additional
investment. This counter intuitive result arises because the government is making alloca-
tion decisions based on the implications for tax revenue, rather than having farmers make
the decision based on implications for their after-tax profits.
    Consider next the allocation of domestic capital to private firms. Compared to allocat-
ing capital to government-owned firms, there are two disadvantages to allocating capital
to private firms. First, private firms hire fewer workers than the government would like
them to, since their hiring decisions are characterized by QiL = w/(1 − si ), rather than
by equation (2.2). To that extent, private firms make less effective use of extra capital.
In addition, the government receives only a fraction of the resulting marginal product of
capital equal to Ti ≡ si + τi (1 − si )< 1. For both reasons, the required marginal product
on capital allocated to private firms must be higher to compensate for these two offsetting
disadvantages to private allocations.
    Turn now to the allocation of land for industrial and residential uses. The first-order
condition for land allocated to government-owned firms is

                              QjA = FA − (1 − σ)FAA (A0f − Af )                              (2.4)

By shifting an extra unit of agricultural land to industrial use, the government pays
(1 − σ)FA to farmers as compensation and bears a fall in agricultural revenue by an
amount σFA , for a combined opportunity cost of FA . Allocations are efficient if there are
no further considerations, so that QjA = FA . However, leaving less land in agriculture
raises its marginal product, so the government needs to provide more compensation to
farmers by an amount −(1 − σ)FAA (A0f − Af ). While this offsetting effect slows the
reallocation of land from agriculture to industry, leading to higher interim values for land
in industry than in agriculture, each generation of official inherits a lower A0f and will
choose to make further land reallocations as long as QiA > FA . This reallocation continues
until officials take office inheriting a value of A0f equal to the allocation they find optimal.
At this optimal allocation, we find that QjA = FA . After enough turnover of officials,
we can expect land to be allocated efficiently between agriculture and government-owned
firms.
    Note, however, that each generation of officials acts in its own self-interest, ignoring the
effects of its sales on the welfare of other generations of officials. If these different genera-
tions of officials could collude, acting as if there were one official in office indefinitely, then
as a group they would take into account the effects of land sales on the compensation paid

                                                8
to farmers on all land ever taken out of agriculture, and not just on the land removed from
agriculture while that one official is in office. With such collusion, the sales price would
be permanently higher for non-agricultural land than for agricultural land. Interestingly,
the central government has a policy to preserve at least 1.8 billion mu of agricultural land,
ostensibly because of concerns over food security.14 An alternative motivation could be
that this national policy serves as a means of collusion among different generations of
officials.
    Consider now the first-order condition that arises when officials consider reallocating
land from government-owned firms to private firms. Here, we find that QiA > QjA for two
reasons. First, while the government receives rent on extra land allocated to private firms
equal to the resulting after-tax profits and also receives the extra tax revenue, summing
to QiA , it suffers a loss due to the fall in equilibrium land rents: (1 − Ti )QiAA Ai . The
government, being a monopoly supplier of land, therefore restricts land allocations to
private firms in order to drive up rents. Second, the private firm hires fewer extra workers
as a result of the extra land than would the government-owned firm, reducing further the
value of this land allocation.
    For residential land, the government also acts as a monopoly supplier. It compares the
marginal revenue it receives to the same types of terms as above measuring the opportunity
cost of the land.
    One implicit assumption in the above derivation is that officials compare the flows of
rent in each use. In fact, they need to pay a lump-sum compensation to farmers reflecting
the present value of the land in agriculture when land is taken from agriculture. If the
trade-off that officials face is between this lump-sum payment to farmers and an increased
flow of rents from industry during the limited time period the official remains in power,
they would favor leaving land in agriculture. The land use policies and practice since the
late 1990s have instead allowed officials to sell rights to the land when it is reallocated
to industry. Officials therefore compare present values. The respective rents are then
divided by a discount rate, giving them much more weight in the above expressions. The
discount rates need not be the same, however. In particular, farmers face a harder time
acquiring funds, since farmland cannot be used as collateral, unlike industrial or residential
land. Farmers’ discount rate should therefore be higher, generating a factor favoring a
reallocation of land from agriculture to industry. In addition, once land has been sold,
changes in rents on this land no longer matter for future officials. In particular, the term
in equation (2.4) capturing changes in residential rents would now capture changes in rents
only on land still owned by the government and changes in value on residential land that
will be sold by that official.
    What about the choice of expenditures on public services? The choices made by
government officials, based on their own self-interest, would be efficient only if local firms
  14
     This policy imposes limits on the conversion of agricultural land within each jurisdiction, with oppor-
tunity costs that vary greatly by jurisdiction. If rights to develop agricultural land could be traded across
jurisdictions, these opportunity costs could be reduced.


                                                     9
and individuals together are left unaffected on net by a marginal change in G.15 Any
benefits to government-owned firms already go in their entirety to the government. The
net benefits to private firms, farmers, and workers equal zero, leading to efficient choice,
only if
   X
          (1 − Ti )(QiG − QiAG Ai ) − (1 − σ)FAL dLG (A0f − Af )
   i∈Ip
                                                                                     X
                                                                   − qL Ah dLG =           (1 − τi )ui . (2.5)
                                                                                    i∈Ip

Here, dLG measures the reallocation of agricultural labor into industry due to the marginal
increase in G, which, we presume, raises the marginal product of industrial labor.
    Incentives on officials are therefore efficient only if user fees fully reflect the direct net-
of-tax benefits to private firms, farmers, and workers minus any losses they incur due to
changes in rents and in compensation payments to farmers. At least for roads with tolls, a
firm makes use of these roads to the point where (1 − Ti )QiG = (1 − τi )ui . Efficiency then
requires that the remaining terms on the left hand side of equation (2.5) equal zero. The
remaining terms all reflect losses to the private sector. Governments therefore have too
strong an incentive to provide these services and would be expected to provide subsidies
to the private firms that undertake these infrastructure investments.
    Similarly, the choice of Gf yields an efficient outcome only if the private sector is left
indifferent at the margin to any marginal change in provision of public services. This
condition holds if


  (1 − σ)FG + (1 − σ)(FAG − FAL dLGf )(A0f − Af )
                                                 X
                                             −          (1 − Ti )QiAL Ai dLiGf − qL Ah dLGf = uf . (2.6)
                                                 i∈IP

Gf raises the marginal product of agricultural labor and therefore causes a marginal
reallocation of industrial workers back into agriculture.16
    For incentives on government officials to be efficient, user fees must fully reflect the net-
of-tax benefits to farmers from extra public services to agriculture, plus any net benefits
farmers receive through increased compensation for land transferred out of agriculture,
plus the net benefits the non-agricultural sector receives from lower rents on commercial
and residential property due to a migration of people back to agriculture. If farmers
make use of public services until marginal benefits and marginal costs are equal, so that
  15
      This condition on marginal incentives is sufficient if the second-order conditions are satisfied, e.g.,
decreasing returns to scale.
   16
      The term dLiGf in equation (2.6) denotes the marginal reallocation of labor from agriculture to industry
i. Since the reallocation is from industry i back into agriculture, dLiGf < 0.


                                                        10
(1 − σ)FG = uf , then efficiency again requires that the remaining terms on the right hand
side of equation (2.6) sum to zero. All these terms reflect a net benefit to the private
sector, implying that the private sector benefits on net from additional expenditures on
public services to agriculture. The government, ignoring these benefits, then provides too
few such services.
    Expenditures on Gh are efficient only if the dollar benefits per household equal their
required user fee. In particular, education and health care services would be provided only
if costs are fully covered through user fees. This forecast is consistent with the claim we
have heard that education and health care have become “commodities” under the reforms,
and helps explain why the national government finds it hard to induce local governments
to provide these services for free to residents.
    Finally, what can we say about regulatory policies? Again, decisions by government
officials are efficient only if the private sector is left indifferent at the margin to any changes
in regulation. As with public services, the private sector benefits from any increase in after-
tax profits, and is affected by any changes in land rents that arise (directly or indirectly) in
response to these extra profits. With no extra user fees, though, there is no offsetting price
that can adjust so that the private sector can be left indifferent on net. As a result, officials
face inadequate incentives to put effort into industrial regulations benefiting private firms,
though they would face efficient incentives if there were separate policies for government-
owned firms. For similar reasons, there are inadequate incentives to regulate agriculture
well.
    While local governments in China control the allocation of land and did in past years
control the allocation of capital, they don’t control the allocation of labor. From their
perspective, too much labor ends up migrating to lightly taxed industries away from more
heavily taxed industries. As a result, local governments can potentially gain through
making use of any further instruments to shift production from lightly taxed to heavily
taxed industries. One such instrument is controls over trade between their jurisdiction and
the rest of China. In particular, each local government has an incentive to restrict imports
in heavily taxed industries and restrict exports in the most lightly taxed industries. By
shifting the composition of local production towards goods that are more heavily taxed,
government revenue in the jurisdiction increases. Largely, this increase comes at the
expense of government revenue in other jurisdictions, who lose export markets for their
most highly taxed goods and have a harder time buying elsewhere the most lightly taxed
commodities. National prices then fall for the more heavily taxed goods, and rise for the
more lightly taxed goods, weakening any further incentive to intervene to restrict trade.
These negative fiscal externalities result in an inefficient choice of government policies
from the joint perspective of local governments, providing a motivation for the national
government to intervene to lessen these trade distortions. Consistent with these forecasts,
Young (2000) and Bai et al. (2004) report evidence that local governments restricted trade
patterns, leading to too many firms of too small scale in the heavily taxed industries.



                                                11
3          Application of model to different time periods
We next use this general model to forecast the behavior of government officials during
particular sub-periods under the reforms in China, and how it should have changed over
time.

3.1         1979-1994
The initial allocation of resources in 1979 favored heavy industries at the expense of
agriculture and industries that catered to consumer demands. The government collected
revenue with a turnover tax, the industrial and commerical tax, on state-owned firms, by
directly controlling the use of state-owned firms’ profits, and by taking grain from peasants
and leaving them just enough for subsistence. Table 2 shows that between 1978 and the
early 1980s, government relied primarily on remitted profits from state-owned firms and
revenue from the industrial and commercial tax for its revenue. To economize on the cost
of revenue collection, the government used price scissors to channel profits and turnover
taxes (which were included in official prices) to a few industries located in large cities.
Agricultural goods were priced the lowest, followed by raw materials, energy, industrial
goods, consumer necessities, and then consumer durables. To capture price scissors, we
assume
                                  p01 ≥ p02 ≥ ... ≥ p0I ≥ p0f ≡ 1,                      (3.1)
so the lower numbered industries are higher-profit-margin consumer durables industries.
Here, the total number of industries is I, and the superscript 0 denotes planned prices.
The national government then used its control over the allocation of factors to produce
those goods demanded at these prices.
    We can characterize the resulting allocation under central planning as a market allo-
cation subject to a set of excise taxe rates, with the highest tax rate on consumer durables
and the lowest on agriculture, sufficient to induce firms to produce those goods demanded
by consumers at the prices p0i
    As part of the initial reforms, local governments obtained control and cash flow rights
for new firms they set up or sponsored as well as for existing small and medium-sized SOEs
and even some large SOEs. The local government not only received the tax payments from
these firms based on the newly introduced excise and profits taxes, but also controlled the
use of the firms’ remaining after-tax profits. As a result, the objective of local officials
was to maximize the sum of pre-tax profits and land rents, minus the cost of public
expenditures on local infrastructure and minus the effort expended on regulations:17
                     X
                           (p0i Qi − wLi − rKi ) + σF − G − Gf − Gh − e(R) − ef (Rf )   (3.2)
                       i
    17
         At least initially, user fees were unusual.



                                                       12
    This objective is a special case of equation (2.1), but with no private firms and no
income from land.18 Since the excise taxes used to maintain the initial prices did not affect
the allocation decisions of local officials, local governments faced undistorted incentives
but prevailing prices that differed sharply from marginal costs. They therefore faced strong
incentives to shift production toward goods that had previously faced high implicit tax
rates. They were in an effective position to do this, since local officials had control over
the allocation of existing bank credit among different firms.19 While existing industrial
workers were guaranteed a planned wage rate, a labor market nonetheless arose since new
“contract” workers could be hired at a market wage rate (Gordon and Li, 1995).
    What do these conditions imply for allocation decisions? The first order conditions
with respect to capital and land satisfy

                                       QjK =(r + σFK )/p0j ,                                    (3.3)
                                       QjA   =σFA /p0j .                                        (3.4)

Conditional on the initial prices, on efficiency grounds the allocation of factors within
industry should have been efficient, though too much capital and land would be shifted
out of agriculture into industry, assuming that the interest rate has been set below the
market-clearing level. Since the initial prices were not market-clearing prices, however, the
resulting allocations led to surplus output in the industries with artificially high prices and
shortages in the industries with artificially low prices. The resulting competition among
local governments to gain market shares in high-margin industries led to over-capacity
and inefficiently small scales in those industries, exposing the incompatibility of pricing
under the plan with decentralized decision-making.
    These growing surpluses and shortages quickly forced the national government to intro-
duce a dual-track pricing system, whereby a fixed quantity, rationed among firms, must be
sold at the original prices, and all further output must be sold at market prices (Li, 1999).
With undistorted incentives on local governments and market prices for all marginal trans-
actions, allocation decisions within industry should indeed have been efficient. Empirical
studies by Gordon and Li (1995), Groves et al. (1994), and Li (1997) confirm the efficiency
enhancing impact of the reform in the 1980s. It was also documented in Li (1997) that,
between 1980 and 1989, more investment did flow to industries that had higher combined
taxes and (after-tax) profits per yuan of sales and that product market competition among
enterprises did bring about marked improvements in total factor productivity. Competi-
tion, however, significant reduced state-owned firms’ profits. Table 2 shows significantly
smaller remitted profits and the presence of large subsidies to cover state-owned firms’
losses in the late 1980s.
  18
     Residential housing was provided by each firm for its employees rather than being rented from the
local government.
  19
     We assume that so little land could yet profitably be used in industry that A0f ≈ Af .




                                                  13
    However, given that σ < 1, there would be too little land allocated to agriculture.
With r ≈ 0, there would also be too little capital investment in agriculture, as is apparent
in the data. Figure 1 shows that the share of capital construction investment allocated
to agriculture started from a small 4.5% in 1980 and declined steadily to less than 1% in
1994. By comparison, the share of capital contruction investment allocated to industry
remained above 60% between 1985 and 1994.
    In spite of an unclear legal environment, some private firms did enter during this
period; see Figure 3 for evidence of a rising share of industrial output produced by non-
state firms between 1980 and 1993. However, since local governments could keep only
the tax revenue from private firms, there would be underinvestment and potentially even
no land allocated to private firms, unless private firms provided side payments to local
officials (implemented perhaps by registering firms as collectives), to compensate for any
lost profits from government-owned firms.
    What about public expenditures? First, without (much of) a private sector and no
land rents, there are no marginal effects on the private sector of any changes in public
services to industry, so government incentives lead to efficient outcomes for G as long as
changes in wage rates can be ignored. Agriculture would benefit directly from extra ser-
vices to agriculture, but without user fees, officials have no reason to take these benefits
into account, leading to inadequate incentives to provide Gf . Without user fees, there are
no incentives to provide Gh to households. Table 4 shows that shares of budgetary ex-
penditures on programs that support agriculture, education, scientific research, and social
subsidies fell between 1991 (the first year we have available data) and 1993, while shares of
budgetary expenditures on capital construction and services to industry, communications,
and distribution held steady. Extra-budgetary expenditures, if the data were available,
would likely be even more biased toward capital contruction than budgetary expenditures.
    Finally, what about regulatory policies? With full control over the entire return to
improvements in industrial productivity, officials should have invested the efficient level of
effort in designing effective regulations for industry. Sharing less in productivity gains in
agriculture, they would have invested less effort there. Data in Table 4 on fiscal support
from local governments for agriculture and non-agricultural sectors are consistent with
this prediction.
    In sum, the reforms starting in the early 1980s offered local officials strong incentives for
industrial development. These incentives encouraged officials to pour resources into sectors
that the planners had previously restricted. Our model forecasts an efficient allocation of
factors within industry, but an excessive shift of capital and land out of agriculture.

3.2   Post-1994
The Chinese government implemented extensive economic reforms around 1994, with many
further gradual changes since then. Our stylized summary of the institutions since 1994
are as follows:


                                               14
    The dual track system was phased out by the mid-1990s. Planned prices were largely
eliminated. This shift in infra-marginal rents, though, didn’t change marginal incentives
so shouldn’t have affected market allocations.
    Restrictions on the entry and growth of private firms were substantially eased, resulting
in a rapid growth of the private sector (Figure 3). The allocation of factors between
private and government-owned firms now becomes a serious choice, making details of the
tax system an important issue.
    The formal tax structure changed dramatically in 1994. Excise taxes with rates that
varied by industry were replaced by: 1) a VAT on mining and manufacturing industries
at a uniform rate of 17%, with local governments receiving 25% of the resulting revenue
collected from firms in the jurisdiction;20 2) a business tax (an excise tax on service in-
dustries), with the revenue going entirely to local governments; and 3) an excise tax on
luxury goods and goods with consumption externalities paid to the national government.
In addition, the statutory corporate income tax rate fell from 55% to 33%. The national
government received the corporate income taxes paid by financial institutions and firms
controlled directly by the national government, while local governments received the cor-
porate taxes paid by local firms.21 A personal income tax was created, with revenues going
entirely to local governments. In addition, the national government took control over the
administration of the taxes on firms, largely eliminating the ability of local governments
to hide the tax liabilities of local firms from the national government.
    The impact of this change in tax structure on the share of budgetary revenue between
national and local governments is apparent in Table 1. From 1993 to 1994, the budgetary
revenue of the national government rose from 2.7% of GDP to 6%, while the budgetary
revenue of local governments fell from 9.6% to 4.8%. And in 1994, Table 2 shows that
state-owned firms stopped remitting profits to governments. In Table 3, we report tax
revenues collected relative to GDP under the new tax regime. The VAT, business tax,
and the corporate income tax accounted for most of the revenues. Personal income taxes
also rose quickly to become the fourth largest revenue source. Tax revenue rose steadily
between 1995 and 2007.
    These various tax reforms should have had only limited effects on the incentives faced
by local officials when allocating factors to government-owned firms: The only change is
that the national government now collects some VAT revenue from these firms, so the
local government does not receive quite all of the pre-tax profits. However, the private
sector becomes increasingly important, in part because of a steady push towards selling
off control over firms owned by local governments. After a sale occurs, local governments
  20
     When first introduced, expenditures on fixed assets were not permitted as a deduction under the VAT.
Until 2009, the VAT was production-based rather than consumption-based. In addition, all of the local
share of the VAT from a multi-jurisdiction firm goes to the jurisdiction where the firm’s headquarters is
located.
  21
     Since 2002, the national government has received corporate income taxes on all new firms, though
local governments continued to keep corporate taxes from existing local firms.



                                                   15
simply receive their share of the taxes collected from these firms, lowering their incentive
to allocate resources to these firms.
    Another major policy change was to reduce local government’s control over the alloca-
tion of credit from the banking system, so that loans would be made based on commercial
principles. With a commercial market for credit, we then must presume that r becomes
a market clearing price. Overall investment in a jurisdiction no longer depends on the
amount of bank deposits in the jurisdiction. Some jurisdictions will then be net capital
exporters and others net capital importers, leading to a more efficient allocation of capital
across the national market.
    What can we then say about the relative rates of investment in different types of
activity? From the government’s perspective, the opportunity cost of investment in a
government-owned firm is now simply r, so that investment in these firms continues until
QjK = r. Private firms would choose to invest until (1 − sj )QiK = r + κi . Taxes discourage
investment in private firms, and to an extent, that differs by industry due to variation
in VAT coverage or in implicit tax rates on capital. Investment should therefore fall in a
firm once it is privatized. Government firms also have a differential advantage in sectors
where private firms face higher tax rates.
    Farmers continued to face agricultural taxes, but now can choose how much to invest
and will do so until (1 − σ)FK = r.22 In the earlier period, we forecast that QjK /FK < σ,
assuming r ≈ 0, but now forecast that QjK /FK = 1 − σ. If σ <.5, we then conclude that
capital flows out of government firms into agriculture following the reforms in 1994. A
yet larger shift in capital toward agriculture should have occurred more recently following
the elimination of taxes on agriculture. Indeed, as shown in Figure 1, the share of capital
construction allocated to agriculture rose from 1% in 1994 to around 3.5% by 2001, while
the share of capital construction allocated to industry fell from 70% to 60%. Figure 2
also shows that the numbers of tractors per 100 square kilometers of arable land increased
rapidly after 1994, and the pace acelerated after 2004 when provinces in China started to
reduce and eventually to eliminate agricultural taxes.
    When private firms and farmers are left indifferent to adding more capital, however,
local governments gain from further capital investment, particularly in private firms, due
to the resulting taxes. They can add to the local capital stock by favoring capital-intensive
over labor-intensive industries. One way to do this is to continue to restrict imports to
the jurisdiction of more capital-intensive products in order to increase demand for local
production in these industries.
    With the loss of control over the allocation of capital, the remaining control over the
allocation of land took on greater importance. Due to the rapid rate of growth in industry
and the pressure for large reallocations of land, land allocations became an important
issue.
    Rather than allocating land specifically to one firm or another, the practice instead
 22
      Insecure use rights to the land, though, may inhibit investments in agriculture.



                                                     16
has been to auction the land to the highest bidder. The key question is then the amount
of land to remove from agriculture and make available for industrial or residential use.
Given the institutions prevailing since 1994, we then forecast that too much land would
be left in agriculture relative to industry. The excess land in agriculture keeps the auction
price high and means that the required compensation to farmers remains low due to the
resulting low marginal product of land in agriculture.
    Due to the restrictions on land available for industry, industrial rents are artificially
high. As a result, land rents have become a major source of finance for local governments
in China. UBS economist Tao Wang estimated that the national average extra-budgetary
revenue from land auctions is between 17% and 24% of total local government revenues.23
In coastal cities where property prices have risen sharply since 2003, the contribution of
land sales to local government budgets should be significantly higher. This institution is
very much reminiscent of the role of land controls in place in Hong Kong, where again the
government has limited that allocation of land to industrial and residential uses.
    The economic reforms also substantially changed the incentives to finance public ser-
vices. Part of the change was the growing use of user fees to finance infrastructure as well
as services to households. Many services (e.g., highways) are provided by private firms, in
principle, financed fully by user fees. Since the private sector as a whole loses at the mar-
gin from increased services due to the resulting increases in land rents, local governments
gain from increased services and therefore have an incentive to subsidize private firms to
provide more services. They can do this by allocating extra land to these private firms,
generating an additional source of revenue for these firms.
    What can we say about the efficiency of spending on Gf ? User fees such as road tolls
now equal the after-tax benefit to farmers from the use of public services, e.g., (1−σ)FG =
uf . As seen from equation (2.6), though, allocations are then efficient only if there are
no net effects of the extra public services on land rents. However, any extra services to
agriculture benefit farmers due to the increase in compensation paid for land removed from
agriculture and also benefit the non-agricultural sector through a fall in land rents there.
To that extent, government incentives to provide services to agriculture are insufficient.
    The model forecasts that Gh will be provided only if fully financed with user fees. The
model omits, though, several complicating factors affecting, in particular, expenditures on
education. For one, more educated workers will be more productive, generating extra VAT
revenue.24 In addition, educated workers may be a complement to capital investments,
benefiting officials by adding to the taxable capital stock in the jurisdiction. Offsetting
these benefits, however, more educated workers may be more likely to leave the jurisdiction,
e.g., going off to university, lowering the tax base for the jurisdiction. There would then
be stronger incentives to provide education at a price below marginal costs in urban areas,
  23
     Tao Wang, “Understanding Land Transfer and Local Government Debt Problem (in Chinese),”
http://cn.wsj.com/gb/20100225/COL174204.asp, accessed on March 9, 2010.
  24
     This extra revenue will show up, though, only when these new workers enter the labor force. Officials
commonly are reassigned after about three years, and as a result, may ignore most of these benefits.


                                                   17
where workers are less likely to leave if they receive better education.

3.3    Labor mobility
Contrary to our assumptions above, there is some labor mobility in China, even if mobility
is clearly restricted as seen from the large differences in wage rates between rural and urban
and between inland and coastal residents. Officially, individuals need to change their hukou
in order to move, requiring approval of both the new jurisdiction and the old jurisdiction.
Mobility therefore requires that the worker as well as both jurisdictions benefit. For a move
to benefit both jurisdictions, side payments between the two jurisdictions will normally
be needed. However, we often see jurisdictions allowing migrant workers to enter without
granting them official residence.25 Without official residence, however, migrants are not
eligible for public services. Our aim in this section is to understand the implications of
labor mobility for government incentives.26
     To begin with, what net benefits does a jurisdiction receive from having workers enter,
and to what degree does the answer depend on the skill level of the worker and whether the
worker is given hukou status? Making use of expression (2.1), we can calculate the impact
on a jurisdiction from a marginal increase in the number of workers. The net benefits/costs
of having an extra worker consist of several components. First, the extra output increases
sales tax revenue. Second, the extra labor force will generate further capital investment,
leading to extra tax revenue both directly due to the implicit tax on capital and indirectly
through further increases in sales tax revenue. Third, land rents change: Industrial land
rents go up due to the increases in both capital and labor, residential land rents increase
due to the larger industrial labor force, but the compensation that must be paid to farmers
for any further land taken out of agriculture also goes up since the value of agricultural
land increases. Fourth, the new worker must be provided public services, but pays any
associated user fees. If user fees do not cover the full cost of services, reflecting for example
the pressures from the national government to provide free education, then the jurisdiction
loses to the extent that the worker needs such services. The demand for services is reduced
substantially if the worker is not allowed to shift hukou to the jurisdiction.
     The size of these net gains will vary by jurisdiction and by type of worker for a variety
of reasons. The gain in sales tax revenue depends on the industrial composition of the
jurisdiction. For example, if the jurisdiction is mainly agricultural, then their gains are
small given that agriculture is no longer taxed. The gain is also larger in jurisdictions
with a high local wage rate, since then the marginal product of labor is higher, leading to
larger increases in sales tax revenue. The increase in capital investment would normally
be larger the more capital intensive the key industries in the jurisdiction are. Capital
  25
     Many coastal provinces in China are home to millions of migrant workers from inland provinces who
hold only temporary residency permits.
  26
     There are in fact experiments under way at the time of the writing of this paper investigating the
economic implications of easing migration restrictions.



                                                  18
intensity should be higher in part when the local wage rate is higher. To the extent that
capital and skilled labor are complements, then skilled labor attracts more capital, leading
to a greater increase in tax revenue from capital. The increase in industrial land rents
would normally be greater the larger the increase in capital and labor, while the higher
compensation to farmers for their land is less important in more urban jurisdictions.
     What migration do we then expect to see? Workers will want to move to jurisdic-
tions that provide them higher utility. We assume that their utility can be expressed by
U (w, q, Gh , u): Utility should be increasing in the wage rate, falling due to higher land
prices, and higher when the package of public services and user fees is more attractive. In
order to attract workers, a jurisdiction faces an incentive to provide cheaper housing and
more attractive public services. To the extent that communities gain from extra workers,
competition can force down the price of public services and housing below the values we
forecast above.
     When will the old and new jurisdictions together agree to shift the migrant’s hukou?
Without a change in hukou, the old jurisdiction normally loses from the migration. Con-
sequently, with unrestricted migration, the resulting rate of migration can be excessive
since neither the migrant nor the new jurisdiction takes these losses to the previous juris-
diction into account. If the previous jurisdiction does not receive compensation, though,
jurisdictions that are threatened with a loss of residents can create barriers to migration,
for example making it difficult to transfer agricultural land.
     The new jurisdiction per se has an incentive to avoid making a side payment to the old
jurisdiction. Only migrants who receive a change in hukou are eligible for public services,
providing a further incentive on the new jurisdiction not to seek to change the worker’s
hukou. However, without a change in hukou, workers face a higher implicit price for public
services, perhaps because their best option is to leave their family in their old jurisdiction
where services continue to be available. Because of these higher costs, workers would be
willing to migrate only if other aspects of the new location are more attractive, e.g., wage
rates are higher. Given the added costs beyond the marginal costs of the services when the
family is divided between two locations, there should be a feasible agreement between the
two jurisdictions to change the worker’s hukou. This agreement may even involve the old
jurisdiction compensating the new one for the provision of public services to the worker’s
family. This pressure to change hukou status is limited though if the migrants do not
place much value on the resulting public services, compared to the cost of these services.
     We have heard anecdotes of jurisdictions trying to prevent entry of unskilled workers.
Why might this be? Industries vary in their relative demands for skilled versus unskilled
workers. The industrial composition of the jurisdiction should then in equilibrium adjust
so that demands for different skill levels match supplies. Given that some industries pay
more in taxes than others, a jurisdiction would then want to adjust the skill composition of
its labor force to match the desired skill composition of the more heavily taxed industries.
If skill-intensive industries are more heavily taxed, as seems plausible, then jurisdictions
have an incentive to increase the ratio of skilled to unskilled workers, by preventing the

                                             19
in-migration of unskilled workers. For example, the government of Zhongshan, a city
in Guangzhou province, started to implement a scoring system to screen non-resident
applicants. The system assigns 80 points for a college degree, 90 points for a graduate
degree, 10 points for owning property in the city, and one point for each 50,000 yuan
investment in the city for up to 10 points. The city government would offer a migrant
worker and his dependents basic medical care if he has a cumulative score at or above 60,
job training if his score reaches 70, equal access to public services that hukou-holders are
entitled to if his score reaches 90, and hukou if he accumulates a score of 100 or above.
The scoring system makes transparent the preference of the local government for migrant
workers.


4    Incentives generated by promotion and retention proce-
     dures
Another important source of incentives for local officials in China arises from the implica-
tions of their performance for possible promotion to higher positions, or possible demotion
(or worse). The national government attempts to regulate directly the behavior of local
officials, compensating for the poor financial incentives faced by local officials by retaining
some elements of centralized allocations.
    Current interventions by the national government take many forms. For one, the
national government has ruled that local governments are obliged to provide free education
through grade nine. We found above, though, that providing such free education is against
the interests of local officials. Given the difficulties faced by the national government in
keeping tabs on a huge country, any such attempts at oversight will likely have only
modest effect.27 Given this problem, the national government more recently has provided
additional national funds to help free students of any remaining fees for education up
through grade nine, requiring that local governments provide matching funds of their own
for this purpose. Our model forecasts, though, that local officials have an incentive to
provide education only if the resulting fees fully cover the cost. They have no incentive
to provide a free education even when the national government finances a fraction of the
costs.
    Over time, the national government has made increasingly explicit its mechanism for
judging the qualifications of local officials for possible promotion: Judgments will be based
in good part on the rate of growth in national tax revenue from the jurisdiction. The
preferences of other top officials in the jurisdiction are also taken into account. How do
these added incentives affect our prior results?
    Previously, the objectives of officials reflected the fiscal profits they controlled while in
office. National promotion policies induce officials to give some weight as well to national
  27
     For example, education can be free of tuition, but there can be many fees imposed (for uniforms,
books, etc.).


                                                 20
tax revenue. The national government collects 75% of the overall VAT payments, increas-
ing the importance of sales tax revenue. They collect all of the corporate tax revenue from
new firms and from state firms, tending to equalize the incentives local officials face to aid
one category of firm compared to another. The national government, though, does not
collect any revenue from agriculture, so the added incentives increase the weight placed on
industry compared with agriculture. Since the VAT does not allow deductions for capital,
promotion incentives create yet more of an incentive to favor capital-intensive industries
over other sectors.
    Having promotion decisions depend on the preferences of other top officials in the
jurisdiction helps address any agency problems in the jurisdiction. In a hierarchical struc-
ture, officials at any given level in the hierarchy require the support of those in the next
lower level. Given these links at each level of the hierarchy, even the top official implicitly
needs to worry about the preferences of the lowest ranked officials. While leading to an
alignment of interests among all officials, though, this structure does not in itself create
any reason to care about the welfare of non-officials, supporting our omitting the utility
of residents from the objective function for local government officials.
    The national government also affects the incentives faced by local governments through
its control over the allocation of intergovenmental transfers of funds. Funds are in part
allocated based on geography, going particularly to inland provinces. Since residents lose
access to any benefits resulting from these transfers if they leave the jurisdiction, these
transfers result in less migration of workers from inland regions that receive greater per
capita transfers. Since we forecast excessive migration previously, transfers can then help
ease the resulting misallocations.


5    Alternative policies and the resulting incentives for local
     officials
Since promotion standards and centralized allocations of funding cannot easily be tailored
to local conditions, these interventions inevitably lead to misallocations. The interven-
tions may still improve on outcomes to the extent that local officials face poorly designed
financial incentives. To the degree that financial incentives were altered so as to lead to
more efficient decentralized allocations, the central government would face less pressure
to intervene directly. How then would the inefficiencies generated by current sources of
finance for local governments be affected by plausible changes in the tax structure?
    Under existing incentives faced by officials, outcomes are inefficient on many dimen-
sions. Governments make use of their controls over the allocation of land to keep prices
high for industrial and residential uses, and low for agriculture. Since any movement of
resources from agriculture to industry generates more tax revenue, officials will make use
of their control over public services and regulations to aid industry relative to agriculture.
They will make use of their regulatory powers to favor more highly taxed (often the more


                                              21
capital-intensive) local industries. To finance public services with user fees, the required
fee must equal the average cost of the service per user in order to break even. But the ser-
vice is used efficiently only if the fee also equals the marginal cost per user. High tolls on
the roads, for example, unduly discourage usage. Migration of workers is limited, leading
to dramatic differences in wage rates across locations, suggesting large inefficiencies from
the misallocation of workers. Along each dimension, what policy changes might lead to
more efficient decentralized allocations?
    Taxes avoid favoring one industry over another, for a given local population, only if the
taxes collected are the same for each worker, regardless of the industry in which a worker
is employed. This equalization of taxes paid per worker would exist under a variety of al-
ternative tax structures. In principle, it arises with a consumption-based VAT, since here
taxes paid depend on each worker’s consumption expenditures but not on the industry
where they are employed.28 A retail sales tax creates equivalent incentives, but also can
have a high evasion rate due to the many small retail firms that are hard to monitor and
due to the ease of cross-border shopping. A third alternative is to confine such a consump-
tion tax to those goods that can easily be monitored, including for example residential
housing, ownership of a car, and a range of other goods such as electricity consumption
and phone usage. Differential rates by form of consumption induce a misallocation of
consumption across commodities, but the efficiency costs here are normally second-order.
Under these alternative tax bases, revenue does not depend on the industry in which a
worker is employed. Revenue also increases as income per capita and the population in the
jurisdiction rise, giving officials an incentive to raise per capita income and to attract new
residents. For these reasons, it is not surprising that the principal sources of tax revenue
among local governments in the United States are a property tax and a local retail sales
tax (that covers in practice around a third of overall consumption).
    What policy alternatives might lead to a more efficient allocation of land? Since
officials are compensated heavily based on the price differential of land in alternative
uses, they face strong incentives to shift land to higher-value uses. Officials shift land too
slowly on efficiency grounds to take advantage of their market power. However, due to
the turnover of officials, each generation of official will choose to transfer additional land
to higher-value uses. As long as this transfer occurs through a sale rather than a lease of
land, the resulting drop in rents on inframarginal units sold by previous officials is borne
by past buyers rather than by the government. According to equation (2.4), allocations
therefore converge towards one with QjA = QiA = FA as the additional transfers by each
generation of official (A0f − Af ) converge toward zero. Misallocation of land therefore
seems to be primarily a transition problem in the absence of any mechanism through
which different generations of officials could collude, acting as if there were one official in
  28
    In practice, though, a consumption-based VAT is hard to enforce, since it is very difficult to monitor
the flow of goods into and out of the jurisdiction.. It would also be difficult to monitor trade within a
multi-jurisdictional firm, given the use of transfer pricing.



                                                   22
office indefinitely.29
    One other current source of inefficiency arises from the high user fees for public services.
When the average cost exceeds the marginal cost for a service, as should be the case for
highways, for example, then the services are underutilized. Even when the marginal and
average costs are equal, as could be true for education, users may face binding liquidity
constraints that prevent them for undertaking an investment in human capital even if the
eventual rate of return is very high. As seen above, though, officials have no incentive to
provide these services unless doing so generates enough extra revenue to cover the costs.
    What alternatives exist? Mobility is the mechanism emphasized in the Tiebout model
to induce officials to provide the efficient level and composition of services. To the extent
people are mobile, officials are pressed to adopt policies that attract potential residents and
induce existing residents to stay. With intense competition, policies end up maximizing
the utility of residents and are efficient. To attract additional residents, the key means
available to officials is to reduce the price and increase the quality of public services. The
residual costs of the extra public services can then be financed out of the other taxes paid
by the new residents.
    A natural fear if restrictions on mobility are relaxed is that cities with high wages will
quickly develop shanty-towns on their periphery. To some degree this occurs already, due
to the temporary residents who lack hukou status. An alternative to the hukou procedure
for limiting the population of a city is to restrict residence to those who own or have signed
a lease for a registered housing unit in the city, and perhaps meet occupancy restrictions
(number of people per square meter). People can then move freely, and property values
adjust as jurisdictions become more or less attractive. Competition among jurisdictions for
residents still creates incentives on officials to provide higher quality public services, even
if the population remains unchanged, since a more attractive jurisdiction attracts higher
income residents, who consume more and so pay more in consumption taxes. Property
values also rise, leading to greater property tax payments.
    One factor inhibiting mobility is the lack of a market for farmland. Those working in
agriculture then face the potential loss of much of the value of this use-right to the land
if they migrate. Only if the utility gain is large enough, given these hurdles, will those
currently working in agriculture move. With easier transfers of use rights, there would
be greater mobility and more pressure on officials to provide the efficient level of public
services.
  29
    However, as we discussed earlier, a policy of the central government that preserves at least 1.8 billion
mu of agricultural land could be serving as a means of collusion among different generations of officials to
keep the value of non-agricultural land permanently higher than agricultural land.




                                                    23
6    Conclusions
The Chinese economy has benefited dramatically from the decentralization of decision-
making to individual firms and workers, regarding what to produce, how to organize
production, and where to work. The question focused on in this paper is the feasibility
of an equivalent decentralization within the government. China, like the United States,
has a federal system of government, with national, provincial, county, municipal, and
village levels of government. Given the huge size and diversity of the country, it is difficult
for the national government to make allocation decisions for all of these different levels of
government, just as it was difficult for the national government to make allocation decisions
for all of the many firms in the economy. To what degree can decentralized decision-making
within the government lead to more efficient outcomes? This can occur only to the degree
that the economic incentives faced by local officials are designed appropriately.
    In this paper, we examined the economic incentives faced by local officials in China
over the course of the economic reforms. In doing so, we made use of a number of the
standard presumptions in the Tiebout model. In particular, we assumed that local officials
benefit from the tax revenue received by their jurisdiction plus any income from renting
or selling land minus the costs of public services. Given these financial incentives, what
allocation decisions do we expect local officials to make? The behavior of local officials
forecast by the model, to our mind, corresponds closely to the stylized facts we see in the
data. If we accept this model as a valid characterization for how officials behave, then
the model provides a mechanism to help guide the redesign of these incentives in order
to induce officials to allocate resources more efficiently. Potential reforms were discussed
briefly, though many others may also reduce the inefficiencies that result under current
incentives.


References
Bai, C.-E., Y. Du, Z. Tao, and S. Y. Tong, Local protectionism and regional specialization:
  evidence from China’s industries, Journal of International Economics, 63 (2), 397–417,
  2004.

Banerjee, A., and E. Duflo, Addressing absence, The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  20 (1), 117–132, 2006.

Buchanan, J. M., and G. Tullock, The Calculus of Consent, University of Michigan Press,
  Ann Arbor, 1962.

Gordon, R. H., and W. Li, The change in productivity of Chinese state enterprises, 1983–
 1987, Journal of Productivity Analysis, 6, 5–26, 1995.




                                              24
Gordon, R. H., and W. Li, Taxation and economic growth in China, in Critical Issues in
 China’s Growth and Development, edited by Y. K. Kwan and E. S. H. Yu, pp. 22–40,
 City University of Hong Kong, Ashgate, 2005.

Grossman, G., and E. Helpman, Protection for sale, American Economic Review, 84,
  833–50, 1994.

Groves, T., Y. Hong, J. McMillan, and B. Naughton, Autonomy and incentives in Chinese
  state enterprises, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 183–209, 1994.

Hussain, A., and N. Stern, Public finances, the role of the state, and economic transfor-
 mation, 1978-2020, in Public Finance in China: Reform and Growth for a Harmonious
 Society, edited by J. Lou and S. Wang, pp. 13–38, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.,
 2008.

Li, W., The impact of economic reform on the performance of Chinese state
  enterprises,1980–1989, Journal of Political Economy, 105 (5), 1080–1106, 1997.

Li, W., A tale of two reforms, Rand Journal of Economics, 30, 120–136, 1999.

O’Brien, K. J., and L. Li, Accommodating "democracy" in a one-party state: Introducing
  village elections in China, The China Quarterly, (162), 465–489, 2000.

Wang, F., and X. Zuo, Inside china’s cities: Institutional barriers and opportunities for
 urban migrants, The American Economic Review, 89 (2), 276–280, 1999.

Xu, C., The institutional foundation of China’s reform and development, University of
 Hong Kong Working Paper, 2010.

Young, A., The razor’s edge: Distortions and incremental reform in the People’s Republic
  of China, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (4), 1091–1135, 2000.




                                           25
Figure 1: Share of capital construction investment allocated to agriculture and to industry
(mining, manufacturing, utilities, and transportation) between 1978 and 2002. Source:
National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBS). (From 2003, NBS stopped reporting capital
construction investment and replaced it with fixed asset investment, a broader measure of
capital formation.)




                                            26
Figure 2: Agricultural machinery: number of tractors per 100 square kilometers of arable
land bewteen 1979 and 2007. Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBS).




                                          27
Figure 3: Share of non-state-owned enterprises in gross industrial output. The large drop
in the share in 1998 was a result of a change in sampling methodology that excludes
non-state enterprises with annual sales less than 5 million yuan. Source: China Statistical
Yearbook 2009, National Bureau of Statistics of China.




                                            28
     Table 1: Public Finance in China, 1978-2007. Revenues and expenditures are reported as percentages of GDP and
     are calculated using data from the 2008 China Statistical Yearbook.


                            Central Government                           Provincial and Local Governments
                           Extra-                    Extra-                    Extra-                   Extra-
             Budgetary   budgetary Budgetary        budgetary    Budgetary budgetary Budgetary        budgetary
      Year    revenue     revenue    expenditure   expenditure    revenue     revenue    expenditure expenditure
      1978      4.8                      14.6                       26.2                     16.2
      1980      6.3                      14.7                       19.3                     12.4
      1985      8.5                       8.8                       13.7                     13.4
      1990      5.3          5.7         5.4           5.6          10.4         8.8         11.1         8.9
      1991      4.3          6.3         5.0           5.8          10.2         8.5         10.5         8.4
      1992      3.6          6.3         4.3           5.9           9.3         8.0          9.6         7.6
      1993      2.7          0.7         3.7           0.6           9.6         3.4          9.4         3.2




29
      1994      6.0          0.6         3.6           0.5           4.8         3.3          8.4         3.1
      1995      5.4          0.5         3.3           0.6           4.9         3.4          7.9         3.3
      1996      5.1          1.3         3.0           1.5           5.3         4.1          8.1         3.9
      1997      5.4          0.2         3.2           0.2           5.6         3.4          8.5         3.2
      1998      5.8          0.2         3.7           0.2           5.9         3.5          9.1         3.3
      1999      6.5          0.3         4.6           0.2           6.2         3.5         10.1         3.3
      2000      7.0          0.2         5.6           0.2           6.5         3.6         10.4         3.3
      2001      7.8          0.3         5.3           0.2           7.1         3.6         12.0         3.3
      2002      8.6          0.4         5.6           0.2           7.1         3.4         12.7         3.0
      2003      8.7          0.3         5.5           0.2           7.3         3.1         12.7         2.8
      2004      9.1          0.2         4.9           0.2           7.4         2.7         12.9         2.5
      2005      9.0          0.2         4.8           0.3           8.2         2.8         13.7         2.6
      2006      9.7          0.2         4.7           0.2           8.6         2.8         14.4         2.6
      2007      11.1         0.0         4.6           0.0           9.4                     15.4
Table 2: Tax and Non-Tax Revenues as Percentages of GDP, 1978-2007. The tax and
non-tax items listed in the table are incomplete. We selected a few items that are relevent
to our discussion in the paper. The sum of the parts is therefore smaller than the total.
Source: China Statistical Yearbook 2008, National Bureau of Statistics of China.

                                       Tax Revenue                           Non-Tax Revenue
                          Industrial                  Corporate   Remitted
                 Tax      Commercial   Agricultural    Income       SOE         Subsidies   Education
 Year   Total   Revenue      Tax           Tax          Tax        Profits      to SOEs        Fee
 1978   31.1     14.2        12.7          0.8                      15.7
 1980   25.5     12.6        11.2          0.6                       9.6
 1982   22.8     13.1        11.7          0.6                       5.6
 1984   22.8     13.1        11.2          0.5                       3.8
 1985   22.2     22.6        12.2          0.5           7.7         0.5           -5.6
 1986   20.7     20.3        11.7          0.4           6.7         0.4           -3.2
 1987   18.2     17.7        10.6          0.4           5.5         0.4           -3.1
 1988   15.7     15.9        9.9           0.5           4.5         0.3           -3.0
 1989   15.7     16.1        10.4          0.5           4.1         0.4           -3.5
 1990   15.7     15.1        10.0          0.5           3.8         0.4           -3.1
 1991   14.5     13.7        9.1           0.4           3.4         0.3           -2.3        0.1
 1992   12.9     12.2        8.3           0.4           2.7         0.2           -1.7        0.1
 1993   12.3     12.0        9.0           0.4           1.9         0.1           -1.2        0.1
 1994   10.8     10.6        8.1           0.5           1.5                       -0.8        0.1
 1995   10.3      9.9        7.5           0.5           1.4                       -0.5        0.1
 1996   10.4      9.7        7.4           0.5           1.4                       -0.5        0.1
 1997   11.0     10.4                      0.5           1.2                       -0.5        0.1
 1998   11.7     11.0                      0.5           1.1                       -0.4        0.1
 1999   12.8     11.9                      0.5           0.9                       -0.3        0.1
 2000   13.5     12.7                      0.5           1.0                       -0.3        0.1
 2001   14.9     14.0                      0.4           2.4                       -0.3        0.2
 2002   15.7     14.7                      0.6           2.6                       -0.2        0.2
 2003   16.0     14.7                      0.6           2.1                       -0.2        0.2
 2004   16.5     15.1                      0.6           2.5                       -0.1        0.2
 2005   17.3     15.7                      0.5           2.9                       -0.1        0.2
 2006   18.3     16.4                      0.5           3.3                       -0.1        0.2
 2007   20.6     18.3                      0.6           3.5




                                                 30
     Table 3: Tax Revenue as Percentage of GDP: 1994–2007. Data on taxes come from China’s State Administration
     of Taxation (www.chinatax.gov.cn). Data on GDP are from China’s National Bureau of Statistics. From 2005, the
     State Administration of Taxation changed the categories of taxes in its statistical reports.


                                   1994    1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007
      Tax Revenue                  10.54   9.99    10.05   10.54   10.95   11.66   12.92   14.03   14.27   15.14   16.12   16.77   17.66   19.66
        National                           7.32    7.07    7.21    7.40    7.91    9.11    9.43    9.51    10.13   11.19   11.59   12.29   13.69
        Local                              2.67    2.99    3.33    3.55    3.74    3.81    4.36    4.46    4.66    4.93    5.18    5.37    5.98
      VAT Total                    5.53    5.08    5.01    5.01    5.18    5.69    6.27    6.56    6.84    7.47    7.89
        VAT Domestic               4.86    4.44    4.31    4.28    4.49    4.52    4.76    5.05    5.27    5.43    5.60    5.81    6.05    6.21




31
        VAT on Imports             0.67    0.64    0.70    0.73    0.69    1.17    1.51    1.52    1.57    2.04    2.29
      Consumption Tax (CT)         1.07    0.95    0.92    0.92    1.01    0.97    0.90    0.88    0.90    0.90    0.97
        CT Domestic                1.04    0.93    0.90    0.90    1.00    0.96    0.88    0.86    0.88    0.88    0.94    0.89    0.88    0.88
        CT on Imports              0.03    0.02    0.01    0.01    0.01    0.01    0.01    0.01    0.02    0.03    0.03
      VAT and CT on Imports                                                                                                2.29    2.33    2.45
      Business Tax                 1.41    1.45    1.52    1.73    1.94    1.92    1.92    1.93    2.07    2.12    2.25    2.30    2.41    2.62
      Corporate Income Tax (CIT)   1.33    1.26    1.16    1.19    1.03    1.14    1.47    1.96    1.66    1.73    1.97    2.37    2.60    3.07
      CIT on Foreign Firms         0.10    0.12    0.15    0.18    0.22    0.25    0.33    0.47    0.52    0.52    0.58    0.62    0.72    0.78
      Personal Income Tax          0.15    0.22    0.28    0.33    0.41    0.47    0.67    0.92    1.02    1.05    1.09    1.14    1.15    1.27
      Other Taxes                  0.94    0.90    1.02    1.17    1.17    1.23    1.35    1.31    1.27    1.34    1.37    1.35    1.51    2.40
      Export Rebates               -0.94   -0.92   -1.18   -0.55   -0.53   -0.71   -0.83   -0.99   -1.06   -1.51   -1.38   -1.83   -2.01   -2.10
Table 4: Local Government Budgetary Expeditures by Selected Programs, as Percent-
ages of Total Budgetary Expenditures. Source: China Statistics Yearbook 2007, National
Bureau of Statistics of China.

                                                                Services to
                                     Culture,                    Industry
          Capital                    Eduation,                Communications     Social       Social
 Year   Construction   Agriculture    Science     Education    & Distribution   Subsidies   Insurance
 1991      8.46           9.61         27.19        16.26          1.63           2.91
 1992       8.7           9.39          27.3        15.97          1.72           2.56
 1993      8.47           8.74         25.65        15.34          1.57           2.24
 1994      7.26           8.78         28.22         17.5          1.58           2.33
 1995      8.51           7.95         27.34        16.99          1.42           2.37
 1996       8.8           7.87         26.66        16.61          1.44           2.19
 1997      8.72           7.53         25.63        15.75          1.44            2.1
 1998      10.14          7.26         24.93        15.83          0.98           2.15        1.77
 1999      11.75          6.74          23.8        15.44          0.97           1.97         3.6
 2000      10.54          6.65         23.64        15.67          1.04           2.03        5.33
 2001      12.54          6.23         22.85         15.5          1.06           2.02        5.69
 2002      12.37          6.43         23.11        15.93          1.08           2.42        6.29
 2003      11.07           5.8          23.2        15.65          1.16           2.87        6.49
 2004      10.17          7.54         22.45        15.28          1.35            2.7        6.45
 2005      10.64          6.54         21.93        14.83           1.4           2.83        6.28
 2006      9.55           6.46         22.04        14.74          1.47           2.96        6.19




                                             32
