                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DETERMINANTS OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

                                          Bruce A. Blonigen
                                            Jeremy Piger

                                        Working Paper 16704
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16704


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




We thank Theo Eicher, Kathryn Russ, Deborah Swenson and session participants at a Western Economic
Association session for helpful comments. Any errors or omissions are completely our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Bruce A. Blonigen and Jeremy Piger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Determinants of Foreign Direct Investment
Bruce A. Blonigen and Jeremy Piger
NBER Working Paper No. 16704
January 2011
JEL No. C52,F21,F23

                                              ABSTRACT

Empirical studies of bilateral foreign direct investment (FDI) activity show substantial differences
in specifications with little agreement on the set of covariates that are (or should be) included. We
use Bayesian statistical techniques that allow one to select from a large set of candidates those variables
most likely to be determinants of FDI activity. The variables with consistently high inclusion probabilities
are traditional gravity variables, cultural distance factors, parent-country per capita GDP, relative labor
endowments, and regional trade agreements. Variables with little support for inclusion are multilateral
trade openness, host country business costs, host-country infrastructure (including credit markets),
and host-country institutions. Of particular note, our results suggest that many covariates found significant
by previous studies are not robust.


Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu

Jeremy Piger
Depart. of Economics
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
jpiger@uoregon.edu
1. Introduction

       Empirical analyses of the factors determining foreign direct investment (FDI) across

countries have employed a variety of econometric specifications. Many previous studies of

cross-country FDI activity have used a gravity equation, which mainly controls for the economic

size of the parent and host countries, the geographic distance separating the countries, and

proxies for certain economic frictions. Like trade flows, this specification does a reasonably

good job of fitting the observed data, but leaves one wondering if such a parsimonious

specification captures all relevant factors.

       Recent papers by Carr, Markusen and Maskus (2001) and Bergstrand and Egger (2007)

have developed theoretical models of multinational enterprise’s (MNE’s) foreign investment

decisions that suggest additional possible factors that determine FDI patterns. These studies

point out a number of modifications to a standard gravity model that may be necessary to

accurately explain FDI patterns. First, while gravity variables may adequately capture

“horizontal” motivations for FDI, where firms look to replicate their operations in other countries

to be more proximate to consumers in those markets, additional controls are necessary to allow

for “vertical” motivations of FDI, where firms look for low-cost locations for labor-intensive

production. For example, these studies introduce measures of relative labor endowments in the

host country with the expectation that countries with relatively high shares of unskilled labor will

be attractive locations for MNEs due to lower wages. In addition, these studies show that FDI

decisions by MNEs are complex enough that interactions between key variables (e.g., GDP and

skilled labor endowments) may be necessary to account for nonlinear effects of these variables

on FDI patterns. Head and Ries (2008) differs from these previous studies by modeling FDI as

arising from decisions by firms to acquire and control foreign assets (i.e., cross-border mergers




                                                                                                    1
and acquisitions), rather than development of new (or greenfield) plants. Their analysis of FDI

patterns highlights the potential role of common culture and language between countries.

        While these prior studies have been important in deepening our understanding of the

factors that determine cross-country FDI patterns, they have generally focused on regression

models involving specific sets of covariates determined by the researcher and the particular

theoretical framework for FDI they chose to examine. By conditioning on a particular regression

model specification, this practice ignores uncertainty regarding the model specification itself,

which can have dramatic consequences on inference.1 Most notably, inference regarding the

effects of included covariates can depend critically on what other covariates are included versus

excluded.

        In this paper, we take a Bayesian approach to confront uncertainty regarding the

appropriate set of covariates to include in a regression model explaining FDI activity. From a

Bayesian perspective, incorporating such uncertainty is conceptually straightforward. The

choice of covariates, or “model”, is treated as an additional parameter that lies in the space of

potential models, which allows us to compute the posterior probability that each potential model

is the true model that generated the data. Posterior distributions for objects of interest, such as the

effect of a particular covariate, are then averaged across alternative models, using these posterior

model probabilities as weights. This procedure, known as Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA),

produces inferences that are not conditioned on a particular model.

        Although conceptually straightforward, BMA is practically difficult when the set of

possible models is large, as direct calculation of posterior probabilities for all models becomes

infeasible. In our application, we have a large set of potential covariates, which yields an


1For discussion and examples, see Leamer, 1978; Hodges, 1987; Moulton, 1991; Draper, 1995; Kass and Raftery,
1995; Raftery, 1996; and Fernandez, Ley and Steel, 2001a.


                                                                                                           2
extremely large set of possible models (  1.4 x 1017 ). To sidestep this difficulty, we use

techniques designed to obtain random draws of models from the probability distribution defined

by the posterior model probabilities. Such draws are made possible even when the posterior

model probabilities are unknown by using the MC3 algorithm of Madigan and York (1995).

These random model draws are then used to construct estimates of the posterior model

probabilities.

         Our set of potential FDI determinants is meant to be comprehensive, and includes a

combination of covariates proposed by the previously mentioned studies, as well as other prior

literature on FDI. We mainly examine cross-sectional patterns for the year 2000.2 We examine

both levels and log-linear regressions, placing more weight on our results for the log-linear

regressions because most previous studies have used a logarithmic transformation to address

skewness in the FDI variable. We also examine three different measures of FDI – FDI stock,

affiliate sales, and cross-border merger and acquisition activity – in order to better compare with

a broader set of prior studies. At the end, we also explore a specification that first differences

across 1990 and 2000 to control for bilateral-country-pair fixed effects.

         Our analysis indicates that many of the covariates used in prior FDI studies (and often

found statistically significant) do not have a high probability of inclusion in the true FDI

determinants model once we consider a comprehensive set of potential determinants using BMA.

A fairly parsimonious covariates set is suggested by our analysis. The covariates with

consistently high inclusion probabilities are traditional gravity variables, cultural distance

factors, parent-country per capita GDP, relative labor endowments, and regional trade

agreements. Variables with little support for inclusion are multilateral trade openness, host-


2
 This year maximized our ability to use data from datasets that have not been updated recently with data sets that
were not collected prior to 2000.


                                                                                                                     3
country business costs, host-country infrastructure (including credit markets), and host-country

institutions.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section reviews previous

empirical literature on the determinants of FDI, and makes the case that the appropriate model

specification for explaining FDI patterns is far from settled. Section 3 then lays out the BMA

methodology we use to assess model uncertainty. Section 4 describes the data and its sources,

while Section 5 reports the results and compares to the existing literature. Section 6 concludes.



2. Prior FDI Literature

        There is little consensus on how to empirically model bilateral FDI patterns, with many

past empirical FDI papers using a base model consisting of gravity-type covariates (country-level

GDP and distance) because of its popularity for explaining trade flows. As mentioned in the

introduction, there have been a few recent efforts to develop specifications based on theoretical

models – namely, the knowledge-capital (K-K) model developed by James Markusen and co-

authors, which was brought to data in Carr, Markusen, and Maskus (2001); Bergstrand and

Egger’s (2007) model incorporating physical capital; and Head and Ries’ (2008) model of

acquisition FDI.

        There is little consistency in the covariates that are postulated to explain worldwide FDI

patterns across these three papers. To see this, the first three columns of Table 1 lists the

covariates used in each of these papers. Distance between countries is the only covariate

common to all three studies. There are 22 different covariates between the three studies, even

though each study only averages about 10 covariates. While all three specifications postulate a




                                                                                                     4
role for economic size and trade frictions as driving forces of FDI, it is surprising how differently

they construct and define variables meant to proxy for these common factors.

        Of course, there have been many other papers that have empirically examined FDI

patterns using specifications that differ from these three papers. Columns 4-8 of Table 1 list the

covariates used in a number of other highly-regarded recent papers. Across these eight studies in

columns 1 through 8, there are a combined 47 covariates. However, no covariate is shared by all

eight studies and, on average, a covariate is only used in 1.7 of the eight studies. Interestingly,

almost 85% of the covariates included in these 8 studies are found to be statistically significant.

Given that the average study includes very few of the total set of possible covariates, the

possibility of spurious correlations is quite real.

        In addition to the substantial differences in covariates used across FDI studies, there are

also differences across studies in whether variables are logged or not, or whether panel data were

used. (These are noted in the first few rows of Table 1). Given these wide differences in

specifications, there clearly is no consensus on how to specify the determinants of bilateral FDI

patterns.

        The final paper documented in Table 1 (last column) is Chakrabarti (2000). This paper is

similar to ours in its motivation to understand which covariates are more likely to be robust

determinants of bilateral FDI. However, the analysis considers a surprisingly small set of

possible covariates, perhaps because it came before some of the recent advances in the literature.

Also, it follows a different methodology (extreme bounds analysis) than ours, feasible

implementation of which requires the model space be restricted a priori. The approach we take

to implement BMA requires no such restriction, and is designed to identify and explore relevant

portions of the entire model space. That said, Chakrabarti (2000) serves as a potential warning




                                                                                                      5
signal for the literature and motivation for further study, as it finds that most of the covariates

investigated are not statistically robust using typical extreme bounds criteria.

       On a final note, Eicher, Helfman, and Lenkoski (2010) is concurrent work that is similar

to ours in its use of BMA to evaluate an extensive set of potential FDI determinants (including

many of those included in Table 1). However, they focus on determinants of FDI flows, whereas

our focus is on the (static) cross-country FDI patterns, which has been the focus of most previous

studies because it connects directly to the main general equilibrium theories of multinational firm

behavior and FDI. An additional focus of Eicher, Helfman, and Lenkoski (2010) is modeling the

selection issue of whether there is any FDI activity between bilateral country pairs in the first

place. Since virtually all prior FDI studies do not address this issue, and our primary focus is on

directly comparing our BMA results to these prior studies, we do not explore this issue here.



3. Methodology

3.1 The FDI Determinants Model and Bayesian Model Averaging

       To study the determinants of bilateral foreign direct investment (FDI) we focus on the

linear regression model:


                                    Y   N  X j  j   ,                                (1)


where Y is an N x 1 vector holding the measure of bilateral foreign direct investment,  N is an N

x 1 vector of 1’s, X j is a N x k j matrix of FDI determinants, and  is a an N x 1 vector of

independent, normally distributed, disturbances, each with mean zero and variance  2 . We are

interested in the realistic case where there is uncertainty about the appropriate variables to

include in X j . In particular, suppose there are K potential determinants of FDI, collected in the N


                                                                                                      6
x K matrix X, and the variables in X j are chosen as a subset of X, so that k j  K . We assume

that the only aspect of model uncertainty in (1) is the selection of X j , so that a particular

selection of X j defines the jth model, denoted M j . If we place no restrictions on the

combinations of the variables in X that can enter the regression model, there are R  2 K different

models to consider.

        The Bayesian approach to comparing alternative models is based on the posterior

probability that M j is the true model that generated the data:


                                                 f Y | M j Pr M j 
                          Pr M j | Y      R
                                                                         , j  1,..., R ,               (2)
                                             f Y | M Pr M 
                                            i 1
                                                            i        i




where (2) follows directly from Bayes’ rule. In (2), Pr M j  is the researcher’s prior probability

that M j is the true model, while f Y | M j  is the so-called marginal, or integrated, likelihood

function:


                  f Y | M j    f Y |  ,  j , , M j  p  ,  j , | M j  d d j d ,         (3)


where f Y |  ,  j ,  , M j  is the likelihood function for M j and p  ,  j ,  | M j  is the

researcher’s prior density function for the parameters of M j . In words, the marginal likelihood

function is the likelihood function integrated with respect to the researcher’s prior density

function. It thus has the interpretation of the average value of the likelihood function, and

therefore the average fit of the model, over different parameter values, where the averaging is

done with respect to the prior density of model parameters.



                                                                                                              7
           The posterior model probabilities in (2) can be used to confront the model uncertainty

present in the FDI determinants regression. One approach for using Pr M j | Y  is to select the

model with highest posterior probability, and then make inferences about the effects of

alternative FDI determinants based on this “best” model alone. However, this approach (which

mimics much of the model selection literature based on hypothesis tests and information criteria)

ignores information in models other than the chosen model, and thus does not yield inferences

that fully incorporate model uncertainty. When the posterior model probability is dispersed

widely across a large number of models, basing inferences on a single model can yield grossly

distorted results.

           Instead of basing inference on a single, highest probability model, BMA proceeds by

averaging posterior inference regarding objects of interest across alternative models, where

averaging is with respect to posterior model probabilities. Specifically, for a generic object of

interest, denoted  , the BMA posterior distribution is calculated as:



                                  p  | Y    p  | Y , M j Pr M j | Y  ,
                                               R
                                                                                                        (4)
                                               j 1




where p  | Y , M j  represents the posterior distribution for  conditional on M j . The BMA

posterior distribution follows from direct application of rules of probability, and is thus the

obvious solution to incorporate model uncertainty into inference from the Bayesian perspective.3

It is worth emphasizing that p  | Y  is not conditioned on a particular model being the true

model, but is instead only conditioned on the data. That is, BMA has integrated out uncertainty

regarding the identity of the true model.


3
    For an introduction to BMA and a review of related literature, see Hoeting, Madigan, Raftery and Volinsky (1999).


                                                                                                                   8
        For common choices of  , the model dependent posterior distribution, p  | Y , M j  , will

often be available analytically. For example, in our application we are particularly interested in

whether or not particular FDI determinant variables belong in the true model. In this case,

p  | Y , M j  is simply an indicator function of whether or not the variable or variables of interest

are included in X j . The corresponding BMA posterior distribution is then the posterior

probability that a particular variable or variables belongs in the true model, which is often

referred to as an “inclusion probability”. As another leading example, the object of interest may

be the slope coefficient of a particular variable on FDI. In this case, p  | Y , M j  , refers to the

posterior distribution for a regression slope coefficient, which will be available analytically for

the models considered in our application.



3.2 Calculating the Posterior Model Probabilities

        To implement BMA, we require the posterior model probabilities. From (2) and (3),

calculation of these probabilities requires a specification for both the prior model probability,

Pr M j  , and the prior density function for the parameters of M j , p  ,  j ,  | M j  , j  1,..., R .

Our prior model probability is uniform with respect to all alternative models:



                                            Pr M j  
                                                          1
                                                            .                                       (5)
                                                          R


This prior specification, which is a common choice in BMA applications, implies that the prior

probability that any single variable belongs in the true model is 50%.

        Specification of prior parameter densities poses a more significant challenge. One

approach is to elicit prior densities for the parameters of each model individually. However, this


                                                                                                                 9
becomes intractable when the space of potential models is large, as will be true for the FDI

determinants model. In such cases, it is useful to use prior parameter densities that are

“automatic”, in that they are set in a formulaic way across alternative models. One simple, and

seemingly attractive, way to do this is to use non-informative priors for the parameters of all

models under consideration. Unfortunately, the use of non-informative priors for those

parameters not common to all models will yield posterior model probabilities that mechanically

favor models with fewer parameters over those with more. For our application, the slope

parameters  j are not common to all models, as they depend on the set of variables included in

X j . Thus, using non-informative priors for  j is not an option, as it will paradoxically generate

model comparison results that are solely a consequence of the prior. This is not the case for

parameters that are common to all models, for which non-informative priors yield posterior

model probabilities that are not a function of the prior, but only of sample information. For this

reason, non-informative priors are a popular choice for parameters common to all models.

       For our analysis, we use two different automatic procedures for setting priors. For our

primary analysis, we use the priors suggested by Fernandez, Ley and Steele (2001a), hereafter

FLS, who provide an automatic procedure for setting parameter prior densities for a group of

linear regression models that differ only with respect to the choice of covariates. This procedure

is designed for the case where the researcher wishes to use as little subjective information in

setting prior densities as possible, and was shown by FLS to have both good theoretical

properties and to perform well in simulations for the calculation of posterior model probabilities.

As a robustness check, we also present results for a prior advocated by Eicher, Papageorgiou and

Raftery (2007). We will describe the FLS prior in detail here, while the alternative prior is

discussed in Section 5.5.



                                                                                                  10
        The FLS procedure begins by factoring the prior parameter density function as follows:


                          p  ,  j , | M j   p  j |  , , M j  p  , | M j  .               (6)


For parameters common to all models, namely  and  , FLS use the standard, improper non-

informative prior density for location and scale parameters:4


                                            p  ,  | M j    1 .                                   (7)


To set p  j |  , , M j  , a non-informative prior is not used, as the slope parameters are not

common across all models. Instead, FLS use the natural conjugate Normal-Gamma prior density:


                                         j |  , M j ~ N  0j ,V j0  .                              (8)


This natural conjugate form is advantageous as it allows for analytical calculation of the integrals

in (3), which greatly speeds computing time. We set the prior mean,  0j , to a k j x 1 vector of

zeros. This centers the prior distribution for all model slope parameters on values consistent with

the FDI determinants in X j having no effect on FDI. To set the prior variance-covariance

matrix, FLS suggests the g-prior specification of Zellner (1986):


                                                     
                                             V j0  gX 'j X j   
                                                                1

                                                                     .
                                                                                                        (9)



This prior specification is useful, as it reduces the input from the researcher to a single



4
 This prior specification is independent of the model, and thus assigns a common prior density for the intercept and
conditional variance parameters across models. To ensure that the model intercept has the same interpretation across
all models, we demean the FDI determinant variables before inclusion in the regressions. This gives the intercept
parameter the role of the unconditional mean of the bilateral FDI measure for all models.


                                                                                                                 11
hyperparameter, g , rather than needing to specify the entire k j x k j matrix V j0 . FLS discuss

theoretical motivations for alternative choices of g , and based on this theory and extensive

Monte Carlo experiments suggest the following strategy for setting g :


                                      1            2
                                      K 2 if N  K 
                                   g                                                  (10)
                                       1 if N  K 2 
                                       N             .



In the FDI determinants application we have N  K 2 , and thus set g  1 / K 2 .

       Given these specifications for the prior densities, posterior model probabilities are

conceptually straightforward to calculate. In particular, model probabilities can be computed

directly by calculating the marginal likelihood for all possible models, each of which are

available analytically for the linear regression model in (1) and the parameter prior densities in

(7-10). However, when K is large, the size of the model space makes direct calculation of

Pr M j | Y  based on (2) practically infeasible. For example, we will consider K = 56 potential

FDI determinants, meaning there are greater than R  7 x 1016 possible models to consider.

Even if each model could be considered in 1 / 100,000 th of a second, an ambitious estimate at

current computing speeds, it would still take over 22,000 years to evaluate all possible models.

       When the model space becomes too large for direct calculation of posterior model

probabilities, a popular alternative approach is to estimate these probabilities by sampling the

model space. In particular, define a model indicator that takes on values from 1,…,R, with a

value of j indicating that model M j is the true model, and assume that this model indicator

follows a multinomial probability distribution with probabilities given by Pr M j | Y  . Further,




                                                                                                      12
suppose that we are able to obtain random draws of this model indicator from its probability

distribution. It is then possible to construct a simulation-consistent estimate of Pr M j | Y  as the

proportion of the random draws for which model M j was drawn. In particular, we can construct

the following estimate of Pr M j | Y :


                                                        S

                                                       I       s
                                            pj        s 1
                                                                    ,                      (11)
                                                            S


where S is the number of random draws of the model indicator, and I s is an indicator function

that is one if the sth draw of the model indicator was j. Note that (11) will estimate Pr M j | Y  to

be zero if M j is never drawn. However, assuming a large number of simulations are conducted,

it will be exactly these models that are likely to have very low posterior model probability. Thus,

estimates of Pr M j | Y  constructed by simulating from the model space provide an efficient

approach to identifying the set of models with relatively high posterior probability.

        Note that if we condition on Pr M j | Y  equaling zero if M j is never drawn, equation (2)

suggests an alternative, approximation-free approach to evaluating the posterior model

probabilities for the visited models:


                                       f Y | M j Pr M j 
                              pj                                           , j,         (12)
                                      f Y | M PrM 
                                     i
                                                   i                    i




where  denotes the set of models that are visited by the sampler. As this set of models will be

feasible to consider individually, the summation in the denominator of (12) will be feasible




                                                                                                     13
whereas the summation in the denominator of (2) was not. If the models that are never visited by

the sampler are assumed to have zero probability, model probabilities based on (12) will be

exact, while those based on (11) will contain estimation error. All results presented for our FDI

determinants analysis use model probabilities based on (12).

           To simulate from the model space, we use the Markov Chain Monte Carlo Model

Composition (MC3) algorithm of Madigan and York (1995). This approach relies on the

Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, which can be used to provide random samples from any

probability distribution provided it is known up to a proportionality constant, which, by

inspection of (2), is true for Pr M j | Y  . MC3 was implemented by Raftery, Madigan and Hoeting

(1997) for BMA in linear regression models, and has been used in a number of economic

applications involving linear regression (e.g. Fernandez, Ley and Steele, 2001a, 2001b).5

           The MC3 algorithm requires an arbitrary model to initialize the sequence of model draws.

Given this initial model, model draws obtained from the algorithm form a Markov chain that

converges to draws from Pr M j | Y . An important issue with such Markov-chain based

samplers is assessing the convergence of the chain. In producing the results described in Section

5 below, we assume that 200,000 draws is sufficient to ensure convergence, and then base our

estimates of posterior model probabilities on 1 million additional draws. We performed three

checks to ensure convergence of the sampling procedure. First, results from an independent

simulation using a longer convergence sample of 400,000 draws were very similar to those based

on the shorter convergence sample. Second, our results are insensitive to two widely dispersed

initial models, one with no FDI determinants, i.e. k j  0 , and one with all possible FDI

determinants, i.e. k j  K . This insensitivity of results to the size of the convergence sample and

5
    For details of the implementation of MC3 in the context of a linear regression model, see Koop (2003).


                                                                                                             14
the initialization of the chain suggests the sampler has converged. Finally, Fernandez, Ley and

Steele (2001a) suggest using the correlation between probabilities based on (11) and (12) as a

check on the convergence of the sampler. For all results we present, the correlation between

these two estimates of the model probabilities was above 0.99.



4. Data

          Measurement of FDI and related activity is far from ideal. Unlike trade flows, reliable

measures of FDI are unavailable for many countries. Relatedly, there is no common source for

FDI data, and prior studies have therefore employed a number of different measures of FDI. As

we wish to compare our results to these prior studies, we have collected data on three different

FDI measures that have been typically used.

          Our first source of cross-country FDI activity is bilateral FDI stocks reported by members

of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), which is the most

comprehensive source of reliable data on total FDI stocks of which we are aware.6 The OECD

provides excellent coverage of FDI activity between OECD countries. It also has some coverage

of FDI between OECD and non-OECD countries, though many transactions with small non-

OECD countries are missing. The OECD does not report any observations of FDI between

countries that are both non-OECD. The FDI stock data will be the benchmark measure of FDI

used in our study, but we will also compare and contrast our results when using two alternative

measures of FDI activity, described next.

          Some studies (e.g., Carr, Markusen, and Maskus, 2001, and Bergstrand and Egger, 2007)

have stressed the use of affiliate sales as the most appropriate measure of actual multinational

firm activity in a host country, as FDI stock data can be significantly affected by financial
6
    These data can be obtained from SourceOECD: www.sourceoecd.org.


                                                                                                    15
transactions of a firm not related to current productive activity. Unfortunately, affiliate sales data

are much less available than FDI stock data. Braconier, Norback, and Urban (2005) have

collected the most extensive database of cross-country affiliate sales of which we are aware, and

have graciously provided this to us. Their database provides information on outward affiliate

sales involving 56 different parent countries and 85 different host countries over roughly four

different years from the late 1980s to 1998. Despite this, the number of observations is much

smaller than with the FDI stock data.7

        Finally, we employ data on cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&As), which have

been used in such studies as Rossi and Volpin (2004) and Head and Ries (2008). These data

come from Thomsen’s SDC Platinum database on M&A activity, which is meant to be a

comprehensive census of worldwide M&As above a $1 million threshold since the early 1990s.

While this amount of country coverage in the M&A data clearly dominates the other two

measures of FDI activity, the M&A measure also has relative disadvantages. First, it measures

only one type of FDI, though M&A does account for the majority of worldwide FDI activity.

Second, because many of the transactions are between private firms, over half of the M&As in

the database do not have any recorded value. Thus, we rely on counts of the number of M&As

occurring between country pairs.8 More specifically, we use cumulated sums of counts of prior

and current-year M&As by country pair to create a measure analogous to cross-country FDI



7 We refer the reader to Braconier, Norback, and Urban (2005) for further detail on country coverage and

data sources.
8 Prior studies, including Rossi and Volpin (2004) and Head and Ries (2008), assumed that the missing M&A

transactions’ values were random and summed up remaining observations of values to create their measure
of cross‐border M&A activity. There are some obvious advantages and disadvantages with using M&A count
versus (non‐missing) value data. One clear disadvantage for our purposes was how many missing
observations are created when using the value data ‐‐ many of the bilateral‐country pairings show M&A
activity, but the value data for all the M&A transactions for that pairing are missing. For this reason, and
because the correlation between the M&A counts and values by bilateral‐country pairs is 0.96, we use the
M&A count data.


                                                                                                          16
stocks. Head and Ries (2008) also use cumulated measures of M&A activity and find a quite

high correlation (greater than 0.80) between the FDI stock and M&A measures of FDI activity.

       It is important to note that virtually all theory and empirics of worldwide FDI has focused

on the (static) cross-country patterns, rather than the dynamics of worldwide FDI flows. We

follow this pattern and primarily focus on data for the year 2000, since it comes before the world

recession following the events of 9/11, and is the most recent data we have for the affiliate sales

database. For those FDI measures where it was available, we also collected data for 1990. This

allowed us to check the robustness of our results, as well as allows us to examine specifications

where we first difference the data to control for country-pair fixed effects.

       The set of potential covariates we consider is intended to be comprehensive and is listed

in Table 2. The variables in Table 2 are grouped into broad categories of factors that plausibly

determine FDI. We have included all covariates from previous studies listed in Table 1 with

only a few exceptions. First, we do not include exchange rate variables or changes in recent

consumer prices, as we wish to examine the long-run determinants of FDI decisions, leaving

examination of dynamic, short-run changes for a future work. Second, bilateral trade flows are

clearly endogenous and so we do not include this covariate as some studies have done. Finally,

there are a few variables where available data are so limited (e.g., wage data) that we feel the

cost in terms of reduced sample size is too great.

       We also include a number of additional variables. First, a few recent studies have found

that geographic spatial issues are important for understanding bilateral FDI patterns (see Baltagi

et al., 2007, and Blonigen et al., 2007). To account for such spatial features of the data to some

extent, we include a remoteness variable for both the host and parent country, which is




                                                                                                   17
constructed as the distance-weighted average of all other countries’ GDP.9 Possible

agglomeration effects within countries also led us to add a measure of urban concentration for

both the host and parent country. Previous studies have hypothesized that endowments may

matter, particularly if FDI is motivated to find lower cost locations (i.e., vertically-motivated

FDI). However, these studies have only included measures of relative labor and capital

endowments. We include measures of land and oil as well. Business costs in the host country

have been included in some previous studies, but they often use proxies that have limited country

coverage which we found significantly reduce the potential sample. Thus, we rely on relatively

recent measures of host-country business costs collected by the World Bank that measure the

average time it takes to enforce a contract, register property, start a business, and resolve an

insolvency. We also include measures from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators on

communications infrastructure, which previous studies have not included, but plausibly could

affect FDI decisions.

        These additions and subtractions from the combined set of regressors from previous

studies leaves us with 56 variables to examine as potential covariates with FDI. The data sources

for our variables are primarily the Penn World Tables, the World Development Indicators

database, and the Gravity database at CEPII (www.cepii.org). A full list of data sources is

available from the authors upon request.



5. Results

        Because previous studies have employed a variety of FDI measures and specifications

(e.g., logging variables or not), the reported results below proceed through a number of possible


9
 Combining spatial econometric techniques with the BMA approach has not been done before to our knowledge,
but would likely be quite difficult to implement.


                                                                                                             18
combinations of the FDI measure and variable transformation, before comparing our results to

those in previous studies.



5.1. Base Results

        We begin with results using our benchmark measure of FDI (FDI stock) as our dependent

variable, considering both a specification where all (non-binary) variables are logged and a

specification where all variables are not logged. We refer to these as the “log-levels” and

“levels” specifications respectively. For each potential covariate, Table 3 reports the inclusion

probabilities and the median of the posterior density for the covariate’s slope coefficient for both

the levels (columns 1 and 2) and log-levels (columns 3 and 4) specifications using our sample of

2000 data. Again, the inclusion probability is the BMA posterior probability that a variable

belongs in the true model explaining FDI. For the posterior density for a covariate’s slope

coefficient, we report the BMA posterior density for the slope coefficient, conditional on that

variable belonging in the true model. Note that interactive variables drop out of the log-levels

specifications as they generate perfect collinearity in the regression upon taking logarithms.

        There are a number of similarities to note across the levels and log-levels specifications.

First, it is a relatively small set of variables out of the 56 potential covariates that have high

inclusion probabilities in both specifications. Only 13 variables have inclusion probabilities

above 50% in the levels specification, while the analogous number of variables is 16 in the log-

levels specification. This suggests a fairly parsimonious specification is sufficient to explain

cross-country FDI patterns. Second, for both specifications, the types of variables that generally

have high inclusion variables are GDP-related variables, distance, cultural distance factors (e.g.,

common official language), and endowments. However, this means that broad categories of




                                                                                                     19
variables are receiving little statistical support, particularly those related to business costs,

infrastructure, and institutions in the host country. The one main difference between the two

specifications is that the GDP terms receiving support in the levels specifications include non-

linear terms, whereas such terms do not find support once the data are logged. This suggests that

logging variables is sufficient to handle the inherent skewness in the pattern of cross-country

FDI.

        Table 4 provides a related analysis where we calculate “group” inclusion probabilities

that measure the probability that at least one of the variables in a given group belongs in the true

model. For example, the probability that at least one of the variables connected with “Business

costs and tax policies” (variables 41 through 46 in Table 2) should be included in the

specification is only 26 percent in the levels regression and only 18 percent in the log-levels

specification. Since GDP-related terms and distance clearly matter from the results in Table 3,

we only report the inclusion probabilities of groupings of our other variables. Table 4 shows that

“cultural distance” and “endowment-related terms” have a high group inclusion probability in

both the levels and log-levels specifications. Also consistent with our discussion above,

inclusion probabilities are low across both specifications for our groupings of host-country

business costs, communications infrastructure, financial infrastructure, and legal and political

institutions. A difference between the levels and log-levels specifications, as also discussed

above, is that the non-linear GDP terms only have high inclusion probabilities (even as a group)

in the levels specification. A final difference between the levels and log-levels specification in

the group inclusion variables is that trade openness (both bilateral and multilateral) and

geography terms beyond distance have reasonably high group inclusion probabilities in the log

levels specification, but not the levels specification.




                                                                                                     20
       Our results to this point use FDI stock as our measure of cross-country FDI activity.

Table 5 next compares results when we use two other measures of FDI that have been used by

prior studies – affiliate sales and cross-border M&A activity. The table displays all variables that

receive at least 50% in one of our three specifications (FDI stock, affiliate sales, or M&A). For

ease in reading the table, we bold the instances where the inclusion probability is 50% or higher.

For comparison sake, we only report the results for the log-levels specification and, for the M&A

sample, we only use observations for the 902 country-pairs for which we observe the FDI stock

variable. (We have many more country-pair observations for the M&A sample that we will

analyze and discuss below.) Due to the limited data availability for the affiliate sales data, we

use all observations available.

       Despite these data issues, many of the patterns found in the FDI stock specification are

also found when using these other FDI measures. First, the traditional gravity variables (real

GDP of both countries and distance) all have inclusion probabilities of 100% across all three

specifications. Parent country real GDP per capita also has a 99% inclusion probability across

all three, suggesting that the wealth of the source country is a key determinant. Interestingly,

host country real GDP per capita does not have similarly high inclusion probabilities. There is a

similar asymmetry in that host country remoteness generally garners high inclusion probabilities

across the specifications, whereas parent country remoteness does not. These asymmetric results

are an example of empirical patterns our analysis finds that have not been examined by prior

theory or empirical studies of FDI to our knowledge.

       In general, the M&A and FDI sample share many variables with high inclusion variables

beyond the ones we have mentioned, including common official language, colonial relationship,

squared skill difference, regional trade agreement, and customs union. We also find it interesting




                                                                                                    21
that the M&A sample finds much greater support for the inclusion of a variety of variables

related to skilled labor endowment levels and differences.

        The FDI stock and affiliate sales specifications find less commonality in the variables

that have high inclusion probabilities. We have also produced results for the FDI stock and

affiliate sales specifications on a common, overlapping, sample of 253 observations, and found

much more similarity in results that mirror those for affiliate sales in Table 5. This suggests that

the differences across the affiliate sales and FDI stock specifications in Table 5 are due primarily

to the relatively small sample available for the affiliate sales measure. Overall, the general

patterns noted in earlier specifications reported above continue to hold – gravity finds very

strong support, while cultural distance and endowment variables also find modest support as

well. In contrast, there continues to be little support for variables capturing host country

business costs, infrastructure, or institutions.

        As mentioned, the data on FDI stock and affiliate sales is limited primarily to OECD

country pairs, though there is some information on FDI from OECD into less-developed

countries, but not on FDI patterns between less-developed countries. On one hand, this selection

may not be a significant issue because the vast majority of FDI in the world economy is between

the developed economies, which are well-represented in our sample. On the other hand, it is

useful to know how FDI determinants may differ when a more representative sample of countries

is examined. Our M&A data source has the ability to address this as it is a census of worldwide

M&A activity.

        Table 6 lists all variables with inclusion variables above 50% for three specifications

using logged data for the year 2000. The first two columns of inclusion probabilities are for

comparison purposes and are for the FDI stock specification and the M&A specification when




                                                                                                   22
limited to the same observations as FDI stock sample. The third column is the M&A

specification when we use all observations for which we have available data, which we call the

“worldwide” sample, as opposed to the restricted sample, which we call the “OECD” sample.

This more than triples the sample size over the other two listed specifications to 3081

observations.

        The results from the worldwide M&A sample show a lot of commonalities with the

previous results. Gravity variables, cultural distance, and relative skilled labor variables all show

very high inclusion probabilities. In fact, 12 of the 15 variables in the OECD M&A sample

specification (column 2) also have high inclusion probabilities in the worldwide M&A sample

specification. However, the worldwide M&A sample also shows high inclusion probabilities for

a few additional variables. These include two variables connected with business costs in the host

country (HOST firm tax rates and HOST years to resolve insolvency), variables connected with

bilateral treaties (Bilateral investment treaty and double taxation treaty), service sector

agreements, and contiguous border. This suggests that these additional variables are important

when considering FDI into developing economies and between developing economies, since

these are the types of observations that are added when we go from the OECD to the worldwide

M&A sample.10



5.2. Implications for prior studies

        With our BMA results in hand, we now turn to address the fundamental question of how

our BMA results compare to those of previous studies. Virtually all of the prior studies include


10 In the “OECD” sample, all country‐pair observations involve at least one OECD country, and 40% of the

country‐pair observations are between OECD countries. In the “worldwide” sample, 32% of the country‐pair
observations do not involve at least one OECD country, and only 18% of the country‐pair observations are
between OECD countries.


                                                                                                      23
gravity related variables and, thus, our results confirm the inclusion of such variables. Common

official language also finds robust support in our analysis and is included in five of the prior

eight studies in Table 1. Beyond this small set of variables, however, prior studies vary

significantly in what they include, and what they include does not necessarily match very well

with the variables our analysis finds to have high inclusion probabilities. For example, our

analysis finds that parent country wealth (real per capita GDP) has strong and robust support, yet

only one study (Head and Ries, 2008) of the eight studies in Table 1 includes this variable. In

contrast, four of the studies in Table 1 include host country wealth, yet we find this variable does

not have strong support for inclusion. The reason for this asymmetry in wealth effects on FDI is

also something that past theoretical papers do not address to our knowledge. Only four of the

prior eight studies include variables related to relative skilled labor endowment levels or

differences, whereas our analysis finds that such variables should be included. There is little

evidence that other relative endowments matter. Colonial relationships, host country remoteness,

regional trade agreements, and customs unions are additional variables that find strong support in

our analysis, but are rarely included in prior studies. On the other hand, a number of the prior

studies include variables connected to host country business costs, infrastructure and institutions,

but these do not find support in our analysis. Finally, the studies in Table 1 whose main focus is

on a particular hypothesized relationship between a potential covariate and FDI generally do not

fare very well in terms of the inclusion probabilities we estimate for the same covariate. This

includes Wei (2000) whose focus is on corruption, Stein and Daude (2007) whose focus is on

time zone differences and di Giovanni (2005) whose partial focus is on financial market

institutions.




                                                                                                   24
5.3. Slope coefficient magnitudes

       To this point, we have focused only on inclusion probabilities. In Table 7, we report

estimates of the slope coefficient of the variables listed in Table 6. In particular, for the variables

and specifications in Table 6, we report the median of the BMA posterior density for the slope

coefficient on each variable. As in Table 3, we focus on the BMA posterior density for a

variable’s slope coefficient, conditional on that variable belonging in the true model. With few

exceptions, the coefficient signs are as one would expect and consistent with prior studies. This

includes the gravity variables, cultural distance variables, and bilateral trade openness variables.

For many of the coefficients, the magnitude of the effect is smaller in the worldwide M&A

sample than for the OECD sample, which suggests that FDI responds much less to economic

forces for host countries that are less-developed. A few of the coefficients have unexpected

signs. One of the more intriguing results is that while the bilateral distance between country

pairs lowers FDI (as expected), the remoteness of both the parent and host countries (that is, how

far they are from the entire world’s markets, not just the other country in the country pair) have

positive coefficients. This distinction has not been made before to our knowledge, but certainly

deserves future investigation.



5.4. Controlling for country-pair effects

        Many prior studies of FDI determinants include country or country-pair effects. A

simple way to control for such effects is to difference the data by country-pair combinations.

Table 8 provides results from log-linear specifications for a 1990-2000 differenced sample for

our FDI stock, OECD M&A and worldwide M&A samples. First-differencing in this manner

eliminates a number of time-invariant variables, as is typical. It unfortunately also eliminates a




                                                                                                    25
very large portion of the observations, due to many more missing values for variables in 1990.

This may be why the FDI stock and OECD M&A samples only have one variable that comes in

with an inclusion probability over 50%, though a possible alternative explanation is that bilateral

FDI patterns are largely driven by slow-moving or time-invariant factors that are then

differenced out of these regressions. However, the worldwide M&A sample still has over 1200

observations and finds 12 variables to have inclusion probabilities over 50%. What we find most

important is that these high-inclusion probabilities in the first-differenced worldwide M&A

sample are largely the same ones as we have found throughout the many varied permutations we

have evaluated in this paper: GDP-related variables, skilled-labor variables, parent-country GDP

per capita, and bilateral trade agreements. Distance and cultural distance factors do not show up

in this table because first-differencing leaves no (or virtually no) variation from which to identify

the impact of these factors.



5.5. Robustness to Alternative Priors

       The results presented above were generated for a specific choice of parameter prior

distribution, namely those suggested in FLS, as described in Section 3 above. It is well known

that BMA results can be sensitive to parameter priors, although for the relatively large sample

sizes available in our application, this sensitively should be muted. To verify this, we also

present results from an alternative prior specification known as the Unit Information Prior (UIP).

The UIP is designed to contain roughly the same amount of information as a typical single

observation (Kass and Wasserman, 1995). Eicher, Papageorgiou, and Raftery (2007) argue for

the UIP as a reasonable “default” prior based on evidence that it outperforms the prior of FLS for

prediction. As discussed in Kass and Wasserman (1995) and Rafery (1995), the UIP suggests a




                                                                                                  26
convenient approximation to the marginal likelihood based on the Bayesian Information

Criterion (BIC), which makes this prior particularly simple to implement.

       Table 9 compares results from the FLS priors to those based on the UIP for the FDI Stock

measure of FDI and the log-level specification. The table displays all variables that receive a

50% or higher inclusion probability for at least one of the alternative priors. For ease in reading

the table, we bold the instances where the inclusion probability is 50% or higher. The inclusion

probabilities suggest that the BMA results are not very sensitive to parameter priors, which again

is what we might have expected given the relatively large sample size. In particular, the

inclusion probabilities are generally very close in magnitude for the two alternative priors, and

there is no case where the two priors yield radically different conclusions regarding the

importance of a covariate.



6. Conclusion

       The prior literature examining the determinants of FDI is comprised of a limited number

of studies that typically propose fairly parsimonious specifications, but which are quite varied in

their specifications and FDI measurement. This suggests significant uncertainty in the true

model of bilateral FDI patterns. Our approach is to provide some needed systematic

investigation of the determinants of FDI by using Bayesian Model Averaging. Our analysis does

not support the inclusion of many variables found in prior FDI studies, and suggests that the

statistical importance of the main focus variables in many prior studies is not robust to

considering a much wider set of covariates. The results also suggest a fairly parsimonious

specification of gravity variables, cultural distance factors, parent-country per capita GDP,

relative labor endowments, and regional2 trade agreements for modeling FDI.




                                                                                                    27
        Of note, our results reflect little support for government policies to encourage FDI, as

there is no robust evidence in our analysis that policy variables controlled by the host country

(such as multilateral trade costs, business costs, infrastructure, or political institutions) have an

effect of FDI. Exceptions include policies that are often negotiated bilateral agreements,

including regional trade agreements, bilateral investment treaties, customs unions, and service

agreements in the case of M&A. However, we caution that exogeneity of these variables may be

more in doubt than many of the other covariates we consider.




                                                                                                        28
References

Baltagi, Badi H., Peter Egger, and Michael Pfaffermayr. (2007) “Estimating Models of Complex
FDI: Are There Third-Country Effects,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 140(1): 260-81.

Bergstrand, Jeffrey H., and Peter Egger. (2007) “A Knowledge-and-Physical-Capital Model of
International Trade Flows, Foreign Direct Investment, and Multinational Enterprises,” Journal of
International Economics, 73(2): 278-308.

Blonigen, Bruce A., Ronald B. Davies, and Keith Head. (2003) “Estimating the Knowledge-
Capital Model of the Multinational Enterprise: Comment,” American Economic Review, Vol.
93(3), 980-94.

Blonigen, Bruce A., and Ronald B. Davies. (2004) “The Effects of Bilateral Tax Treaties on U.S.
FDI Activity,” International Tax and Public Finance, Vol. 11(5): 601-22.

Blonigen, Bruce A., Ronald B. Davies, Glen R. Waddell and Helen Naughton. (2007) “FDI in
Space: Spatial Autoregressive Relationships in Foreign Direct Investment,” European Economic
Review, Vol. 51(5): 1303-25.

Blonigen, Bruce A. and Miao Wang, (2005) “Inappropriate Pooling of Wealthy and Poor
Countries in Empirical FDI Studies,” in T. Moran, E. Graham and M. Blomstrom (Eds.), Does
Foreign Direct Investment Promote Development? Washington, DC: Institute for International
Economics, 221-243.

Braconier, Henrik, Pehr-Johan Norback, and Dieter Urban. (2005) “Reconciling the Evidence on
the Knowledge–Capital Model,” Review of International Economics, 13(4): 770–86.

Carr, David, Markusen, James R., Maskus, Keith E. (2001) “Estimating the Knowledge–Capital
Model of the Multinational Enterprise,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91(3): 693–708.

Chakrabarti, Avik. (2001) “The Determinants of Foreign Direct Investment: Sensitivity Analyses
of Cross-Country Regressions,” Kyklos, Vol. 54(1): 89-114.

Di Giovanni, Julian. (2005) “What Drives Capital Flows? The Case of Cross-Border M&A
Activity and Financial Deepening,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 65(1): 127-49.

Draper, D., 1995. Assessment and Propagation of Model Uncertainty (with discussion). Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 57, 45-97.

Eaton, J., Tamura, A., 1994. Bilateralism and Regionalism in Japanese and U.S. Trade and
Direct Foreign Investment Patterns, Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 8,
478-510.

Eicher, T., Helfman, L., Lenkoski, A., 2010. Robust FDI Determinants, Mimeo.




                                                                                             29
Eicher, T., Papageorgiou, C., Raftery, A.E., 2007. Determining Growth Determinants: Default
Priors and Predictive Performance in Bayesian Model Averaging. Journal of Econometrics,
forthcoming.

Fernandez, C., Ley, E., Steele, M.F.J., 2001a, Benchmark Priors for Bayesian Model Averaging.
Journal of Econometrics 100, 381-427.

Fernandez, C., Ley, E., Steele, M.F.J., 2001b, Model Uncertainty in Cross Country Growth
Regressions. Journal of Applied Econometrics 16, 563-576.

Head, Keith and John Ries. (2008) “FDI as an Outcome of the Market for Corporate Control:
Theory and Evidence,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 74(1): 2-20.

Hodges, J.S., 1987. Uncertainty, Policy Analysis, and Statistics. Statistical Science 2, 259-291.

Hoeting, J.A., Madigan, D., Raftery, A.E., Volinsky, C.T., 1999. Bayesian Model Averaging: A
Tutorial (with Discussion). Statistical Science 14, 382-401. Correction: 15, 193-195.

Kass, R.E., Raftery, A.E., 1995. Bayes Factors. Journal of the American Statistical Association
90, 773-795.

Kass, R.E., Wasserman, L., 1995. A Reference Bayesian Test for Nested Hypotheses and its
Relationship to the Schwarz Criterion. Journal of the American Statistical Association 90, 928-
934.

Koop, G., 2003. Bayesian Econometrics, Wiley.

Leamer, E.E., 1978. Specification Searches: Ad Hoc Inference with Nonexperimental Data.
Wiley, New York.

Madigan, D., York, J., 1995. Bayesian Graphical Models for Discrete Data. International
Statistical Review 63, 215-232.

Min, C. and A. Zellner, 1993. Bayesian and Non-Bayesian Methods for Combining Models and
Forecasts with Applications to Forecasting International Growth Rates, Journal of Econometrics
56, 89-118.

Moulton, B.R., 1991. A Bayesian Approach to Regression Selection and Estimation with
Application to a Price Index for Radio Services. Journal of Econometrics 49, 169-193.

Raftery, A.E., 1995. Bayesian Model Selection for Social Research. Sociological Methodology
25, 111-163.

Raftery, A.E., 1996. Approximate Bayes Factors and Accounting for Model Uncertainty in
Generalised Linear Models,” Biometrika 83, 251-266.




                                                                                                    30
Raftery, A.E., Madigan, D., Hoeting, J.A., 1997. Bayesian Model Averaging for Linear
Regression Models. Journal of the American Statistical Association 92, 179-191.

Rossi, Stefano, and Paolo F. Volpin. (2004) “Cross-Country Determinants of Mergers and
Acquisitions,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 74(2): 277-304.

Stein, Ernesto and Christian Daude. (2007) “Longitude Matters: Time Zones and the Location of
Foreign Direct Investment,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 71(1): 96-122.

Wei, Shang-jin (2000). “How Taxing is Corruption on International Business,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 82(1): 1-11.

Zellner, A., 1986. On Assessing Prior Distributions and Bayesian Regression Analysis with g-
Prior Distributions, in Goel, P.K. and A. Zellner (eds.), Bayesian Inference and Decision
Techniques: Essays in Honour of Bruno de Finetti, Amsterdam: North Holland.




                                                                                               31
                                                     Table 1
                              Specifications of Prior Studies of FDI Determinants
                               Carr,
                             Markusen, Bergstrand             Eaton and                           Stein and
                              Maskus and Egger Head and        Tamura       Wei     di Giovanni    Daude     Chakra-
                              (2001)     (2007)   Ries (2008)   (1994)     (2000)      (2005)      (2007)   barti (2001)
Data and specifications
                                                   Stock and
Dependent variable            Sales      Sales       M&A        Stock      Stock      M&A          Stock       Flows
Variables logged?              No         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Some         No
Panel data?                    Yes        Yes         No         Yes        Yes        Yes          No          No
Two-way or one-way flows?    Two-way    Two-way    Two-way     Two-way    One-way    Two-way      Two-way     One-way

Gravity measures
PARENT GDP                                  x                                            x
HOST GDP                                    z                                 x          x                       x
Distance                         z          x          x                      x          x           x

Other GDP related terms
PARENT per capita GDP                                  x
HOST per capita GDP                                    x          x                                              x
PARENT population                                      x
HOST population                                        x          x           x
GDP similarity                              x
GDP sum                          x          x                                                        x
GDP difference                   x
GDP per capita differences                                                               x           x
HOST GDP growth                                                                                                  z
Rest-of-the-world GDP                       x




                                                                                                                      32
Other geography measures
Contiguous border                                              z
Time zone differences                                          x

Country-level endowments
Relative skilled-unskilled labor
endowments (skill difference)          x   x                   x
Interaction of skill differences and
GDP differences                        x
Relative capital-labor endowments          x
HOST wages                                             x           z
HOST population density                            x
HOST education levels                              x

Bilateral cultural and colonial
linkages
Common language                            x   x       x   x   z
Colonial links                                 x               x

Multilateral trade openness
HOST trade costs                       x                           z
PARENT trade costs                     x
HOST trade openness (imports plus                                  z
exports divided by GDP)
HOST trade costs times skill
difference term squared                x

Bilateral trade openness
BILATERAL transport costs                  z
BILATERAL trade flows/deficit                              x       z
Regional trade agreement                   x               z   z



                                                                       33
Customs union                                      z
Common service sector agreement                    x

Host country FDI/business costs
HOST FDI costs                         x   x
HOST taxes                                     x           z
PARENT taxes                                       x
PARENT country has tax credit                  z
system
Change in HOST consumer prices                             z

Bilateral tax and investment
agreements
Tax treaty                                         x   x
Investment treaty                                      z

Host country communications
infrastructure
Telephone traffic                                  x   x

Host country financial
infrastructure
HOST market capitalization                         x
HOST domestic credit                               x

Political environment & institutions
HOST political stability                       x           z
HOST legal institutions                                x
HOST corruption                                x




                                                               34
Exchange rate
Exchange rates                                                                                                            z                        z
Volatility of exchange rates                                                                                              x
Notes: An “x” signifies that a variable is included and statistically significant in the majority of specifications reported in the paper. A “z”
signifies that a variable is included, but is not statistically significant in the majority of specifications reported in the paper. We exclude from this
table variables that Chakrabarti (2001) posited as ex ante doubtful and which did not come in statistically significant in that analysis. The type of
dependent variable in these studies varied in construction, but can be characterized by data on affiliate sales (which we term “Sales” in the table),
FDI stock (“Stock”), FDI flows (“Flows”) and/or counts (or value) of cross-border merger and acquisition activity (“M&A”).




                                                                                                                                                       35
                                       Table 2
                                      Variables

                                                                                            Included in
                                                                                              previous
                                                                                            study listed
Variable                             Definition                                              in Table 1

Dependent variables
FDI stock                            FDI position of PARENT country in HOST country
                                     (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Affiliate sales                      Sales of PARENT-owned affiliates in HOST country
M&A counts                           Cumulated counts of PARENT country acquisitions
                                     of HOST country targets prior to year of observation

Gravity measures
1. PARENT real GDP                   Real GDP of PARENT country (in trillions)                   X
2. HOST real GDP                     Real GDP of HOST country (in trillions)                     X
3. Distance                          Distance between the two most populous cities in the        X
                                     PARENT and HOST country


Other GDP-related terms
4. PARENT real GDP per capita        Real GDP per capita of PARENT country (constant             X
                                     price: Chain Series)
5. HOST real GDP per capita          Real GDP per capita of HOST country (constant               X
                                     price: Chain Series)
6. Sum of HOST and PARENT real       Sum of HOST and PARENT real GDP                             X
   GDP
7. Similarity of HOST and            Share of HOST real GDP in the sum or HOST and               X
   PARENT real GDP                   PARENT GDP * Share of PARENT real GDP in the
                                     sum or HOST and PARENT GDP
8. Squared GDP difference            Squared real GDP difference between HOST and                X
                                     PARENT country
9. Squared GDP per capita            Squared real GDP per capita difference between              X
   Difference                        HOST and PARENT country
10. HOST urban concentration         Urban population (% of total) in HOST country

11. PARENT urban concentration       Urban population (% of total) in PARENT country


Geography measures other than distance
12. Contiguous border              Dummy variable indicating PARENT and HOST                     X
                                   countries are geographically contiguous
13. HOST remoteness                Distance of HOST country from all other countries
                                   in the world weighted by those other countries’ share
                                   of world GDP (Does not include host country in
                                   calculations)




                                                                                                     36
14. PARENT remoteness                   Distance of PARENT country from all other
                                        countries in the world weighted by those other
                                        countries’ share of world GDP (Does not include
                                        host country in calculations)
15. Time zone difference                Time zone difference between capitol cities of HOST     X
                                        and PARENT countries

Relative labor endowments
16. HOST education level                Average education years in HOST country                 X
17. HOST skill level                    Percent of employment by skilled labor in HOST          X
                                        country
18. PARENT education level              Average education years in PARENT country
19.PARENT skill level                   Percent of employment by skilled labor in PARENT
                                        country
20. Squared education difference        Squared difference in average education years           X
                                        between PARENT and HOST country (proxy for
                                        relative skilled labor endowments)
21. Squared skill difference            Squared difference in percent of employment by          X
                                        skilled labor between PARENT and HOST country
                                        (proxy for relative skilled labor endowments)

22. Interaction of GDP differences      Interaction of GDP differences with education           X
    with education differences          differences
23. Interaction of GDP differences      Interaction of GDP differences with skill differences   X
    with skill differences

Other relative endowment measures
24. HOST capital per worker             Capital per worker in HOST country
25. PARENT capital per worker           Capital per worker in PARENT country
26. Squared difference in capital per   Squared difference in capital per worker between        X
    worker                              HOST and PARENT country
27. HOST land area                      Land area (sq. km) in HOST country
28. PARENT land area                    Land area (sq. km) in PARENT country
29. HOST population density             Population divided by land area in HOST country         X

30. HOST is oil country                 Indicator variable that the HOST country is a top 10
                                        producer or top 10 exporter of oil

Cultural distance
31. Common official language            Indicator variable that PARENT and HOST                 X
                                        countries share a common official language
32. Common language overlap             Indicator variable that PARENT and HOST
                                        countries share a language which at least 9% speak
                                        in each country
33. Colonial relationship               Dummy variable indicating PARENT and HOST               X
                                        countries have had (or do have) a colonial link


Multilateral trade openness
34. HOST trade openness                 HOST country openness (imports plus exports             X
                                        divided by GDP) in constant prices (constant


                                                                                                    37
                                       prices, in %)

35. PARENT trade openness              PARENT country openness (imports plus exports          X
                                       divided by GDP) in constant prices (constant
                                       prices, in %)
36. Interaction of education           Interaction of education differences with HOST trade   X
    differences with HOST trade        openness
    openness
37. Interaction of skill differences   Interaction of skill differences with HOST trade       X
    with HOST trade openness           openness

Bilateral trade openness
                                       Indicator variable for regional trade agreement        X
38. Regional trade agreement           between PARENT and HOST countries
                                       Indicator variable for customs union between           X
39. Customs union                      PARENT and HOST countries
                                       Indicator variable for economic integration            X
                                       agreement in services between PARENT and HOST
40. Service sector agreement           countries

Host country FDI/business costs
41. HOST time to enforce contract      Time required to enforce a contract (days) in HOST
                                       country
42. HOST time to register property     Time required to register property (days) in HOST
                                       country
43. HOST time to start business        Time required to start a business (days) in HOST
                                       country
44. HOST time to resolve               Time to resolve insolvency (years) in HOST country
    insolvency


Host country tax policies
45. HOST corporate tax                 Highest marginal tax rate, corporate rate (%) in       X
                                       HOST country
46. HOST is tax haven                  Indicator variable that the HOST country is
                                       considered a tax haven by the OECD


Bilateral tax and investment agreements
47. Bilateral investment treaty        Dummy variable indicating a bilateral investment       X
                                       treaty in place between HOST and PARENT country
                                       before July 1 of year
48. Double taxation treaty             Dummy variable indicating a double taxation treaty     X
                                       governing “income and capital” in place between
                                       HOST and PARENT country before July 1 of year



Host country communications infrastructure
49. HOST telephones                Mobile and fixed-line telephone subscribers (per 100
                                   people) in HOST country
50. HOST internet users            Internet users (per 100 people) in HOST country




                                                                                                  38
51. HOST computers                    Personal computers (per 100 people) in HOST
                                      country


Host country financial infrastructure
52. HOST domestic credit              Domestic credit provided by banking sector in HOST      X
                                      country (% of GDP)
53. HOST market capitalization        Market capitalization of listed companies (% of         X
                                      GDP)

Political environment and institutions
54. HOST legal institutions          Strength of legal rights index (0=weak to 10=strong)     X
                                     in HOST country
55. HOST political rights            Political rights index for HOST country (Ranges          X
                                     from 1 to 7 with highest score indicating the lowest
                                     level of freedom)
56. HOST civil liberties              Civil liberties index for HOST country (Ranges from
                                      1 to 7 with highest score indicating the lowest level
                                      of freedom)




                                                                                                  39
                                     Table 3
           Level and Log-Level Regressions to Explain FDI Stocks in 2000
                                             Levels                     Log-levels
Variable                             Inclusion    Posterior      Inclusion     Posterior
                                    Probability    Median       Probability     Median
1. PARENT real GDP                      100         7712            100           1.48
2. HOST real GDP                        100         8780            100           1.38
3. Distance                             85          -0.48           100          -0.95
4. PARENT real GDP per capita            93          0.82           100           1.77
5. HOST real GDP per capita              12          0.74            50           0.71
6. Sum of HOST and PARENT                0           NA              0             NA
   real GDP
7. Similarity of HOST and               65         23379             5          -1.17
   PARENT real GDP
8. Squared GDP difference              100         -500.94           7          -0.30
9. Squared GDP per capita              74        -9.18 x 10-6        1           0.00
   difference
10. HOST urban concentration            1           26.83           94           1.66
11. PARENT urban concentra-             1          -37.41           2           -0.35
    tion
12. Contiguous border                    7         3811.4           1            0.05
13. HOST remoteness                      1           0.22          95            1.31
14. PARENT remoteness                    4          -0.67          10            0.80
15. Time zone differences                4        -305.14           9            0.15
16. HOST education level                 1        -140.55           2           -0.46
17. HOST skill level                    71         32098            7            0.81
18. PARENT education level              1         -164.97          54           -0.97
19. PARENT skill level                  1         1232.45           1            0.18
20. Squared education difference         1          55.12           8           -0.09
21. Squared skill difference             9         44724           100           1.68
22. Interaction of GDP differenc-       99          -3.14          NA            NA
    es with education differences
23. Interaction of GDP differenc-       1          -124.84         NA            NA
    es with skill differences
24. HOST capital per worker             18          -0.27           7            0.50
25. PARENT capital per worker           93          -0.36           94           0.98
26. Squared difference in capital       14       2.09 x 10-6        2            0.05
    per worker
27. HOST land area                      67       -7.91 x 10-4        2          -0.08
28. PARENT land area                     2       -2.45 x 10-4        1          -0.01
29. HOST population density              1         -153.16           3           0.18
30. HOST is oil country                  2        -2762.54           1          -0.08
31. Common official language            78         7884.79          99           1.27
32. Common language overlap             1          268.73            1          0.06
33. Colonial relationship               47         7975.17          72          1.08
34. HOST trade openness                  4          23.69           71           0.73


                                                                                      40
35. PARENT trade openness                          1                7.80               3                -0.26
36. Interaction of education                       1                0.58              NA                 NA
   differences with HOST trade
   openness
37. Interaction of skill differ-                   7              354.38              NA                 NA
    ences with HOST trade
    openness
38. Regional trade agreement                        1            1187.19               92               1.17
39. Customs union                                   1             578.25               64               0.94
40. Service sector agreement                       11            4791.78               11               0.69
41. HOST time to enforce                            2              4.38                 1               0.19
    contract
42. HOST time to register                          15             -26.25                3               0.12
    property
43. HOST time to start business                    13             -37.27                1               -0.08
44. HOST time to resolve                           1              -15.39                8               -0.26
    insolvency
45. HOST corporate tax                              2              136.15              51               -0.72
46. HOST is tax haven                               1             2841.19              1                 0.56
47. Bilateral investment treaty                    45            -3335.56              4                -0.25
48. Double taxation treaty                          4            -2153.51              25                0.40
49. HOST telephones                                58              -98.30              7                -0.86
50. HOST internet users                             3               62.20               2               -0.20
51. HOST computers                                  8              110.70               2                0.09
52. HOST domestic credit                            9               33.06               2                0.19
53. HOST market capitalization                     3               16.86               5                0.19
54. HOST legal institutions                         2             -334.53               3               -0.32
55. HOST political rights                           2             2185.30              20               -0.43
56. HOST civil liberties                            4            -1801.26               4               -0.03

Sample size                                       902                                 902
Notes: “Inclusion Probability” refers to the posterior probability that the associated variable is in the true
FDI determinants model. “NA” denotes “not applicable” when the variable is not included because it is
perfectly collinear with other variables once logged.




                                                                                                              41
                                    Table 4
                          Group Inclusion Probabilities
Group                                          2000 Levels           2000 Log Levels
Nonlinear GDP terms                               100                       13
Geography besides pure distance                    24                       95
Endowment-related terms                           100                      100
Multilateral trade openness                        17                       60
Bilateral trade openness                           22                       88
Cultural distance                                  99                      100
Business costs and tax policies                    26                       18
Communications infrastructure                      31                       16
Financial infrastructure                           17                       13
Legal and political institutions                    8                       26
Notes: “Group Inclusion Probabilities” are the probabilities that at least one of the variables
from the group indicated in the first column belongs in the true FDI determinants model.




                                                                                                  42
                                             Table 5
              Inclusion Probabilities Above 50% Using Alternative Measures of FDI
                                       (Logged 2000 Data)
                                                                                                     Cross-border
 Variable                                                  FDI Stock           Affiliate Sales          M&A
 PARENT real GDP                                               100                   100                      100
 HOST real GDP                                                 100                   100                      100
 Distance                                                      100                   100                      100
 PARENT real GDP per capita                                    100                    99                      100
 Squared skill difference                                      100                    13                      79
 Common official language                                       99                     8                      100
 HOST remoteness                                                95                   100                       83
 HOST urban concentration                                       94                     2                      12
 PARENT capital per worker                                      94                     6                       1
 Regional trade agreement                                       92                    37                      100
 Colonial relationship                                          72                     2                      88
 HOST trade openness                                            71                     3                       2
 Customs union                                                  64                    22                      97
 PARENT education level                                         54                    21                       2
 HOST corporate tax                                             51                    78                       5
 HOST real GDP per capita                                       50                     2                       3
 Squared GDP per capita difference                               1                    98                       2
 HOST legal institutions                                         3                    65                       2
 HOST time to start business                                     1                    64                       1
 Squared education difference                                    8                     2                      98
 PARENT remoteness                                              10                     1                      94
 PARENT urban concentration                                      2                     1                      91
 PARENT skill level                                              1                     4                      89
 HOST skill level                                                7                     3                      66

 Sample size                                                   902                   395                      902
Notes: The table displays all variables that have at least a 50% inclusion probability in one of the listed
specifications. Instances where the inclusion probability is 50% or higher are in bold type.




                                                                                                              43
                                          Table 6
           Inclusion Probabilities Above 50% for OECD and Worldwide Samples
                                     (Logged 2000 Data)
                                                                                                   Worldwide
                                                                OECD Sample                         Sample
                                                                      Cross-border                Cross-border
Variable                                                  FDI Stock      M&A                         M&A
HOST real GDP                                               100           100                         100
PARENT real GDP                                             100           100                         100
Distance                                                    100           100                         100
PARENT real GDP per capita                                  100           100                         100
Squared skill difference                                    100            79                             29
Common official language                                     99           100                            100
HOST remoteness                                              95            83                            100
HOST urban concentration                                     94            12                             2
PARENT capital-to-labor endowment                            94             1                             8
Regional trade agreement                                     92           100                            100
Colonial relationship                                        72            88                            100
HOST country trade openness                                  71             2                             1
Customs union                                                64            97                            100
PARENT education level                                       54             2                             74
HOST corporate tax                                           51             5                            100
HOST real GDP per capita                                     50             3                             2
Squared education difference                                  8            98                             79
PARENT remoteness                                            10            94                            100
PARENT urban concentration                                    2            91                            100
PARENT skill level                                            1            89                             39
HOST skill level                                              7            66                             23
Bilateral investment treaty                                     4                   21                   100
Double taxation treaty                                         25                    2                   100
HOST education level                                            2                    2                   100
HOST years to resolve insolvency                                8                   46                    90
Service sector agreement                                       11                    4                    93
Contiguous border                                               1                    1                    84

Observations                                                  902                   902                 3081
Notes: The table displays all variables that have at least a 50% inclusion probability in one of the listed
specifications. Instances where the inclusion probability is 50% or higher are in bold type.




                                                                                                              44
                                         Table 7
          Posterior Median Slope Coefficients for OECD and Worldwide Samples
                                  (Logged 2000 Data)
                                                                                                  Worldwide
                                                               OECD Sample                         Sample
                                                                     Cross-border                Cross-border
Variable                                                 FDI Stock      M&A                         M&A
HOST real GDP                                               1.38         0.91                        0.61
PARENT real GDP                                             1.48         1.05                        0.82
Distance                                                   -0.95        -0.60                       -0.48
PARENT real GDP per capita                                  1.77         1.37                        0.71
Squared skill difference                                    1.68         0.77                        0.33
Common official language                                    1.27         1.15                        0.50
HOST remoteness                                             1.31         1.02                        0.54
HOST urban concentration                                    1.66         0.70                        0.09
PARENT capital-to-labor endowment                           0.98         0.08                       -0.15
Regional trade agreement                                    1.17         1.21                        1.13
Colonial relationship                                       1.08         0.81                        1.26
HOST country trade openness                                 0.73         0.14                       -0.03
Customs union                                               0.94         1.00                        0.80
PARENT education level                                     -0.97        -0.21                        0.39
HOST corporate tax                                         -0.72        -0.29                       -0.34
HOST real GDP per capita                                    0.71        -0.19                        0.61
Squared education difference                               -0.09        -0.13                       -0.05
PARENT remoteness                                           0.80         1.12                        0.48
PARENT urban concentration                                 -0.35        -0.73                       -0.44
PARENT skill level                                          0.18         0.93                        0.38
HOST skill level                                            0.81         0.96                        0.30
Bilateral investment treaty                                -0.25        -0.26                       -0.40
Double taxation treaty                                      0.40         0.12                        0.33
HOST education level                                       -0.46         0.23                        0.67
HOST years to resolve insolvency                           -0.26         0.23                        0.13
Service sector agreement                                    0.69         0.62                        0.69
Contiguous border                                           0.05         0.08                        0.21

Observations                                                  902                  902                 3081
Notes: The table displays the posterior median slope coefficient for all variables that have at least a 50%
inclusion probability in one of the listed specifications. Coefficients where the associated inclusion probability
is 50% or higher are in bold type.




                                                                                                          45
                                         Table 8
          Inclusion Probabilities Above 50% for OECD and Worldwide Samples
                        (Logged and First-differenced 2000 Data)
                                                                                             Worldwide
                                                        OECD Sample                           Sample
                                                    FDI    Cross-border                     Cross-border
 Variable                                          Stock       M&A                             M&A
 PARENT real GDP per capita                          97         40                                  3
 PARENT urban concentration                           3         90                                 100
 HOST real GDP                                        3                   9                        100
 PARENT real GDP                                      5                  40                        100
 PARENT education level                               2                  14                        100
 Regional trade agreement                             2                   5                        100
 Service sector agreement                             2                   2                        100
 Customs union                                        3                   3                         99
 PARENT remoteness                                    8                   2                         99
 GDP similarity                                       3                   6                         97
 HOST real GDP per capita                             3                   3                         96
 PARENT skill level                                   3                   2                         96
 HOST skill level                                     5                  38                         85

 Observations                                       244                 244                       1246
Notes: The table displays all variables that have at least a 50% inclusion probability in one of the listed
specifications. Instances where the inclusion probability is 50% or higher are in bold type.




                                                                                                              46
                                         Table 9
         Inclusion Probabilities Above 50% Using Alternative Parameter Priors
                             (FDI Stock - Logged 2000 Data)
 Variable                                              FLS                                  UIP
 PARENT real GDP                                        100                                 100
 HOST real GDP                                          100                                 100
 Distance                                               100                                 100
 PARENT real GDP per capita                             100                                 100
 Squared skill difference                               100                                 100
 Common official language                                99                                  98
 HOST remoteness                                         95                                  97
 HOST urban concentration                                94                                  98
 PARENT capital per worker                               94                                  97
 Regional trade agreement                                92                                  98
 Colonial relationship                                   72                                  90
 HOST trade openness                                     71                                  80
 Customs union                                           64                                  78
 PARENT education level                                  54                                  63
 HOST corporate tax                                      51                                  73
 HOST real GDP per capita                                50                                  49

 Sample size                                            902                                 902
Notes: The table displays all variables that have 50% or higher inclusion probability for at least one of two
alternative specifications for parameter priors. Instances where the inclusion probability is 50% or higher
are in bold type. Results are for the FDI Stock dataset and log-levels specification. FLS refers to priors
suggested by Fernandez, Ley and Steele (2001a), as described in Section 3. UIP refers to the Unit
Information Prior of Kass and Wasserman (1995), as described in Section 5.




                                                                                                          47
