                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TESTING DUAL LABOR MARKET THEORY:
                A RECONSIDERATION OF THE EVIDENCE


                        William T. Dickens

                            Kevin Lang



                      Working Paper No. 1670




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 1985




We would like to acknowledge the able research assistance of Alan
MacArthur and Phillip Bokovoy and the generous research support of
the Institute of Industrial Relations at Berkeley and the National
Science Foundation under grant number SES—8409380. We also thank
James Albrecht, Elizabeth Bishop, Aniihai Glazer, Lawrence Katz,
Jonathan Leonard, David Lilien, Martin Orans, Ken Small and David
Smith for coninents on an earlier draft. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1670
                                               July 1985




                  Testing Dual Labor Market Theory:
                  A Reconsideration of the Evidence



                                ABSTRACT




    this paper replicates and extends our earlier analysis of dual market
theory. We use a technique which estimates for each worker a probability
of being in the primary sector on the basis of his characteristics. We
use this information to determine the occupational and industrial
composition of the sectors. We continue to produce results which are very
supportive of the theory. In studies by other authors, workers were
"assigned" to the primary or secondary sector on the basis of the industry
or occupation in which they are employed and educated guesses about the
industries or occupations which make up the two sectors. We find that
previous studies, which produced mixed and inconclusive results, had
serious misclassification problems. In the cases examined, at least half
of all full time prime age male workers identified as being in the
secbndary sector by these classification schemes are found to have a high
probability of primary.sector attachment. Past studies which were most
supportive of dual market theory are found to have had the least severe
misclassification problems.


William 1. Dickens                         Kevin Lang
Department of Economics                    School of Social Sciences
University of California                   University of California
Berkeley, CA 94702                         Irvine, CA 92717
(415) 642—4308                             (714) 856—6205
         —5452
                        Testing Dual Market Theory

                                    by

                            William 1. Dickens

                                    and

                                Kevin Lang



    Dual labor market theory maintains that there are two sectors of the

labor market: one with high wages, good working conditions, stable

employment, rewards for education and job experience and opportunities for

advancement (primary sector) and one with low wages, bad working

conditions, unstable employment, no rewards for education or job

experience and no opportunities for advancement (secondary sector). The

secondary market can persist because primary jobs are rationed ——     not
everyone who wants and is qualified for a primary jo.b is able to obtain

one. In particular, women and minorities face discrimination in obtaining

primary sector employment (Doeringer and Piore, 1971; Piore, 1980a&b).

    While the characteristics of the jobs within each sector vary, there

is substantial evidence that jobs can be usefully thought of as falling

into one of two categories as dual market theory predicts. When industry,

occupation or worker characteristics are factor analyzed, there are a

dominant factor fitting the dual market typology and bimodally distributed

factor scores (Gordon, 1971; Buchele, 1976a&b; Oster, 1979). However,

these studies do not address the two aspects of dual. market theory which

are of greatest economic and sociological interest ——   that   there are no

returns to education and experience in the secondary sector and that not

everyone who wants and is qualified for a primary job can get one.
                                                                           2




     A number of studies have attempted to determine whether
                                                               secondary

 wages increase with education and experience (Beck, Haran and Tolbert,

 1978&80; Bibb and Form, 1977; Hodson, 1977; Osterman, 1975; Carnoy and

 Rumberger, 1980; Buchele, 1976a&b; Rosenberg, 1976; Wright, 1979; Zucker

 and Rosenstein, 1981). These studies divide occupations or industries

 into two sectors on the basis of the characteristics of the jobs or of the

workers in those occupations and industries. Having divided the sample

they test far differences in the wage equations in the two sectors. In

particular the returns to education and experience are examined for

congruence with dual market theory. Some studies have found patterns

corresponding roughly to dual market theory, others have found little

support.for the hypothesis. None of the studies is entirely free of

anomalies. Zucker and Rosenstein (1981) suggest that the differences are

largely due to the use of different classification systems.

    The contribution of our 1985 paper was the development of a technique

(described below) which allowed the simultaneous determination of the

probability that a worker is in the primary or secondary sector and the

form of the wage determination mechanisms in the sectors. This allowed us

to avoid relying on judgement to classify industries or occupations as

primary or secondary. The technique also allowed a direct test of the

hypothesis that not everyone who wants and is qualified for a primary

sector job can find one, an issue which had not been addressed

previously.1 Our results were strongly supportive of both major tenets

of dual market theory    that there are two sectors fitting the dual

market typology and that at least some minority workers are involuntarily

confined to the secondary sector.
                                                                          3




    In this paper we extend and replicate this analysis using a new data

set. In addition, we use our approach to determine the sectoral

composition of industries and occupations. With this information we are

able to reexamine the classification systems used by past authors. The

sectoral composition of industries and occupations corresponds roughly to

the expectations implied by the classification systems used by past

authors. We find that it is possible to identify industries and

occupations which are composed almost entirely of primary workers.

However, no industries are made up entirely of secondary workers. Thus

all of the classification systems are subject to substantial

misclassification error. Five classification schemes are analyzed in

detail. We find that those which produce results which are most

supportive of dual market theory are also the ones with the least severe

misclassification problems.

    The rest of this paper is divided into four sections. In the next

section we discuss methods for testing dual market theory. In section II

we describe the data used for this analysis and the results of the

extensions to our earlier work. In section III we present results on the

location of the secondary sector and the reevaluation of the

classification systems used by past authors. Finally, section IV is a

conclusion which reviews the results, discusses their implications, and

suggests directions for future research.
                                                                             4




I. Testing Dual Market Theory

       If we knew which workers were in the primary sector and which were in

the secondary sector we might try to test the hypothesis that the process

determining wages in the two sectors was different by estimating separate

wage equations for the two groups. Following the standard practice of

letting the log of the wage be a function of personal characteristics, we

might estimate:



(1)         in Wj =      + epi


if person i is in the primary sector and



(2)         in w = X1B5 +



if    he or she is in the secondary sector, where w is the wage, X is a

vector of personal characteristics, 8p and 8 are vectors of

parameters and ep and e5 are random error terms. Under the dual labor

market hypothesis the       coefficients on education and experience would

be large and significant while the B coefficients on education and

experience would be small and insignificant.

      Formally we could test the hypothesis that the two sets of

coefficients are equal. If they were not, we could consider informally

whether the pattern of coefficients corresponds to that predicted by dual

labor market theory. The formal test determines whether the wage

equations for the two sectors are the same and, hence, whether two
                                                                          5




equations have substantially more predictive power than one. If the

coefficients were significantly different and two equations fit

significantly better than one, we might conclude that there are at least

two sectors. The informal test allows us to determine whether the two

sectors are those described by dual market theory.

    This is the procedure used in tests of dual labor market theory which

address the issue of whether there are different returns to education and

experience in the two sectors. It suffers from two important defects. If

unobserved characteristics which determine wages also determine sector

attachment, estimates of the wage equations can be badly biased in a

manner which will tend to give results supportive of dual labor market

theory. For example, suppose that the classification system used in a

study divided workers into the sectors on the basis of their wages. It

would not be surprising to find that the effect of education on wages

among low wage jobs is small. To take an extreme case, suppose that the

researcher assumed that the secondary sector consisted only of jobs paying

the minimum wage. Obviously, the only variable affecting the wage in jobs

paying the minimum wage is the constant term; education and experience

have no effect. In general, dividing the sample in this way will bias the

estimated returns to education and experience towards zero in both

sectors. However, since the secondary sector is smaller than the primary

sector, the bias in the secondary sector equation will be greater (see

figure 1). Thus, even though there is only one wage equation common to

both sectors, when a wage equation is estimated for the set of low wage

jobs, wages are estimated to be unaffected by education. In technical
                                                                                6




terms, this happens because the truncation of the sample produces a

correlation between the errors of the wage equations and the X variables.

    The techniques for handling this problem are well known (tladdala,

1983). To eliminate truncation bias, we specify a third equation

measuring the tendency to be in the primary sector,



         y       —       +
             1       1       ewi



where y* is the tendency to be in the primary sector and all •other

variables are defined analogously to those in equations (1) and (2).

Equation (3) is known as the switching equation because individuals are in

the primary sector if y is greater than zero and in the secondary sector

if y* is less than zero.2 There are several techniques for estimating

the system of equations (1) —      (3).   Their use would allow us to correct

for the bias caused by the correlation between the X variables and the

errors in the wage equations.

    A second difficulty with the standard approach is that we do not know

whether workers are in the primary or secondary sector. Even if there are

two sectors of the labor market, our estimates of         and B5 will be

similar if we misclassify a substantial portion of the sample. All

existing systems necessarily involve some misclassification of workers.

For example, if workers are classified on the basis of industry, managers

in industries composed mostly of secondary workers will be incorrectly

classified as secondary workers. The janitor in a social science

consulting firm will be treated in the same way as the professional
                                                                           7




 researchers. Classifications based on occupations are also flawed. The

 same occupation may be primary in one firm or industry and secondary in

 another. Assembly workers in some firms may be well paid and may have

 opportunities for advancement, and in others they may not. Consequently,

 any classification scheme based on occupations or industries will

misclassify some workers. The solution is to treat each worker's sector

 of employment as unknown. This is the approach we use.

    The tatistical technique we employ is known as endogenous switching

with unknown regimes. For those not familiar with the technique, we

provide only a brief nontechnical explanation here. We rovide a

technical and extensive intuitive description in our 1985 paper.

    Consider a scatter diagram such as diagram 2 which plots log wages

against education. We can imagine fitting first one line and then two

lines. In the first case, we might, as in the case of ordinary least

squares, choose the line which minimizes the sum of squared distances of

the points from the line. It is then natural to fit two lines by

minimizing the sum of squared distances from the closest line.

Alternatively, we could assign a probability that the point is determined

by the first line rather than the second line. We would then measure the

distance of each point from both lines and weight each squared distance by

the probability that the point was determined by that line. We could then

establish whether two lines were preferable to one line by determining

whether the sum of squared distances was substantially smaller with two

lines than with a single line.
                                                                           8




     In practice we should not determine the probability that a point was

 determined by a particular line by measuring the distance of the point

 from the two lines. Instead, we should allow the
                                                    probability to depend on
 the worker's characteristics (X3i in equation 3). Note that if we allow

 the probability to depend on the individuals' characteristics, we obtain

 not only an estimate of the parameters of the equations which describe the

 two lines, but an estimate of the probability that a particular worker's

wage is determined by the first as opposed to the second line.

     The actual estimation technique used in this paper differs slightly

from the approach we have just described. The probability of the wage

being determined by the first or the second line is modeled as a nonlinear

function of the worker's characteristics and the error terms in equations

(1) and (2). The particular form of this function is derived by assuming

that the error terms in equations (1) — (3) are normally distributed. The

parameters of equations (1) — (3) are estimated jointly using a maximum

likelihood technique. Nevertheless, the nontechnical description above

describes, in essence, the estimation technique used in this paper.

    Simply testing for the existence of two sectors does not provide a

complete test of the dual labor market hypothesis. To provide support for

the theory, our results should give estimates of the wage equations which

correspond to the sectors of dual market theory. The wages that most

workers would receive if they were employed in the primary sector should

be higher than the wages they would receive in the secondary sector. The

primary sector wage should increase with education and experience while

the secondary sector wage should be nearly unaffected by these variables.
                                                                           9




Since we will be dealing with a sample of adult male heads—of—households

we would also expect most of the sample to be associated with the primary

sector.

    As noted above, in addition to postulating the existence of two

sectors with distinct wage setting mechanisms, dual labor market theory

maintains that blacks and women have difficulty obtaining primary sector

employment. To see how to test this hypothesis, consider again the

scatter diagram of log wages and education. For simplicity, assume that

the best fitting lines are the same for blacks and for whites. In that

case, for each level of education blacks can expect to receive the same

wages as whites do in that sector (an assumption we relax in our empirical

work). Under these assumptions, if there is no job discrimination, for

each level of education, the points for blacks and whites should be

equally likely to be scattered around the primary sector line. In other

words, if eighty percent of white high school graduates are scattered

around the primary sector line, eighty percent of black high school

graduates should be scattered around the primary sector line. If we find

that blacks are more likely to be associated with the secondary sector

line, we must choose between two hypotheses ——   blacks   like secondary

sector employment more than whites do or blacks have more difficulty

obtaining primary employment. Our approach does not allow us to

distinguish between these two hypotheses, but auxiliary evidence discussed

in footnote 12 suggests that the latter is more probable.
                                                                            10




     We use this approach to replicate and extend the test of the dual

 labor market hypothesis in our 1985 paper. However, the primary objective

 of this paper is not replication of our earlier work but reconsideration

of tests of the dual market hypothesis which have relied on occupation or

 industry based classification schemes. As noted above, there is reason to

believe that the anomalous and conflicting results obtained by earlier

studies reflect significant misclassification of workers. Our approach

allows us to estimate the distribution df workers across industries and

occupations. This distribution can be compared to the classification

schemes used by previous authors and the extent of misclassification

judged.

    Equation (3) tells us what proportion of workers with the same

personal characteristics (Xis) we would expect to be in the primary

sector if we knew nothing about how much they were earning. For workers

of the same type, each individual's wage conveys additional information

which can help us determine which sector he is. in. Figure 2 can help

explain how this is done. It shows the primary sector and secondary

sector wage by education for workers who are otherwise identical. A

worker with wage and education at point A where the two wage lines cross

would be assigned the average probability of being in the primary sector

of all workers of his type ——   his   wage tells us nothing about which sector

he is in. Worker B will have a very high probability of being in the

primary sector because his point is very near the primary sector line and

far from the secondary sector line. Worker C will have a very low

probability of being in the primary sector. Worker D will be assigned a
                                                                       11




probability of being in the secondary sector which is only slightly higher

than for similar workers. Even though he is closer to the secondary

sector wage line than to the primary sector line, he could be assigned a

higher probability of being in the primary sector than the secondary

sector if other people with his non—wage characteristics are

disproportionately in the primary sector.

    Note that while our estimation technique entails calculating a

probability of being in each sector for each worker, the above explanation

shows that we can get better estimates of the probability. The two

probabilities have very different interpretations. The probability

calculated in the course of the estimation of the model is the probability

that the worker will end up in the primary or secondary sector given his

non-wage characteristics. However, by the time we observe him in our

sample, each worker is either in the primary sector with probability, one

or in the secondary sector with probability one. The ex post probability

we calculate is therefore a measure of our ignorance -- how certain we are

that this individual is in the primary sector. Thus, if we estimate that

an individual has a 99% probability of being in the primary sector, we are

reasonably certain that he is in the primary sector while if we estimate

that he has a 50% probability of being in the primary sector, we have no

information about sector of attachment. Therefore, to describe the

cccnposition of an industry or occupation we calculate the proportions of

workers in that industry or occupation whom we can accurately classify as

being in the primary or secondary sector and the proportion for whom

sector of employment cannot be accurately ascertained.4
                                                                          12



 III. Data and Extensions

     The data used for this study are drawn from the 1983 Current

 Population Survey. All male heads—of—household between 20 and 65 years of

 age who were employed, reported that they normally worked more than twenty

 hours a week, earned more than the minimum wage, and for whom data on

wages5 and all independent variables were available were included in the

 sample.   Screening on this basis left us with 4,391 observations in
January, and 48,411 for the year. For cost reasons, the tests which

largely replicate our earlier study use only the January sample. The

final tests and estimates of the distribution of workers between the

sectors use the larger sample. The sample was restricted to men because

of the substantially different nature of many women's jobs and the

difficulty of fitting them into the dual market typology. In particular,

pink collar jobs have many characteristics of both primary and secondary

jobs. The other restrictions are made to ensure that if a secondary

sector is identified by the analysis, it consists of more than part time

earners or those with transient labor market attachment. As a result,

ours is a very conservative test of dual market theory. We will fail to

find a secondary market unless there are a substantial number of prime age

males in it.

    Our earlier work specified wage equations for the two sectors which

included a constant, number of years of education and post school job

experience and dummy variables for residence in an SMSA, never having been

married and race.6 Our first concern is that our previous finding of a

distinct secondary sector and rationing of primary jobs was a consequence
                                                                          13




of not including the square of the number of years of experience in the

wage equations. Such a term is frequently included in wage equations

because the rate at which wages increase with experience is expected to be

greater for earlier years of experience than for later yearsof

experience. Hence the coefficient on experience squared should be

negative, indicating that the wage increase associated with an additional

year of experience declines and may even become negative as the amount of

experience the worker has already accumulated increases. Since many of

the people we identified as having a high probability of being secondary

workers were over 50 and since it is well known that average wages peak at

about 50 years and then begin to fall, it is possible that those people we

identified as being secondary workers were just older workers earning less

than a wage equation with no second order term would predict.

    We therefore begin by estimating our original model with the sinöle

modification that experience squared is included in the wage equations.

This does not significantly alter the results. The results are reported

in Table 1. The first column of the table gives ordinary least squares

(OLS) estimates of a standard wage equation while the second through

fourth columns give the estimates of the dual labor market model. The

second and third columns give the estimated wage equations for the primary

and secondary sectors (equations 1 and 2 in the text) while column four

gives the estimates for the switching equation (equation 3 in the text)

which determines the probability that an individual will obtain primary

employment. The second and third columns can therefore be interpreted in

the same way as standard wage equations. Since the dependent variable is
                                                                          14



 the natural logarithm of the wage, the coefficients are percentage changes

 associated with a one unit change in the explanatory variable. The

 parameters of the switching equation do not have an analogous

 interpretation since the probability of obtaining primary sector

 employment is a nonlinear function of the coefficients. However, positive

coefficients indicate that the variable increases the probability that an

individual with that characteristic will obtain primary employment.

     As in our previous work, the primary sector equation is similar to

that obtained using OLS estimation. The return to education is somewhat

higher in the primary sector than in the OLS equation and the black—white

wage differential somewhat lower. In the secondary sector there is no

return to schooling and a small although statistically significant return

to experience. In both sectors the effect of experience squared is

negative so that the return to experience decreases as experience already

accumulated increases. There are also somewhat surprisingly large effects

of living in an SMSA and never having been married on secondary sector

wages. Using a likelihood ratio test we can formally reject at the .01

level thehypothesis that only one wage equation is needed to describe the
data.7

    Expected wages are higher in the primary sector for most workers. For

example, a white who had never married, did not live in an SPISA, had eight

years of education and no experience would earn marginally more in the

primary sector than in the secondary sector. After twenty years of

experience, he would earn nearly two dollars an hour more in the primary

sector than in the secondary sector.
                                                                          15




    Examination of the coefficients of the switching equation shows that

having been married, having a lot of education and being white increases

the likelihood of being in the primary sector.

    Our results also confirm our previous finding of noneconomic barriers

to primary sector eniployment for blacks. Blacks and/or more educated

workers are more likely to be employed in the secondary sector than we

would expect if they were free to choose between the two sectors. To

understand how we reach this conclusion, consider the case in which there

are no noneconomic barriers to enployment and individuals choose to work

in the sector in which they receive the highest wages over their

lifetimes. In our earlier paper, we demonstrated that under reasonable

assumptions, this implies that the coefficients of the switching equation

should be equal to the difference between the coefficients of the primary

and secondary wage equations.8 Intuitively, if a characteristic like

education earns a larger reward in one sector than in another, people with

that characteristic should be more likely to be in the sector where they

earn the reward. Therefore, if education is more valuable in the primary

sector than in the secondary sector, the coefficient in the switching

regression should be positive —— people with more education should be more

likely to be in the primary sector. In fact, this relation holds, but the

effect is not as large as would be expected given how much more educated

people earn in the primary sector.

   Of course, even if there were no noneconomic barriers to primary

sector eniployment, workers would not choose their sector of employment
                                                                          16




solely on the basis of the wages they would earn but would also consider

working conditions and other noripecuniary aspects of employment in the two

sectors. If personal characteristics affect how workers respond to the

nonpecuniary aspects of employment, the coefficients in the switching

equation may not be equal to the difference between the primary and

secondary sector coefficients even if workers are free to choose their

sector of employment. Since we anticipate that people who do not live in

an SIISA or who have never been married may view the rionpecuniary aspects

of secondary employment differently from those in SISAs or who have been

married, we test only the constraint that the coefficients on race and

schooling in the switching equation are equal to the difference between

the coefficients in the wage equations for the two sectors. The

likelihood ratio test statistic for this constraint is 7.96. With one

degree of freedcoi9 we reject the hypothesis at the .01 level. Both

coefficients are larger than what we would expect if individuals were free

to choose between the sectors. We therefore conclude that at least some

blacks and/or more educated people are confined to jobs in the secondary

sector.'° Of course, tastes for the nonpecuniary aspects of employment

may differ by race and education. However, other studies show that blacks

and more educated workers value the nonpecuniary aspects of primary

employment more rather than less than other workers.12

    Since we reject the hypothesis that individuals are free to choose

their sector of employment, the assumption that individuals make a one

time decision regarding their sector of employment (as they would if there

were free choice and sector specific skills) is not valid. Consequently,
                                                                           (7


the   exclusion of experience and experience squared from the switching

equation is not justified. Columns 5 - 7 of Table 1 give estimates of the

model with experience and experience squared in the switching equation

using the sample for the entire year. The results are not substantially

different from those obtained using the smaller sample and without the

experience variables in the switching equation except that standard errors

are generally smaller and the return to experience in the secondary sector

is now estimated to be negative in the early years of a worker's career

and positive only towards the end. In contrast to our previous paper, we

can now reject the hypothesis of no black—white wage differential in the

primary sector although our estimate of this differential remains smaller

than that obtained using OLS estimation. Again, using a likelihood ratio

test, we can reject the single sector model.

      The division of the work force into two sectors would be without

consequence if workers were free to move between sectors and skills were

fully portable. In this case, workers would be employed in whichever

sector offered them the highest wage adjusted for nonpecuniary attributes

of employment. Following the same reasoning used to derive the test of

free choice when some skills are not perfectly portable, we can test the

above model by testing whether the coefficients in the switching equation

are equal to the difference between the primary and secondary wage

coefficients. Again, since the other variables may be related to the

value attached to nonpecuniary benefits, we limit ourselves to testing

this equality for education and race. The hypothesis of free choice can

be rejected at the .01 level.
                                                                           18




     These results. are strongly supportive of dual market theory. We can

not reject any of the predictions of dual market theory and we can reject

the alternative hypothesis that the dual structure does not exist or that

people are free to choose between the sectors. In particular, we find

that the returns to education are near zero in the secondary sector and

that that the return to experience is considerably smaller in the

secondary sector than in the primary sector. Past work has not been so

unambiguously supportive of dual market theory. We turn now to the

question of whether our method can shed light on why past work has not

been as decisive.



III. Locating the Secondary Sector.

    Table 2 shows the breakdown of sector attachment for several types of

workers. These are estimates of the ex post probabilities that the worker

is actually in a given sector rather than the ex ante probability that he

will obtain employment in that sector. The three columns next to each

category show the percent of people in that category who had a 0—30%

probability of being in the secondary sector (secondary workers) a 30—70%

probability (?s) and a 70—100% probability (primary workers).1'

    In the entire sample 7.5% of workers appear to be associated with the

secondary sector. While this may seem small, 13.5% have unknown

attachment of whom many presumably are in the secondary sector. Further,

it should be remembered that we are using a sample of male full time

workers who are heads of households.   If women, teenagers and part time

workers were taken into account, the proportion of workers in the

secondary sector would be higher.
                                                                          19




     As might be expected, people who live in SMSAs, who are or have been

married, whites, and the more educated are most likely to be found in

 primary sector jobs. Also union workers and those who have jobs with a

 union contract are much more likely to be found in the primary sector.

     Tables 3 and 4 present the same breakdown for various industries and

occupations. The results are substantially in accord with descriptive

work on the dual market. Agricultural workers, retail sales workers, and

service workers are more likely to be associated with the secondary

market. Most manufacturing workers are very likely to be in the primary

sector, but textile and apparel workers are not. Also, more secondary

workers can be found among operatives in manufacturing than among the

skilled crafts. One notable attribute of these tables suggests why past

studies have often produced anomalous and inconsistent results —— None of

the industries or occupations examined are identifiable as being entirely

secondary. It seans that even in those industries or occupations which

are substantially secondary, there are many people who are probably

primary workers. This finding is not an artifact of our choice of

industries or occupations for this table. It was true of all detailed

(three digit census codes) occupations and industries for which there were

enough people in our sample to be confident of the composition estimates.

With over 48,000 people this was nearly all categories.

    A large number of classification schemes have been used in previous

research. The large degree of misclassification which is inherent in

industry or occupation based schemes suggests that one reason for the

inconsistency of results across studies may be varying degrees of
                                                                          20




inaccuracy. To cast light on this possibility, we review four industrial

classification schemes (Beck, Moran and Tolbert, 1978; Tolbert, Horan and

Beck, 1980; Bibb and Form, 1977; Modson, 1977) and one occupational

classification scheme (Osterman, 1975). We chose these studies because

Zucker and Rosenstein (1981) have reanalyzed the four industrial schemes

and present a direct comparison of their results. Osterman's occupational

classification system is the most accessible and one of the most widely

used.13

    Zucker and Rosenstein cpare the industrial classification schemes

first by examining the average characteristics of workers in each sector.

Of the seventeen characteristics examined, Beck, Moran and Tolbert's

classification system produced the anticipated differences in means for

twelve, Tolbert, Horan and Beck's system produced differences with the

expected sign for nine characteristics, Bibb and Form's systen produced

seven with the anticipated sign and Hodson's scheme produced six.

    In addition, Zucker and Rosenstein estimated separate earnings

equations for each sector for the four classification schemes. Beck,

Moran and Tolbert's (1978) system was the only one which produced

significantly different results in the two sectors. Thus among the

industrial classification schemes, Beck, Horan and Tolbert seems to have

performed somewhat better than the others, followed by Tolbert, Horan and

Beck, Bibb and Form and Hodson.

    Studies which have used occupational classifications have generally

been more supportive of dual market theory than those using industrial

classification (Rosenberg, 1976; Osterman, 1975).   In particular, Osterman
                                                                           21




 estimates sharply differing wage equations for the primary and secondary

 sectors, and the differences correspond to the predictions of dual labor

 market theory.

     Table 5 presents our estimates of the true distribution of workers in

 each of the five studies' "sectors". Our results suggest that all five

 schemes are broadly consistent with the data. Sectors classified    as

 "periphery" or "secondary" contain a higher fraction of secondary workers

 and fewer primary workers. However, all five schemes also misclassify a

 large number of workers. Thus it is not surprising that the evidence

generated by using these classification systems is so mixed. Of course,

these classification systems might perform better for women, teenagers and

part time workers. However, prime age males make up a substantial

proportion of employment in nearly all three digit occupations and

industries. Thus, even in a broader sample there would be substantial

'misclassification.

    Osterman's occupationally based classification scheme does a much

better job than the industrial schemes of dividing workers between sectors

although substantial misclassification remains. It nevertheless appears

that his results are strongly supportive of the dual labor market

hypothesis because his classification scheme is more accurate than those

used by other researchers. Further, it is worth noting that the two

schemes used by Beck, Horan and Tolbert, which performed marginally better

in Zucker and Rosenstein's cctnparison, perform slightly better than the

other two systems. Both have fewer primary workers misclassified as being

in the periphery, and more secondary workers who are correctly classified.
                                                                          22



IV. Conclusion.

    Past attempts to test the two most important tenets of dual market

theory ——   that   workers receive no returns to human capital investments in

the secondary sector and primary sector jobs are rationed —- have produced

mixed and inconclusive results. A major problem with past studies was the

use of a priori classification systems. The analysis in our 1985 paper

and here avoids this problem. We use a statistical technique which allows

the simultaneous determination of the sector workers are in and the

characteristics of the sectors. Both the analysisin our earlier paper

and the extensions presented here are strongly supportive of dual market

theory.

    Further, in this paper we have used the switching model to determine

the sectoral caiposition of industries and occupations. We have used this

information to evaluate the classification systems used by past

researchers. We find that there are almost no occupations or industries

which are entirely secondary. Consequently, none of the systems used by

previous researchers avoids substantial misclassifications. Using our

sample of adult mall full time workers, we find that between 52% and 71%

of those classified as being in the secondary sector or periphery by the

five systems we evaluate are probably primary sector workers. Only 11 to

20% of those classified as secondary by these schemes are identified as

having a high probability of being secondary by our model. Finally, of

the schemes we analyzed, those with marginally less severe

misclassification problems produce results more in accord with dual market

theory.
                                                                         23




    Taken together these findings provide extremely strong support for the

view that labor market segmentation is an important determinant of the

distribution of value in the U.S. The results which suggest that at least

nonwhites may not have easy access to primary sector jobs should raise

questions about the efficiency and fairness of the mechanism by which

primary sector jobs are allocated.

    One important area for future research is continued examination of how

primary sector jobs are allocated and what can be done to make the system

of allocation fair and efficient. In particular, patterns of mobility

between the sectors are of interest for what they reveal about the effects

of segmentation on lifetime incane. These are issues we intend to address

in future research.
                                                                        24




Footnotes

1. Some studies have attempted to examine the related issue of restricted
mobility between the sectors. The results are mixed and difficult to
interpret. Leigh (1976) and Schiller (1977) find substantial upward
mobility for blacks and those at the bottom of the income distribution and
argue that this refutes dual market theory. On the other hand, Rosenberg
(1976) and Carnoy and Rumberger (1980) find that minority workers are more
likely to begin their careers in the secondary sector and, having started
there, are less likely to leave than whites. These authors argue that
differential mobility supports dual market theory. However, dual market
theory does not rule out all mobility between the sectors. These studies
do not address the key issue —— whether there are qualified individuals
who would like to work in the primary sector but cannot find a job there.

2. The use of zero as a cutoff point is an inconsequential normalization.
Any other cutoff point could be used without substantively altering the
results.

3. More formally, suppose that there are some sector specific skills so
that workers choose their sector of employment at the beginning of their
careers. We assume that workers would choose to enter the secondary
sector only if the ratio of the present discounted value of their lifetime
earnings in the secondary sector to the present discounted value of their
lifetime earnings in the primary sector exceeds some amount which
compensates them for the poorer working conditions in the secondary
sector. The assumption that the effect of experience on wages is
multiplicative is nearly universal in empirical work. Under this
assumption, the condition that workers enter the secondary sector is just

         Xi(Bs — Bp) +        —
(4)                      e5       epi
                                        > C


where X excludes experience and C is a function of the compensation
required for secondary employment and the returns to experience in the two
sectors. If, given the pecuniary benefits of being in the primary and
secondary sectors, blacks are more likely than whites to be in the
secondary sector, our estimates will indicate that C is lower for blacks
than for whites. As noted in the text, this suggests that either blacks
are less averse to secondary employment or blacks are not free to choose
between the sectors.

4. A straightforward application of Bayes theorem shows that the
probability that a worker is in the primary sector is the likelihood for
the primary sector for that observation divided by the likelihood for the
whole observation.

5. For salaried workers, wages are computed by dividing weekly earned
income by normal hours of work.
                                                                       25




6. Job experience is measured as Age — (Years of schooling +   5).
7. Although the single equation model is nested in the switching model
when the switching equation model is constrained to yield the single
equation model, several parameters are unidentified. This problem
complicates the calculation of the degrees of freedom. In addition, it is
possible that the asymptotic likelihood ratio statistic does not have a
chi—squared distribution. However, if we reinterpret the null hypothesis
as being that there is a single sector and that the unidentified
parameters are zero, it is clear that the test follows a chi—squared
distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the number of constraints
plus the number of unidentified parameters. Treating the degrees of
freedom in this way therefore yields a conservative test using the
chi—squared distribution.

8. The assumptions are that experience is worth more in the sector where
it was acquired then in the other sector and that utility can be expressed
as being proportional to the present discounted value of lifetime earnings
where the factor of proportionality is different for the two sectors.
Under these assumptions, the experience variables are not included in the
switching equation because, following the above assumptions, sector
attachment is a once—and—for—all choice. Therefore under these
assumptions the probability of primary sector attachment should not vary
with job experience.

9. Two coefficients are constrained, but imposing the first constraint
constitutes a normalization of the unidentified variance of the switching
equation error (previously normalized to one). Thus only one constraint
is truly binding and the two constraints involve the loss of only one
degree of freedcni.

10. Note that if we assumed that living in an SMSA and/or never having
been married do not affect valuations of the nonpecuniary aspects of
employment, we would also reject the hypothesis of free choice. The chi
squared statistic would be at least 7.96 which is statistically
significant at the .05 even for three degrees of freedom.

11. Percentages are calculated using the CPS household weights.

12. Blacks are more likely to support unions in representation elections
(Farber & Saks, 1980; Dickens, 1983), are less likely to quit a job
(Viscusi, 1979) and have greater demand for occupational safety than
equivalent whites.

13. Osterman's classification was based on the 1960 census codes. We
modified his classification system to correspon to the 1970 census codes.
It is possible that we therefore underestimate the accuracy of his system.
                                                                        26




REFERENCES

Beck, E. M., Koran, Patrick M., and Tolbert, Charles M. II.
"Stratification in a Dual Economy: A Sectoral Model of Earnings
Determination." American Sociological Review, 1978, 43: 704—20.

__________ "Industrial Segmentation and Labor Market Discrimination."
Social Problems, 1980, 28: 113—30.

Bibb, Robert and Form, William H.. "The Effects of Industrial,
Occupational and Sex Stratification on Wages in Blue—Collar Markets."
Social Forces, June 1977, 55, 974—96.

Buchele, Robert. (1976a) "Jobs and Workers: A Labor Market Segmentation
Perspective on the Work Experience of Young Men." unpublished doctoral
dissertation: Harvard University, May 1976.

__________ (1976b) "Jobs and Workers: A Labor Market Segmentation
Perspective on the Work Experience of Middle—Aged Men." unpublished paper
submitted to the Secretary of Labor's Conference on the National
Longitudinal Survey of Retirement Years. 1976. Boston.

Carnoy, M. and Rumberger, R., "Segmentation in the U.S. Labor Market: Its
Effects on the Mobility and Earnings of Whites and Blacks." Cambridge
Journal of Economics, June 1980, 4, 117—32.

Dickens, William 1., "The Effects of Company Campaigns on Certification
Elections: Law and Reality Once Again," Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, July 1983, Vol. 36, no. 4.

Dickens, William 1. and Lang, Kevin. "A Test of the Dual Labor Market
Hypothesis," American Economic Review, Sept. 1985, 75 (forthcoming).

Ooeringer, Peter B. and Michael J. Piore, Internal Labor Markets and
Manpower Analysis, Lexington, MA: Lexington, 1971.

Gordon, David M., "Class, Productivity and the Ghetto," unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Harvard University, 1971.

Hodson, Randy D., "Labor Force Participation and Earnings in the Core,
Peripheral, and State Sectors of Production, M.A. Thesis, Department of
Sociology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1977.

Kahn, Shulamit, Occupational Safety and Worker Preferences, unpublished
doctoral dissertation, MIT, 1983.

Leigh, Duane E., "Occupational Advancement in the Late 1960s: An Indirect
Test of the Dual Labor Market Hypothesis," Journal of Human Resources,
Spring 1976, 11, 155—71.

Maddala, C. S., Limited—Dependent and Qualitative Variables in
Econometrics, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
                                                                         2/




Oster, Gerry, "A Factor Analytic Test of the Theory of Dual Economy,'
Review of Economics and Statistics, Feb. 1979, 61: 33—51.

Osterman, Paul, "An Empirical Study of Labor Market Segmentation,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1975, 28: 508—23.

Piore, Michael J. "Dualism as a Response to Flux and Uncertainty," in
Suzanne Berger and Michael Piore, Dualism and Discontinuity in Industrial
Societies, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1980a.

Piore, Michael 3. "The Technological Foundations of Dualism," in Suzanne
8erger and Michael Piore, Dualism and Discontinuity in Industrial
Societies, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1980b.

Rosenberg, Samuel, "An Empirical Test of the Dual Labor Market
Hypothesis," unpublished manuscript, Williams College, 1976.

Schiller, Bradley R., "Relative Earnings Mobility in the United States,"
American Economic Review, Dec. 1977, 67: 926—41.

Tolbert, Charles M., II, Horan, Patrick M., and Beck, E. N., "The
Structure of American Economic Segmentation: A Dual Economy Approach,"
American Journal of Sociology, 1980, 85: 1095—116.

Viscusi, W. Kip, Employment Hazards: An Investigation of Market
Performance, Cambridge, MA: Harvard, 1979.

Wright, Eric 0., Class Structure and Inciie Determination, New York:
Academic Press, 1979.

Zucker, Lynne 6. and Carolyn Rosenstein, "Taxonomies of Institutional
Structure: Dual Economy Reconsidered," American Sociological Review,
December 1981, 46: 869—83.
            Figure 1. Hypothetical Scatter Plot——
                      Standard Human Capital Theory
 Log Wage
                                                           9




                                                    r

 sample                                                 line
                                                                     Estfr,atad lines


"Low wage
samnie




                                                                        Education




            Figure 2. Hypothetical Scatter Plot—                        n
                        Dual   Market Theory                    -1


Log Wage                                                                      C

                                                          I.                  4


                                               '4               -a

                                                                I
                                                          S




                .7   . C,
                                                               j Ce



                                                                        Education
                                                      TABLE    1
                        PARAMETER ESTIMATES FOR SINGLE AND DUAL LABOR MARKET MODELS
                                          S%IITCIIING MODEL 1                 .
                                                                                        SWITChING MODEL 2
                      OLS              Primary     Secondary        Switch                                Switch
VARIABLE             coErr.                                                       Primary     Secondary
                                        coErr.      COEFF.          COEFF.        COEFF.             COEFF.    coErr.
Constant             0.730              0.607        1.187          0,2i6          0.720             1.1146   -0.315
                    (0.0114)           (0.303)      (0,2145)       (0.238)        (0.086)        (0107)       (0.137)
SMSA                 0.109              0.101       -0.1403         0.561          0.078         —0.330        0.14145
                    (0.004)            (0.085)      (0.095)        (0.119)        (0.018)        (0.030)      (0.035)
Never married       —0.106             -0.025        0.365         —0.602         -0.051             0.391    -0.571
                    (0.001)            (0.103)      (0,124)        (0.1(13)       (0.027)        (0.0118)     (0.006)
School               0.069              0.061       —0.003          0.022          0.011          0.005        0,016
                    (0.001)            (0.0011)     (0.01(i)       (0.019)        (0.001)        (0.006)      (.001)
White                0.158              0.127       -0.222         0.1477          0.121         —0.321        0.515
                    (0.007)            (0.062)      (0.125)        (0.161)        (0.023)        (0.0145)     (0.0514)
Experience           0.030              0.032        0.011            —            0.030         -0.025        0.0118
                    (0.001)        .
                                       (0.002)      (0.005)                       (0.002)        (0.005)      (0.006)
Experience          -0,000146          -0.000(11 -0.00023                         -Q.0001f1       0.00066     -0.00107
Squared             (0.00001)          (0.00005) (0.00009)                        (0.00005)      (0.0001)     (0.00012)
Std. Error           0.1118             0.338        0.122           *             0.3117            0.172       *
Covariance with                         0.0141      —0.693           —             0.028        —0.151           —
switching error                        (0.369)      (0.019)                       (0.106)       (0.023)
Log Likelihood      —261167.011            —2259.01                                        —25283.039
                     1481111                14391                                           481111
  The standard error or the switch equation is normalized to one.
                                     TABLE 2
                               SECTORAL COMPOSITION


TYPES OF WORKERS     PCT. SECONDARY     ?     PCT. PRIMARY

ALL WORKERS              7.5          13.5      79.0

LIVING IN SMSA           6.3          10.3     83.4

NOT LIVING IN SMSA      10.1          21.4     68.5

NEVER MARRIED           15.9          30.6     53.5

MARRIED BEFORE           6.6          12.1     81.3

WHITE                    6.7          12.3     81.0

NON—WHITE               14.4          27.5     58.1

UNION MEMBER             2.7           7.9     89.4

NOT UNION MEMBER         9.2          16.0     74.8

NO UNION CONTRACT        9.3          16.0     74.7

UNION CONTRACT           2.9           8.4     88.7

YEARS OF SCHOOL
  5                      4.1          42.5     53.4
  6                      5.3          39.4     55.3
  7                      4.8          32.9     62.3
  8                      4.6          31.4     64.0
  9                      6.5          23.8     69.7
  10                     6.3          21.4     72.3
  11                     6.5          20.6     72.9
  12                     7.9          18.6     73.5
  13                     7.2          13.7     79.0
  14                     7.2          13.3     79.6
  15                     8.1          11.1     80.8
  16                    10.8          12.5     76.7
  17                     7.8           8.4     83.8
  18                     8.0           6.6     85.4
  19 OR MORE             9.2           6.8     84.0




                                                             1
                                       TABLE 3


                COMPOSITION OF INDUSTRY EMPLOYMENT


 INDUSTRY                                 SECONDARY     ?   PRIMARY


 AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES         25.29 36.39 38.32

 MINING                                          2.07 8.64 89.29

 CONSTRUCTION                                    3.75 13.12 83.13

 NONDURABLE MANUFACTURING
    FOOD AND KINDRED PRODUCTS              5.60       16.50 77.90
    TOBACCO                                8.52       13.80 77.68
    TEXTILE MILL PRODUCTS AND APPAREL      6.97       26.11 66.92
    PAPER AND ALLIED PRODUCTS              2.27       7.11 90.62
    PRINTING, PUBLISHING AND ALLIED IND.   7.83       11.12 81.05
    CHEM., PETROL., COAL, RUB. AND PLASTIC 2.76       10.33 86.91
    LEATHER AND LEATHER PRODUCTS          12.35       30.70 56.95

DURABLE MANUFACTURING
   LUMBER,WOOD AND FURNITURE                  9.33 26.14 64.53
   STONE, CLAY, GLASS ANO CONCRETE PROD.      3.59 14.92 81.49
   PRIMARY METALS                             2.26 7.20 90.54
   MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT                    2.42 7.74 89.84
TRANSPORTATION                                6.27 10.53 83.20

COMMUNICATIONS (EXCEPT TELEPHONE)             9.69 15.52 74.79

UTILITIES AND TELEPHONE                       1.40 5.01 93.59
WHOLESALE                                     6.94 14.50 78.56

RETAIL (EXCEPT EATING, DRINKING AND LIQ.) 13.35 21.60 65.06
   EATING & DRINKING PLACES, LIQUOR SIRS. 29.29 32.11 38.60

FINANCE, INSURANCE AND REAL ESTATE            7.06 11.73 81.20

BUSINESS AND REPAIR SERVICES
   ADVERTISING, RESEARCH AND COMPUTERS     2.75 6.05 91.21
   SERVICES TO BLDGS AND PERSONNEL SUPPLY 24.21 24.12 51.67
   DETECTIVES AND PROTECTIVE SERVICES     48.66 17.83 33.51
   REPAIR AND SERVICES N.E.C.              8.35 20.31 71.34

PERSONAL SERVICES                           23.94 26.88 49.18

ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATIONAL SERVICES     18.75 22.91 58.34

PROFESIONAL AND RELATED SERVICES
   OFFICES OF HEALTH PROFESSIONALS           9.69 7.05 83.26
   HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SERVICES N.E.C      11.33 18.04 70.63
  NURSING, CHILD AND RESIDENTIAL CARE       26.61 22.09 51.30
  EDUCATION AND RELATED INSTITUTIONS        15.51 15.29 69.19
  OTHER PROFESIONAL SERVICES                 2.79 5.78 91.43
                                    TABLE 4

                    COMPOSITION OF EMPLOYMENT BY OCCUPATION

OCCUPATION                                        SECONDARY     ? PRIMARY

MANAGERS AND PROFESSIONALS(EXECPT THOSE BELOW)         3.44 5.83 90.73
   THERAPISTS AND PHYSICIANS' ASSISTANTS              11.81 16.34 71.85
   POST SECONDARY TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS              9.73 7.53 82.74
      ECONOMISTS*                                      0.00 4.71 95.29
      SOCIOLOGISTSt                                   29.00 0.00 71.00
   OTHER TEACHERS                                     19.15 16.11 64.74
   SOCIAL, RECREATIONAL AND RELIGIOUS WORKERS         36.41 20.16 43.43
   WRITERS, ARTISTS, ENTERTAINERS AND ATHLETES         7.54 11.08 81.37

TECHNICAL, SALES AND ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT OCCUPATIONS
   HEALTH TECHNOLOGISTS AND TECHNICIANS              5.69     15.87 78.44
   TECHNOLOGISTS AND TECHNICIANS EXCEPT HEALTH       2.10     6.95 90.95
   SALES
      RETAIL                                        22.68     23.61 53.72
      OTHER THAN RETAIL                              6.68     11.67 81.65
   ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT
      SUPER., COMP. OP. AND SECRETARIES              4.23     11.65 84.13
      INFORMATION CLERKS                            19.24     17.00 63.76
      MESSENGERS, OFFICE MACHINE OPERATORS, MAIL, RATE,
      PERSONNEL, LIBRARY AND BOOKKEEPING CLERKS     18.38     22.09 59.53
      BANK CLERKS                                   26.09     29.19 44.72
      OTHER                                          5.97     16.64 77.39

SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
   PROTECTIVE SERVICES(EXCEPT GUARDS)
   GUARDS                                             39.05   22.87   38.08
   FOOD PREPARATION AND SERVICE                       34.29   34.07   31.64
   HEALTH SERVICE OCCUPATIONS                         23.94   44.93   31.13
   CLEANING, HOUSEHOLD AND PERSONAL SERVICES          24.61   28.09   47.31

FARM, FORESTRY AND FISHING OCCUPATIONS                27.42 37.57 35.01

PRECISION PRODUCTION, CRAFT AND REPAIR OCCUPATIONS
   MECHANICS AND REPAIRERS                            3.72 .13.05 83.23
   CONSTRUCTION SUPERVISORS                           2.10 6.22 91.68
   CONSTRUCTION TRADES(EXCEPT SUPERVISORS)            3.26 13.45 83.29
   EXTRACTORS, PLANT AND SYSTEM OPERATORS, CRAFT
   SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION AND METAL CRAFTS        2.07 7.38 90.55
   OTHER PRECISION PRODUCTION                          5.14 19.15 75.70

OPERATIVES(EXCEPT TEXTILE, APPAREL AND FURNISHINGS). 4.33 15.09 80.58

OPERATIVES(TEXTILE, APPAREL AND FURNISHINGS)           9.60 36.98 53.42

TRANSPORTATION, AND MATERIAL MOVING OCCUPATIONS
   MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATORS                            10.08 19.68 70.24
   RAIL AND WATER TRANSPORTATION                       5.46 8.45 86.09
   MATERIAL MOVING EQUIPMENT OPERATORS                 3.99 15.74 80.27

HANDLERS, EQUIPMENT CLEANERS, HELPERS, AND LABORERS
   GARAGE WORKERS, VEHICLE WASHERS AND PACKERS         20.07 39.39 40.55
   OTHERS                                              10.56 21.82 67.62



*BASED ON SMALL NUMBER PEOPLE IN OCCUPATION
                                          TABLE 5

             COMPARISON OF DUAL LABOR MARKET CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS



 BECK, HORAN AND TOLBERT (1978) INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION

              SECONDARY   ?   PRIMARY
 Core          4.97     10.63     84.39
 Periphery    14.19     22.66     63.14


BIBS AND FORM (1977) INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION

             SECONDARY   ?      PRIMARY
Core          3.38   10.04      86.58
Periphery    11.29   17.37      71.32


HODSON (1977) INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION

             SECONDARY    7     PRIMARY
Core          3.05     9.68     87.27
Periphery    12.02   18.42      69.56
State         1.33     6.01     92.66


TOLSERT, HORAN AND BECK (1980) INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION

             SECONDARY    ?     PRIMARY
Core          3.52     9.69     86.80
Periphery    14.98   21.97      63.03


OSTERMAN (1975) OCCUPATIONAL CODING SYSTEM

                      SECONDARY       ?       PRIMARY

Upper Tier, Primary      8.81       8.32       82.87
Lower Tier, Primary      5.48       12.31      82.21
Secondary               20.42      27.77       51.81




                                                                      1
