                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE IMPACT OF PLANT-LEVEL RESOURCE REALLOCATIONS AND TECHNICAL
              PROGRESS ON U.S. MACROECONOMIC GROWTH

                                             Amil Petrin
                                            T. Kirk White
                                           Jerome P. Reiter

                                        Working Paper 16700
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16700


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers
of the U.S. Census Bureau at the Triangle Census Research Data Center. Any opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census
Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that
no confidential information is disclosed. We thank Bert Grider and Arnie Reznek for many disclosure
avoidance reviews and the editor and referee for very helpful comments. We also thank numerous
seminar participants for many helpful comments.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Amil Petrin, T. Kirk White, and Jerome P. Reiter. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Plant-level Resource Reallocations and Technical Progress on U.S. Macroeconomic
Growth
Amil Petrin, T. Kirk White, and Jerome P. Reiter
NBER Working Paper No. 16700
January 2011
JEL No. E32,L6,O47

                                                 ABSTRACT

We build up from the plant level an "aggregate(d)" Solow residual by estimating every U.S. manufacturing
plant's contribution to the change in aggregate final demand between 1976 and 1996. Our framework
uses the Petrin and Levinsohn (2010) definition of aggregate productivity growth, which aggregates
plant-level changes to changes in aggregate final demand in the presence of imperfect competition
and other distortions/frictions. We decompose these contributions into plant-level resource reallocations
and plant-level technical efficiency changes while allowing in the estimation for 459 different production
technologies, one for each 4-digit SIC code. On average we find positive aggregate productivity growth
of 2.2% in this sector during this period of declining share in U.S. GDP. We find that aggregate reallocation
made a larger contribution to growth than aggregate technical efficiency. Our estimates of the contribution
of reallocation range from 1.7% to 2.1% per year, while our estimates of the average contribution of
aggregate technical efficiency growth range from 0.2% to 0.6% per year. In terms of cyclicality, the
aggregate technical efficiency component has a standard deviation that is roughly 50% to 100% larger
than that of aggregate total reallocation, pointing to an important role for technical efficiency in macroeconomic
fluctuations. Aggregate reallocation is negative in only 3 of the 20 years of our sample, suggesting
that the movement of inputs to more highly valued activities on average plays a stabilizing role in
manufacturing growth. Our results have implications for both the theoretical literature on growth and
alternative indexes of aggregate productivity growth based only on technical efficiency.


Amil Petrin                                             Jerome P. Reiter
Department of Economics                                 Duke University
University of Minnesota                                 jerry@stat.duke.edu
4-101 Hanson Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
petrin@umn.edu

T. Kirk White
Economic Research Service, USDA
1800 M St., NW
Washington, DC 20036
tkirkwhite@gmail.com
1    Introduction
What are the micro-level components of aggregate productivity growth?
Aggregate final demand can increase without an increase in input use if
plants become more technically efficient, perhaps by inventing new and bet-
ter methods of production or by learning to imitate other better-performing
plants. Final demand can also increase without more input use if inputs
reallocate to more valued market activities. Theoretically, the two stories –
technical efficiency and reallocation – are not mutually exclusive, and both
may be important causes of aggregate productivity growth (APG) at busi-
ness cycle frequencies and in the long run.
     In this paper we construct estimates of every U.S. Manufacturing plant’s
contribution to changes in APG between 1976 and 1996. There are a wide
variety of such definitions using plant-level data. Our contribution is to
be the first to adopt the one from Petrin and Levinsohn (2010), which in-
sists that changes at the micro-level in reallocation and technical efficiency
aggregate to the change in final demand holding labor and capital constant.
     Using U.S. Census data and the Annual Survey of Manufacturers to es-
timate this “aggregate(d) Solow residual,” we find an average annual rate
of growth over this period of 2.2%. Over this same period manufacturing’s
share of U.S. GDP falls from 21% to 15%. Thus either plant-level technical
efficiency or a reallocation across plants of inputs (or both) led U.S. manu-
facturing to positively contribute to growth in the face of its declining share
in U.S. output.
     We investigate the role of aggregate reallocation and aggregate technical
efficiency in APG. The growth rate of aggregate technical efficiency is the
Domar-weighted sum of plant-level growth rates in technical efficiency, where
this Domar weight is equal to plant-level revenue divided by aggregate value
added. Aggregate reallocation under this definition tracks the movement of
inputs across plants, increasing when an input moves from a lower-valued
to higher-valued activity. In total each plant contributes one term related
to the plant’s technical efficiency change and five terms - one for each input
we consider - related to aggregate reallocation.


                                      3
     Estimators of the plant-level contributions to these quantities require
production function estimates. We exploit the micro-level data, relaxing the
usual assumption of the existence of one aggregate manufacturing economy-
wide production function. Specifically, we allow for different production
functions for each of our 459 4-digit SIC industries, estimating parameters
for each industry separately. In the estimation we are also flexible on the
approach, estimating the production functions parameters with a variety of
estimators robust to different econometric problems, including the use of Or-
dinary Least Squares, Levinsohn and Petrin (2003, LP), and the Wooldridge
(2009) variant of the LP estimator (programs are publicly available).
     In explaining APG over the two decade period we find that reallocation
contributes positively on average and serves to stabilize the overall level
of growth in the declining manufacturing sector. Specifically we find that
aggregate reallocation’s contribution to this growth is positive in all but 3
years, on average accounting for more than half of aggregate productivity
growth (1.7% to 2.2% per year, depending on the production function esti-
mator). The volatility in the reallocation term is relatively small, with the
standard deviation of 1.1% to 1.7%. In contrast, technical efficiency growth
in this declining industry was smaller on average (0.2% to 0.6% per year),
and was also responsible for most of the volatility in aggregate productivity
growth, as its standard deviation was 2.6% to 3.0%.
     The APG decomposition and our data allow us to decompose aggregate
productivity at any level of aggregation. We show that the patterns we
found for the entire manufacturing sector generally also hold at the 2-digit
SIC industry level: for most industries the average contribution of realloca-
tion is greater than the average contribution of technical efficiency growth,
and technical efficiency growth is significantly more volatile than growth
from reallocation. We find that for most industries that the contribution of
reallocation is positive in almost all years. We also find significant variation
across industries in the relative contributions of reallocation and technical
efficiency growth.
     The result that aggregate reallocation makes relatively stable and mostly
positive contributions to aggregate productivity growth is robust to a vari-


                                       4
ety of estimators of plant-level productivity, and has been found in Chilean
and Colombian data as well. This result makes economic sense, as Petrin
and Levinsohn (2010) show that in the presence of imperfect competition,
frictions in input markets, or fixed costs, reallocation of resources can con-
tribute to aggregate productivity growth. Furthermore, we expect that any
market populated by profit-maximizing firms will have resources reallocating
on average towards uses with higher marginal products.
     On reallocation, to the extent that an economy is not perfectly friction-
less or perfectly competitive, policies that reduce these frictions or increase
competition may have large effects on aggregate productivity growth via
reallocation. Many of these policies relate to specific inputs, like labor or
capital. Our estimation approach recovers one term per plant for each input
and we decompose aggregate reallocation into terms including production
workers, non-production workers, capital, and intermediate inputs to try to
understand where frictions may be most important in U.S. manufacturing.
     These results are useful for determining which of the many theoreti-
cal growth models with adjustment frictions appear consistent with U.S.
manufacturing. For example, in Melitz (2003) there is no growth in plant-
level technical efficiency as the only source of aggregate productivity growth
comes from reallocation. When exposed to trade resources move from the
low productivity to the high productivity plants, so productivity (which
is isomorphic to technical efficiency) is a sufficient plant-level statistic for
tracking plant-level reallocation. Our setup allows for plant-level productiv-
ity growth and for a reallocation term for each input at each plant. We find
a significant role for reallocation in growth, which is consistent with Melitz
(2003), However, we find its role varies across inputs and that the inputs
do not necessarily track plant-level technical efficiency movements well. We
also find that half of growth is related to plants become more technically
efficient themselves.
     Our results shed light on the precise meaning of counterfactuals that take
the U.S. as a “frictions benchmark” and then ask how much output would
increase if a country were able to achieve the U.S. level of frictions. For
example, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) ask what the impact for growth would be


                                       5
in China and India if capital and labor were reallocated to reflect the level of
frictions that we see in U.S. manufacturing industries. Our findings suggest
that the U.S. benchmark is one with small gains from further reallocation of
non-production and production workers, and substantially larger gains from
the reallocation of capital.
    Several recent models of growth have no channel for growth via inter-
mediate inputs. Our results show that the large role of intermediates in
production of manufacturing leads to a large role for reallocation growth for
intermediate inputs in aggregate U.S. manufacturing productivity growth.
We show this finding suggests that models of growth or cyclicality that as-
sume the existence of a valued-added production function in an economy
with perfect competition and no frictions or distortions attribute too much
growth to the direct effect of technology shocks.
    While the finding of a positive contribution of aggregate reallocation
makes economic sense, it is in contrast to estimates of productivity growth
due to reallocation as defined by other measures, such as in Baily, Hulten,
and Campbell (1992, BHC hereafter). These indices define APG exclusively
as the change in the average of the plant-level technical efficiency shocks,
and thus do not aggregate plant-level changes in inputs and technical effi-
ciency to changes in aggregate value added. Petrin and Levinsohn (2010)
explain how the BHC index is related to APG. When we estimate aggregate
productivity growth and reallocation as defined by the BHC index, we find
that the volatility of growth due to reallocation is enormous: the standard
deviation of the annual rate is as high as 7.8 percentage points – more than
4 times the volatility of the APG measure of reallocation. In many years,
the contribution of BHC-measured reallocation is both large (in absolute
value) and negative, sometimes indicating a decline of more than 20% in
a single year. We find these results are robust to a variety of production
function estimators, suggesting the way one defines aggregate productivity
growth can have a substantial impact on how one interprets the roles of tech-
nical efficiency and reallocation in any economy. These differences between
APG-measured reallocation and BHC-measured reallocation for U.S. manu-
facturing data are also consistent with findings for Chilean, Colombian, and


                                       6
Japanese micro data.
    In section 2 we discuss the theory in .15 time. Section 3 describes the
discrete-time approximation. Section 4 describes the estimation. Section 5
describes the data. Readers interested only in the results can skip to section
6. Section 7 concludes.


2    Theory
Measuring aggregate productivity growth is an old and honored tradition
in economics and there is an enormous theoretical and empirical literature
devoted to it. Solow (1957) shows that in a perfectly competitive economy
with an aggregate production function and without distortions, the (Solow)
production function residual measures both aggregate technology change
and aggregate productivity growth (APG), which is equal to the change in
aggregate final demand. Hulten (1978) examines the case when (different)
sectoral level production functions exist but the setting remains competitive
and without distortions. He finds that the sectoral production function
residuals, when properly weighted, exactly aggregate to APG. In both of
these cases, there is no further role for the reallocation of resources in APG
as all inputs are chosen so that value of an input’s marginal product is equal
to its marginal price.
    Hall (1988) and Hall (1990) show that the estimate of technological
change is affected by imperfect competition. More recently, Basu and Fer-
nald (2002) study an economy with markups, showing that APG and aggre-
gate technological progress differ because markups drive a wedge between
marginal products, which leads to possible role for reallocation of resources
in increasing APG and aggregate final demand.
    Petrin and Levinsohn (2010) extend Basu and Fernald to plant-level
data, showing how to aggregate changes in plant-level technical efficiency
and changes in resource allocations across plants to changes in aggregate
final demand. The linkage provides a theoretical basis for decomposing
changes in aggregate final demand holding primary inputs constant into the
contribution of technological progress (or “technical efficiency”) and several


                                      7
terms that measure the contribution of the reallocation of inputs across
plants, one for every input. In this paper we provide the first application of
the Petrin and Levinsohn (2010) decomposition of APG to U.S. data (P-L
hereafter).
    We operate in continuous time and assume the production side of the
economy has at any time at most N plants. While it is not difficult to ex-
tend the framework to multi-product plants, we assume for transparency all
plants are single product plants. Every plant may have a different produc-
tion technology, and we let each plant i’s production technology be written
as
                               Qi (Xi , Mi , ωi ),                         (1)

where Xi = (Xi1 , . . . , XiK ) is the vector of K primary input amounts used
at plant i, Mi = (Mi1 , . . . , MiJ ) is the vector giving the amount of each
plant j’s output used as an intermediate input at plant i, and ωi is the level
of plant i’s technical efficiency. Primary inputs may include several different
types of labor and capital, and any of the N products may potentially be
used as an input in production somewhere in the economy.
    We use Fi to denote the sum of all fixed and sunk costs that are paid
by plant i. We normalize these costs to the equivalent of the forgone output
and deduct them directly from the production function, letting

                          Qi = Qi (Xi , Mi , ωi ) − Fi .                         (2)

The total amount of output from plant i that goes to final demand Yi is
then
                                    X
                          Yi = Qi −    Mji ,
                                            j
      P
where j Mji is the total amount of i’s output that serves as intermediate
input within the plant and at other plants. The differential in levels is
                                            X
                           dYi = dQi −          dMji ,
                                            j
                                                           P
Pi denotes the price of plant i’s output, and thus         i Pi dYi   is equal to the
change in final demand.

                                        8
    Aggregate productivity growth is then defined as the difference between
the change in aggregate final demand and the change in aggregated expen-
ditures on primary inputs:
                                 X               XX
                   AP G ≡             Pi dYi −                    Wik dXik ,                    (3)
                                 i                   i        k

where Wik equals the unit cost of the kth primary input and dXik is the
change in the use of that primary input at plant i. Converting (3) to growth
rates we have:
                            X                            XX
                AP GG =              Di dlnYi ∗ −                     cik dlnXik ,              (4)
                             i                            i       k

where Di = PNPi Qi is the .15 (1961) weight, dlnYi ∗ =                          dYi
                                                                                Qi    is the growth
                i=1 Pi Yi
rate of i’s output going to final demand, and
                                        Wik Xik
                                 cik = PN          .
                                         i=1 Pi Yi

    We do not observe in the data the amount of a plant’s output that
ultimately goes to final demand. However, the Growth Accounting Identity
shows that aggregate final demand is equal to aggregate value added:
                       X                        X
                            Di dlnYi ∗ =                 Div dlnV Ai
                        i                        i

with value added
                                                 X
                            V Ai = Pi Qi −                    Pj Mij                            (5)
                                                     j

and the .15 weight equal to the plant’s share of value added Div = PV VAiAi .
                                                                    i
We then replace the first term in (3) and calculate aggregate productivity
growth as
                         X                 XX
               AP GG =       Div dlnV Ai −        cik dlnXik .          (6)
                             i                            i       k

where we note we can rewrite
                                            Wik Xik
                                      cik = P
                                             i V Ai


                                            9
dividing through instead by aggregate value added.
    Lemma 1 in P-L shows when Qi is differentiable equation (3) can be
decomposed as follows:
XX              ∂Qi             XX     ∂Qi            X         X
          (Pi       −Wik )dXik +   (Pi     −Pj )dMij −  Pi dFi +  Pi dωi ,
                ∂Xk                    ∂Mj
 i   k                             i       j                i         i
                                                                           (7)
          ∂Q           ∂Q
where       and
          ∂Xk          are the partial derivatives of the output production
                      ∂Mj
function with respect to the kth primary input and the jth intermediate
input respectively, dMij is the change in intermediate input j at plant i, dFi
is the change in fixed and sunk costs, and dωi is the change in “net output”
at plant i, defined as the output remaining after the contribution of both
primary and intermediate inputs at plant i have been deducted:
                                   X ∂Qi        X ∂Qi
                     dωi = dQi −         dXik −       dMij .                  (8)
                                     ∂Xk          ∂Mj
                                       k                j

     Equation (7) shows that under this definition of aggregate productiv-
ity growth, if at every firm every marginal product is equated with every
marginal cost, then further reallocation cannot increase growth, as all alloca-
tive efficiency gains have been achieved. However, if there is market power
(i.e. markups) or frictions such as adjustment costs or taxes, or other char-
acteristics of the economy that lead to a divergence between the marginal
product and the marginal cost, then a reallocation of inputs alone can in-
crease aggregate productivity growth. This reallocation effect is captured in
the first two summation terms in (7).
     Equation (7) can be rewritten in growth rates as:
X         X                        X X                    X           X
     Di         (εik −sik )dlnXik + Di (εij −sij )dlnMij −  Di dlnFi +  Di dlnωi ,
 i        k                        i           j            i             i
                                                                        (9)
where Di is the Domar weight, εik and εij are the elasticities of output
with respect to primary and intermediate inputs, sik = WPiki Q
                                                             Xik
                                                              i
                                                                 and sij =
Pj Mij
 Pi Qi are the respective plant-specific revenue shares for both primary and
intermediate inputs, and dlnFi and dlnωi denoting the growth rates in fixed
costs and technical efficiency, with the base given by Qi .

                                                   10
   If a value added production function exists (e.g., see Bruno (1978)), then
we can express the decomposition as1
XX                               XX                          X             X
        Div (εvik −svik )dlnXik +   Div (εvij −svij )dlnMij −  Div dlnFiv +  Div dlnωiv ,
 i       k                          i   j                             i                 i
                                                                       (10)
         v      Wik Xik      v     Pj Mij
where sik = V Ai and sij = V Ai , and the elasticities are now those
for the value added production function, which can be shown to equal the
elasticities from the gross output production function divided by one minus
the ratio of intermediate expenditures to revenues:
                                                  εij
                                   εvij =         P         .
                                            1−      j sij

lnF v denotes the growth rate in fixed costs divided by one minus the ratio
of intermediate inputs expenditures to revenues. The value added technical
efficiency shock is derived from the value added production function, which
can be expressed as
                                            X
                        lnωiv = ln(V Ai ) −   εvik lnXik               (11)
                                                        k

with intercept β0v .2 The relationship between the value added technical
efficiency shock and the gross output production function technical efficiency
shock is
                                        lnωi
                             lnωiv =     P     .                          (12)
                                     1 − j sij
We now discuss implementation of this index with discrete time data.


3        Discrete Time Approximation
The theory says that we can compute an approximation to APG directly
from plant-level data without having to estimate production functions. How-
ever, up to this point all of the equations that we have considered have been
     1
     A sufficient condition is that the intermediate inputs are separable in the gross output
production function.
   2
     If the elasticity of output with respect to each intermediate input is not equal to the
intermediate’s revenue share, then the estimated residual will include additional terms
related to the intermediates.


                                             11
written in continuous time, and the data we observe has been aggregated
to discrete intervals. We use Tornqvist-Divisia approximations for all of our
calculations. For example, for equation (6), the Tornqvist approximation is:
                         X v                XX
              AP GG,t =      Dit ∆lnV Ait −        cikt ∆lnXikt          (13)
                           i                   i   k
        v
where  Dit is the average of plant i’s value-added share weights from period
t-1 to period t, ∆ is the first difference operator from t − 1 to t, cikt is the
average across the two periods of plant i’s expenditures for the kth primary
input divided by aggregate value added.
    Equation (7) can be estimated in discrete-time by:
                P        P                         P        P
 AP GG,t =        i D it  k (εik − sikt )∆lnXikt +   i D it  j (εij − sijt )∆lnMijt
                  P                  P                                              (14)
                − i Dit ∆lnFit + i Dit ∆lnωit ,
where again bars over variables denote two-period averages and ∆ is the
first-difference operator. Thus we need estimates of production function pa-
rameters and residuals to estimate the components of the decomposition.
We estimate the production function parameters in logs and use them as
estimates for εik and εij . For the growth rate in plant-level technical effi-
ciency, we use the posited functional form for the production function to
calculate the residuals, and then take the first difference. For example, if we
assume a Cobb-Douglas production function, we would take first differences
of an estimate of:
                                 X               X
                  lnωi = lnQi − (   εik lnXik +      εij lnMij ).          (15)
                                  k                j

We do not observe changes in fixed costs in our data directly, but we can esti-
mate the aggregate fixed cost term as APG minus the aggregate reallocation
and technical efficiency terms.
    If intermediate inputs are separable in the production function then one
can approximate the decomposition using a value added production function
to construct estimates of the elasticities and changes in technical efficiency.
In this case the decomposition is given as
                               v     v                            v     v
                P P v                               P P v
 AP GG,t =        i   k D it (εik − sikt )∆lnXikt +    i j D it (εij − sijt )∆lnMijt
                                                                                     (16)
                − i D it ∆lnFitv + i Dv it ∆lnωit   v,
                  P v                 P


                                       12
with the value added residual given as
                             X                X
           lnωiv = lnV Ai − (  εvik lnXik ) −   (εvij − svijt )lnMijt     (17)
                                 k                j

In the case where the elasticity of output with respect to each intermediate
input is equal to the ratio of expenditure on the input to total revenues,
then the terms j (εvij − svijt )lnMijt equal zero. Otherwise, the estimated
                P

value added residual will contain the reallocation terms associated with in-
termediate inputs.


4    Production Function and Technical Efficiency
     Estimation
One major advantage of the decomposition of APG in (9) is that many of the
components are either directly observed or easy to estimate using standard
plant-level data sets. Both Domar weights Dit and Dit     v are measurable as

Pi Qi and V Ai are observed for every plant-year. The shares in (9) are typi-
cally observed for all inputs but capital because plants report expenditures
on their inputs. Finally, the plant-level data can also be used to estimate the
parameters and technical efficiency terms for both gross output and value
added production functions.
     We estimate both the value added and the gross output specifications
and their associated decompositions. We compare the estimated technical
efficiency residuals across the two approaches - properly adjusted as in (12)
- to see if differences between output elasticities and revenue shares for
intermediate inputs are important in confounding technical efficiency in the
value added case.
     We observe every plant’s nominal value of total shipments and we de-
flate nominal gross output by a 4-digit industry price index for shipments,
denoted Ps for time period s, so our dependent variable in the gross output
specifications is given as
                           Pit Qit
                      ln           = lnQit + lnPit − lnPt .               (18)
                             Pt

                                        13
Our definition of plant-level double deflated value added is given by
                                 Pit Qit PiM t Mit PiEt Eit
                     V ADD
                        it =            −         −                                 (19)
                                   Pt      PtM       PtE

where we deflate expenditures on materials (M) and energy (E) using a
4-digit industry price indexes for materials (PtM ) and energy (PtE ). Our
gross output production function specification includes three primary inputs:
production worker labor (LP ), non-production worker labor (LN P ), and
capital (K). For production workers we observe total number of hours at the
plant and for non-production workers we observe number of people. We also
have intermediate inputs, which includes the cost of parts and materials (M)
and energy (E). For capital we use the real value of the total capital stock
at the plant, constructed using the perpetual inventory method. The data
appendix contains more detailed descriptions of our measures. Our value
added specifications include just the three primary inputs as regressors.
     We posit a Cobb-Douglas production function. We estimate produc-
tion functions separately for each of our 459 4-digit SIC industries using
Ordinary Least Squares, Levinsohn and Petrin (2003, LP), and Wooldridge
(2009) variant of the LP estimator. While the different estimators have
different strengths and weaknesses, our preferred estimator is the latter,
which corrects for the simultaneous determination of inputs and technical
efficiency, is robust to the Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2008) criticism,
and is one line of code in Stata.3
     Given any estimator of production function coefficients our estimate of
plant-level technical efficiency from the gross output specification is then

         ωit = ln PitPjt
       lnb            Qit
                               jP lnLPit + b
                            − (b            jN P lnLN P
                                                     it + b
                                                          jK lnKit
                                                                                    (20)
                            + b
                              jM lnMit + b
                                          jE lnEit )

where bj· denotes the estimated elasticities of output with respect to the in-
puts in 4-digit SIC industry j. Similarly, our estimate of technical efficiency
   3
     We have publicly available programs for computing APG and its decomposition on
Petrin’s website. In each of these programs production function estimates are computed
in six different ways. The code includes the one-line of Stata code that is Wooldridge-LP
(it uses ivreg2.do).


                                           14
for the value-added specification is given as

          cv it = ln(V Ait ) − bv jP lnLPit + bv jN P lnLN P
                                                                             
        lnω                                                     bv
                                                           it +  jK lnKit          (21)

where bv j· denotes the estimated elasticities of value added with respect to
the inputs in 4-digit SIC industry j.
    We now turn to the specifics of the Census data. Researchers interested
in going directly to the results can skip to Section 6.


5       The Annual Survey of Manufacturers and Cen-
        sus Data
We use the U.S. Census Bureau’s Annual Survey of Manufactures and Cen-
sus of Manufactures, which provide a nationally representative sample for
the entire U.S. manufacturing sector. These data include measures of the
total (nominal) value of shipments, total expenditures on intermediate and
primary inputs, and other input and output measures needed for our esti-
mation.
    The Census takes place in the years ending in 2 and 7, and includes
approximately 200,000 manufacturing establishments that make up virtually
all of aggregate value added.4 The Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM)
samples between 50,000 and 70,000 plants in U.S. manufacturing. With
probability one the ASM samples all plants with more than 250 employees,
all plants that are part of very large companies, and all plants in certain
industries that are considered important to track. These plants account for
approximately half of the sample. The other half includes plants that are
sampled from the population with a probability related to the plant’s value
of shipments within each 5-digit product class.5 The ASM sampling weight
    4
     There are many other small plants from which data are not collected because they
generate very little value added.
   5
     The sampling probabilities for other plants are chosen to minimize the total cost of
sampling, subject to a set of target variances. The targets are the sampling variances
of the estimated change since the last Census in the value of shipments for each 4-digit
SIC industry and each 5-digit product class. In 1994, Census changed the algorithm they



                                           15
applied to these plants is then inversely proportional to the probability that
the plant is sampled.
    While the data we have is from the manufacturing sector and not the
entire economy, P-L show that for any subset of plants in the economy we
can decompose their contribution to aggregate value added. Entrants and
exiters are included in APG in every year.6
    Given the definition of plant-level value added (see equation 19) and the
ASM sampling weights wit , we estimate aggregate value added in manufac-
turing as
                                     X
                            V ADD
                               t   =      wit V ADD
                                                 it                       (22)
                                               i

Our estimate of APG from t − 1 to t is given by
                           X      v                    XX
              AP
              [  GG,t =          Dit ∆lnV ADD
                                           it −                    cikt ∆lnXikt       (23)
                             i                           i     k

where we define Dit and cikt in terms of the ASM sampling weights, with

                                    v         wit V ADD
                                                      it
                                   Dit =                 ,                            (24)
                                               V ADDt
                                             v + Dv
                                            Dit
                                      v              i,t−1
                                  Dit =                    ,                          (25)
                                                 2
                                            wit Wikt Xikt
                                  cikt    =                ,                          (26)
                                              V ADD
                                                  t
and
                                            cikt + cik,t−1
                                  cikt =                   .                          (27)
                                                  2
k indexes three primary inputs: production worker labor (LP ), non-production
worker labor (LN P ), and capital (K).
    We observe the total wage bill both for production workers and non-
production workers separately and can thus compute cikt for them directly.
used to select the sample, but the description above of the sampling weights still remains
applicable.
    6
      Decomposing changes in aggregate productivity growth from entry and exit is straight-
forward in levels. Decomposing growth rates with entry and exit cannot be done for the
first year but can be done for every year after.


                                               16
For capital expenditures we multiply the plant-level real stock of capital by
the 2-digit industry level nominal rental price of capital, denoted PtK , and
then weight:
                                    wit PtK Kit
                             ciKt =             .                         (28)
                                      V ADD
                                          t

For production workers ∆lnLPt is the change in total hours from period t − 1
to t. For non-production workers, ∆lnLN   t
                                            P is the change in the number of

laborers from period t − 1 to t. For the change in capital ∆lnKt we use the
change in the real value of the total capital stock at the plant, constructed
using the perpetual inventory method.
    The decomposition is straightforward to calculate given the production
function estimates. In the gross output case, the estimate for the change in
aggregate technical efficiency is
                                X
                                   Dit ∆lnb ωit                          (29)
                                         i

where                                        P
                                             i wit Pit Qit
                                  Dit =                    .              (30)
                                              V ADDt
As noted in PL, a lower bound on aggregate reallocation is given by
                                   X
                         AP
                         [  GG,t −    Dit ∆lnb
                                             ωit                          (31)
                                                 i

For any specific input Xijt - either primary or intermediate - the reallocation
term is
                          X
                              (Ditbj· − cijt )∆lnXijt .                   (32)
                              i
   The decomposition for reallocation for value added follows the same
approach.The change in aggregate technical efficiency is given by
                            X v
                               Dit ∆lnωcv it ,                     (33)
                                     i

and for any primary input Xijt the reallocation term is given by
                       X v
                          (Dit bv j· − cijt ) ∆lnXijt .                  (34)
                          i


                                             17
6       Estimates of APG using the ASM
In this section we present estimates of APG from the ASM data and com-
pare these results to estimates of aggregate productivity growth using other
indexes. In the Appendix we compare our estimates of value added to sev-
eral alternative estimators and find that the results are similar (see Table
A1).

6.1     APG and Its Decomposition Using Gross Output Pro-
        duction Functions
Table 1 shows estimated APG and its decomposition (using (23)) for the
entire U.S. manufacturing sector. This includes changes in aggregate value-
added and changes in the aggregate costs of capital, production-worker la-
bor, and non-production-worker labor. While aggregate value-added in man-
ufacturing grew by an average of 2.3% per year, aggregate costs of capital
and non-production labor grew very little over this period.7 The growth
rate of aggregate value-added was also much more volatile than the growth
rates of aggregate primary input costs.
    The final column of table 1 shows our estimates of aggregate productivity
growth. Since the growth rates of aggregate primary input costs are close
to zero in most years, APG basically follows the growth rate of aggregate
value-added with a slightly smaller variance. The mean is approximately
the same (2.2% for APG) and the contemporaneous correlation between
aggregate value-added growth and APG is 0.98.
    Next we decompose APG into productivity growth due to within-plant
technical efficiency growth and growth due to the reallocation and fixed
cost terms. We estimate the production functions using OLS, LP, and the
Wooldridge (2009) modification of LP. Table 2 shows the results from the
Wooldridge estimator.8 For comparison, column 1 of Table 2 is the growth
    7
     The biggest outlier is 1982, when our measure of aggregate production labor costs
declined by 3.6%.
   8
     Results for the LP and OLS estimators are presented in tables A2a and A2b respec-
tively in the Appendix.



                                         18
rate of aggregate real value-added and column 2 is APG from column 5 of
Table 1. Column 3 of Table 2 shows the contribution of technical efficiency
growth to APG. Total reallocation (column 4) is the sum of the reallocation
“gap” terms for primary and intermediate inputs in equation (14).
    Technical efficiency and reallocation make important contributions to
aggregate productivity growth, both in terms of the average growth rate
and the volatility of aggregate productivity growth. Reallocation makes a
larger contribution on average, whereas most of the volatility in aggregate
productivity growth is coming from aggregate technical efficiency growth.
The contribution of total reallocation is positive in all but 3 years, which
one would expect from a well-functioning market economy where resources
on average move from lower-value to higher-value activities.
    The final column of Table 2 shows the difference between APG and the
sum of the technical efficiency and total reallocation terms. This residual
term includes any fixed costs which are not already captured by the techni-
cal efficiency term. In almost all years, the fixed costs residual term is small
relative to the total reallocation term in column (1), indicating that the re-
allocation “gap” terms explain most of the growth of aggregate productivity
that is not due to technical efficiency growth.
    There are multiple sources of variation in these gap terms. Anything
that drives a wedge between the marginal product and the marginal cost of
an input - like markups, taxes/subsidies, or adjustment costs - lead to a role
for APG growth from the reallocation of inputs. A particular input for a
plant can contribute positively to the reallocation term because of a positive
gap and a positive growth rate of that input or because of a negative gap
and a decline in the use of that input.
    In Table 3a we present our decompositions of aggregate productivity
growth due to reallocation into the contributions of the “gap” terms associ-
ated with each factor of production using Wooldridge-LP. The largest share
of the annual variation in aggregate productivity growth due to reallocation
is coming from variation in the intermediate materials gap term, although
production worker labor reallocation is important in some years. We are
investigating the large fluctuations in the contribution of reallocation of in-


                                      19
termediate materials, which may be due to large fluctuations in the growth
rates of intermediate materials and relatively constant gaps between the
output elasticities and input cost shares. Capital’s contribution is relatively
stable and almost always positive.The growth rates of the individual gap
terms are also less volatile than the aggregate technical efficiency terms in
Tables 3a. These results are robust across the LP and OLS estimators (see
Tables A3a/A3c).
    In Table 3b we show the correlations of the individual reallocation gap
terms with total reallocation and with each other. The materials reallo-
cation term is strongly correlated with total reallocation, and the energy
and production worker reallocation terms are also positively correlated with
total reallocation. Non-production worker reallocation is negatively corre-
lated with total reallocation and with the reallocation of all the other inputs
except energy, and capital reallocation is essentially uncorrelated with real-
location of all of the other inputs except energy.9

6.2      Value-added Results
The results in Tables 2 and 3 are constructed from gross-output production
functions. For many settings, value-added production functions are more
convenient to estimate, but they require stronger conditions on the produc-
tion technology (e.g. separability of intermediate inputs). Overall we find
similar qualitative results between the value-added and the gross output
production functions, but only after we correct the estimated value-added
technical efficiency residual by removing the intermediate input reallocation
term that exists if elasticities of intermediate inputs differ from their revenue
shares (see equation (16)).
    Tables 4 and 5a-b present the results of the decomposition of APG into
aggregate technical efficiency and total reallocation, where the value-added
production functions are estimated using Wooldridge-LP. Comparing these
results to the gross-output results in Table 2, the most striking difference
is that for the value-added specification the total reallocation term (column
  9
      For OLS or LP see Tables A3b/A3d.



                                          20
3) is even more stable: its standard deviation is only 0.7 (compared to
1.7 in the gross-output specification), and it is negative in only one year.
As in the gross-output case, the total reallocation term makes a significant
contribution to aggregate productivity growth–about 0.9 percentage points
per year. In the value-added specification, estimated aggregate technical
efficiency (column 2) is much more volatile than reallocation–the standard
deviation is 3.5–and it contributes about 1.3 percentage points per year to
APG over the period 1976-1996.
     The differences between the results in columns 2 and 3 of table 4 and
columns 3 and 4 of table 2 are principally explained by the intermediate
reallocation term confounding technical efficiency. In table 3a, these inter-
mediate “gap” terms are important in several years.10 Column 4 of table
4 shows the results when we subtract the intermediate reallocation terms
from the gross output case (columns 4 and 5 in table 3) from the technical
efficiency growth term in the value-added case (column 2 of table 4). In
most years, this “corrected” value-added technical efficiency growth is close
to gross output technical efficiency growth, and the mean and standard de-
viation of this corrected term (0.4% and 2.8%, respectively) are very close to
the mean and standard deviation of gross-output technical efficiency (0.2%
and 2.7%, respectively). Our results suggest that business cycle models that
assume the existence of a valued-added production function in an economy
with perfect competition and no frictions or distortions attribute too much
growth to the direct effect of technology shocks.

6.3      Industry-level APG Decompositions
One of the beauties of the APG decomposition is that it allows us to inves-
tigate how much individual industries contribute to aggregate productivity
growth. To keep the volume of results manageable, we computed aggregate
productivity growth decompositions at the 2-digit SIC industry level. To
compute the industry-level decompositions, we took the plant-level techni-
cal efficiency and reallocation terms and weighted them by the plant’s Domar
 10
      The same result holds for either the LP or OLS estimator.



                                           21
weight within that 2-digit industry. In other words, for these industry-level
decompositions, the Domar weight of plant i is:

                                              Pi Qi
                             DiSIC2 = P                                          (35)
                                           i∈SIC2 V   Ai
where the denominator of the Domar weight is the aggregate value-added
of that 2-digit SIC industry. When we weight the resulting industry-level
technical efficiency and reallocation terms by each 2-digit industry’s share of
manufacturing valued-added, the industry-level terms sum up to aggregate
productivity growth for the entire manufacturing sector.
    Table 6 presents summaries of the industry-level decompositions for each
2-digit SIC manufacturing industry for the gross-output specification esti-
mated with the Wooldridge-LP estimator.11 Columns 1 and 2 show the
time series mean and standard deviations for technical efficiency growth.
Columns 3 and 4 show the means and standard deviations for the sums of
the reallocation “gap” terms. For most industries, the patterns we found for
the entire manufacturing sector also hold at the 2-digit industry level: the
average contribution of reallocation is greater than the time-series average
of technical efficiency growth, and technical efficiency growth is significantly
more volatile than growth from reallocation. These results are robust across
gross output and value added production function specifications and the LP
and OLS estimators (see Tables A6a-A7c in the Appendix).
    Table 6 also shows significant variation across industries in the rela-
tive contributions of reallocation and technical efficiency growth. Column
5 shows each 2-digit industry’s average share of manufacturing value-added
over the period 1976-1996. The average contribution of reallocation at the
2-digit industry level varies from -2.3 percentage points (for food & tobacco
products) to 5.1 percentage points (electronic equipment), while the average
  11
     Only for the industry-level decompositions do we combined tobacco products indus-
tries (2-digit SIC=21) with food manufacturing industries (20) in order to comply with
Census Bureau disclosure avoidance rules. Tobacco product manufacturing in the U.S.
is highly concentrated. Therefore, when we aggregated, we combined tobacco products
industries with food manufacturing industries (SIC2=’20’). We estimated all industry
production functions at the 4-digit SIC industry level.



                                         22
contribution of technical efficiency growth at the 2-digit industry level varies
from -2.7 percentage points (wood products) to 4.4 percentage points (food
and tobacco). Some industries have above-average growth rates, but are a
relatively small share of aggregate value-added (rubber & plastics), whereas
others are large, but are not growing very fast (e.g., transportation equip-
ment). The average industry shares range from 0.4% (leather products) to
12.2% (food and tobacco products).
     Column 6 of Table 6 shows the proportion of years in which the 2-digit-
industry-level total reallocation terms were positive. Just as we saw at the
manufacturing sector level, we find that for most industries reallocation
contributes positively to aggregate productivity growth in the vast majority
of years.
     Table 7 presents time-series means and standard deviations of the industry-
level reallocation terms for each input for each 2-digit industry. Again, there
is significant industry-level variation in the contributions of different inputs.
For example, the within-industry average contribution of materials realloca-
tion ranges from -1.0 percentage points (for petroleum and coal products) to
2.0 percentage points (industrial machinery). The within-industry standard
deviation of materials reallocation ranges from 0.6 (paper products) to 4.2
(food and tobacco products).

6.4   Comparing APG to Productivity Measures Based Only
      on Technical Efficiency Change
While we are the first to apply the APG decomposition to U.S. data, many
studies have used the ASM and the Census to decompose aggregate pro-
ductivity growth using some variant of the BHC productivity index, like
those found in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) and Olley and Pakes
(1996). These indices are defined completely in terms of the plant-level
technical efficiency residual. In continuous time the BHC index is given as:
                       X                    X                X
             BHC ≡ d         (si lnωi ) =       si dlnωi +       lnωi dsi ,   (36)
                         i                  i                i

where si is either the gross-output share or the labor share for plant i.


                                        23
     The BHC measure decomposes into the two right-hand-side terms. The
first term is referred to as the technical efficiency or “within” term and the
second term is known as the reallocation or “between” term. An empir-
ical regularity from many plant-level panels is that the reallocation term
from BHC takes on negative values that are frequently large relative to the
technical efficiency term in the aggregate (see Petrin and Levinsohn, 2010
and Kwon, Narita, and Narita (2009)). In a market economy populated
by profit-maximizing firms it is difficult to see why reallocation of primary
inputs should have such large negative effects in the aggregate on APG,
something we do not find for our definition of reallocation.
     BHC growth measured with discrete time data and the Tornquist-Divisia
approximation is then
                              X              X
                    BHCt =       sit lnωit −     si,t−1 lnωi,t−1          (37)
                             i                   i

with decomposition
             X (sit + si,t−1 )              X (lnωit + lnωi,t−1 )
   BHCt =                        ∆lnωit +                           ∗ ∆sit .   (38)
                       2                               2
              i                              i

On the technical efficiency term, the BHC-type indexes use either labor
share or gross output share as the weight, where APG weights by the Domar
weight. The only case in which the Domar weight will equal the gross output
share is when there are no intermediate input deliveries in the economy.
Otherwise the difference between the two is increasing in the fraction of
gross output that goes to intermediate input use. For example, if every
plant has a ratio of materials expenditures to revenues of 50% (typical for
manufacturing), then the BHC technical efficiency growth is exactly half of
APG technical efficiency growth.
    Empirically we want to focus on the differences in reallocation between
BHC and APG, so we abstract from differences in technical efficiency by
using the Domar weight for both BHC and APG technical efficiency growth
in Table 8. The volatility of growth due to reallocation is enormous for BHC:
the standard deviation of the annual rate is as high as 7.8 percentage points
– more than 4 times the volatility of the APG measure of reallocation. In

                                       24
many years, the contribution of BHC-measured reallocation is both large (in
absolute value) and negative, sometimes indicating a decline of more than
20% in a single year. These results are robust to OLS and LP (see Tables A8a
and A8b), and suggest the way one defines aggregate productivity growth
can have a substantial impact on how one interprets the roles of technical
efficiency and reallocation in any economy.


7    Conclusions and Suggestions for Further Research
We provide the first application of the Petrin and Levinsohn (2010) aggre-
gate productivity growth statistic and decomposition to U.S. data. We adopt
this definition because it insists that micro-level changes add up to changes
in aggregate final demand holding primary inputs constant. We decompose
aggregate productivity growth into the contributions of technical efficiency
and reallocation. Over the period 1976-1996, in the U.S. manufacturing sec-
tor we find that both contributions are important. On average reallocation
was responsible for about 1.7 to 2.1 percentage points per year, and it was
positive in all but 3 years. Technical efficiency growth was responsible for
only 0.2 to 0.6 percentage points per year, but it was more volatile: our
estimates of the standard deviation of the annual growth rate range from
2.6 to 3.0 percentage points, compared to 1.1 to 1.7 percentage points for
reallocation. The results are robust to several different production function
estimators.
    Our results have implications for both the theoretical literature on growth
and alternative plant-level indexes of aggregate productivity growth like the
BHC index and its derivatives. We can sort between the theoretical models
as they have implications for whether/how growth takes place from plant-
level technical efficiency changes and related reallocations of resources. For
example, Melitz (2003) and other models of micro-level growth rule out tech-
nical efficiency change and attribute all growth to reallocation towards the
more technically efficient firms. Our results suggest that while reallocation
does play an important role in growth, it only accounts for half of growth,
and a single-index of reallocation at the plant-level - and one only related


                                      25
to technical efficiency - do a poor job of characterizing U.S. manufacturing
growth over our sample period. This finding also suggests that plant-level
aggregate productivity growth indices based only on technical efficiency miss
a large source of growth, and mischaracterize reallocation growth by looking
at only technical efficiency and not considering each input gap individually.




                                     26
Appendix A: Data

We use the Census Bureau’s confidential Census of Manufactures (CMF,
conducted in years ending in 2 and 7), the Annual Survey of Manufactures
(ASM), and the Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). In Census
years we use only the plants receiving the ASM questionnaire, since that sur-
vey instrument askes more detailed questions about costs than the non-ASM
questionnaire sent to other plants in the Census years.12 For deflators and
depreciation rates we use the dataset available on John Haltiwanger’s web
site: http://www.econ.umd.edu/ haltiwan/capital/CRIWNBER/external.sas7bdat
(last accessed on October 1, 2008).

Our unit of analysis is the plant. Consistent with most researchers who
use this microdata, we drop administrative records plants from the sample,
because most of the cost data for these plants is imputed.

Industry coding. We use SIC industry codes at the 4-digit level. The
SIC system of coding industries has changed over time, most notably in
1987 and in 1997. In the Census years, the plants have been recoded using
the 1987 SIC system based on the 7-digit products that the plants were
producing in each Census year. We use the 1987 SIC coding system and the
Census years to create consistent 4-digit SIC industries across time using
the microdata. In cases where we could not recode industries this way, we
use a concordance from the 1977/1982 SIC system to recode the plants into
the 1987 SIC system. Our coding scheme gives us 459 industries.

     Table A1 shows the annual growth rates of real GDP and four different
measures of the growth rates of aggregate real value-added in manufacturing:
from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), from the NBER-
CES manufacturing productivity database, and two different measures from
the plant-level ASM data.13 To calculate the estimates in column (4), we
first used equation (22) to computed aggregate real value-added using all
plants in the ASM for which we could compute real value-added, and then
  12
    The LBD is described in Jarmin and Miranda (2002).
  13
    Unfortunately real value-added for manufacturing is only available on the BEA website
starting in 1987.


                                           27
we computed the growth rates of these aggregates. For column (5), we
selected only plants which are continuers from one year to the next and
for which we could compute plant-level estimates of productivity. Then
we computed the growth rate of aggregate real value-added as a Tornqvist
index, as in the first term in equation (23).
     The average annual growth rate (AAGR) of real GDP over this period
was about 2.5%, while our estimates of the AAGR of manufacturing value-
added range from 2.3% for the Tornqvist index based on continuing ASM
plants to 3.6% in the NBER-CES database. The growth rate of manufactur-
ing valued-added was more volatile than that of GDP: our estimates of its
standard deviation range from 4.6% for the Tornqvist index of continuing
ASM plants to 6.0% for the ASM measure that uses all plants. This is com-
pared to a standard deviation of only 2.4% for the growth rate of real GDP.
The correlation between the growth rate of manufacturing valued-added for
continuers and the GDP growth rate during this period is 0.78.
     The numbers from the plant-level ASM do not exactly match the aggre-
gate real value-added growth rates from the NIPA both because the samples
are different, and because the value-added measures used by the Census Bu-
reau and the BEA are somewhat different. However, the numbers are quite
similar in most years.
     The differences between columns (4) and (5) illustrate the impact of
entry and exit in the ASM. At the beginning of each ASM panel, a little less
than half of the plants exit the panel and are replaced. If we exclude the
first year of each ASM panel–years ending in 4 or 9–then in most years the
growth rate of aggregate real value-added based on all ASM plants is close
to the growth rate computed only for continuing ASM plants.14
     Despite the differences in the samples and value-added measures, our es-
timates from the ASM do generally track the growth rates of manufacturing
value-added from other sources. In particular we can clearly see the con-
tractions in 1980, 1982, and 1990/1991, and the expansions in the 1980s and
1990s, and the standard deviation of our estimates of the growth rate of ag-
gregate value added (column 5) is about the same as the standard deviation
 14
      We discuss entry and exit in greater detail in Appendix C.


                                            28
of the growth rates of aggregate value from the NBER-CES productivity
database (4.7 versus 4.6 percentage points, respectively). The correlation
between our measure of aggregate value-added from continuing ASM plants
and manufacturing aggregate real value-added from the NIPA (for the years
for which we have real value-added from the NIPA) is 0.97.

Output. The nominal dollar total value of shipments, TVS, is observed in
the ASM/CMF. Note that the surveys ask multi-plant firms to report the
operations of each plant as a separate economic unit. Thus the shipments
from one plant to another plant in the same firm are supposed to be included
in the total value of shipments of the shipping plant, and they are supposed
to be included in the total cost of materials of the receiving plant. We also
observe inventories for finished goods and work-in-progress at the begin-
ning and end of the year (FIB, FIE, WIB, and WIE). Our measure of real
gross output is (TVS+(FIE-FIB)+(WIE-WIB))/PISHIP, where PISHIP is
the 4-digit SIC industry-level shipments deflator from the NBER/CES Pro-
ductivity database.

Value-added. Nominal value-added is nominal total value of output minus
the nominal value of intermediate inputs (VM). Our measure of double-
deflated real value-added is the real total output minus the real total cost
of intermediates.

Production-worker hours. Thousands of total annual plant hours worked
by production workers at a plant are measured directly in the ASM and
CMF. For production worker costs in the numerator of equation (26), we
use total annual production worker wages at the plant. For non-production
worker costs we use total salaries and wages less total production worker
wages at the plant.

Intermediate inputs. The total cost of intermediate inputs (VM) is the
sum of the cost of materials and parts (CP), the cost of fuels (CF), the
cost of purchased electricity (EE), the cost of resales (CR), and the cost
of contract work (CW), all measured in nominal dollars. The real total
cost of intermediates is VM/PIMAT, where PIMAT is the 4-digit industry-


                                     29
level deflator for materials from NBER-CES productivity database. For the
gross-output production functions, we also break out intermediate inputs
into the real cost of materials, (CP+CR+CW)/PIMAT, and the real cost
of energy, (CF+EE)/PIEN, where PIEN is the energy deflator from the
NBER-CES productivity database.

Capital. We use the perpetual inventory method to construct a measure
of total real capital stock for each plant using the book value of the plant’s
assets (appropriately deflated), the plant’s real capital expenditures (in-
cluding rentals of equipment and structures), and industry-specific capital
depreciation rates. For each plant we construct separate stocks for machin-
ery/equipment and building/structures, and then we sum them to get the
total capital stock for the plant.
    The initial capital stock is the book value of assets at the beginning of the
year deflated to thousands of 1987 dollars using industry-level asset deflators.
For example, for equipment, the real initial capital stock is computed as: ini-
tial stock = (initial nominal book value)*(nkceq/gkheq)*(piinve87/piinve96),
where nkceq = the real value of net equipment capital stock in millions of
1996 dollars for a given year for an entire 2-digit SIC industry; gkheq = the
book value of gross equipment capital stocks (in millions of historical dollars)
for a given year for an entire 2-digit SIC industry; piinve96 = the 3-digit
industry equipment investment deflator (PIINVE) for 1996, where 1987 is
the base year; piinve87= 1. We follow an analogous procedure for buildings
or structures. After the initial year, the plant’s capital stock is the unde-
preciated stock from the previous year plus total real capital expenditures
from the previous year.
    To construct the capital cost shares in equation (26), we need an estimate
of the user cost of capital. We use equipment (“machinery”) capital rental
prices (at the 2-digit SIC industry level) and the structures (“buildings”)
capital rental prices constructed from BLS data.
    In later years we have to deal with several missing data issues to construct
our capital stocks measures. For plants that enter the ASM after 1986
and survive until a census year, we construct initial capital stocks using
backwards and forwards perpetual inventory, starting in the first census

                                       30
     year that the plant is observed. Furthermore, after 1992, the ASM only
     collected the total book value of assets, rather than separate book values
     for machinery and buildings. To impute the book value machinery assets in
     1997, we accumulate the plant’s expenditures on machinery over all the years
     of the plant’s existence prior to 1997 and multiply the total assets variable
     by the ratio of cumulated machinery investment to total investment over the
     same period. We follow the analogous procedure for investment in buildings.


     References
Ackerberg, D., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2008): “Structural Identification
      of Production Functions,” Working Paper.

Baily, M., C. Hulten, and D. Campbell (1992): “Productivity Dynamics in
       Manufacturing Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Basu, S., and J. Fernald (2002): “Aggregate Productivity and Aggregate
      Technology,” European Economic Review, 46, 963–991.

Bruno, M. (1978): “Duality, Intermediate Inputs and Value-Added,” in Pro-
      duction Economics: A Dual Approach to Theory and Applications, ed. by
      M. Fuss, and D. McFadden. North-Holland.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Krizan (2001): New Developments in
      Productivity Analysischap. Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from
      Microeconomic Evidence, pp. 303–372. University of Chicago Press.

Hall, R. (1988): “The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Indus-
      try,” Journal of Political Economy, 96, 921–947.

          (1990): “Invariance Properties of Solow’s Productivity Residual,”
       in Growth/Productivity/Employment: Essays to Celebrate Bob Solow’s
       Birthday, ed. by P. Diamon. MIT Press.

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing
       TFP in China and India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 74(5), 1403–
       1448.

                                          31
Hulten, C. (1978): “Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs,” The Review
      of Economic Studies, 45(3), 511–518.

Jarmin, R., and J. Miranda (2002): “The Longitudinal Business Database,”
      Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Discussion Paper CES-02-17.

Kwon, H. U., F. Narita, and M. Narita (2009): “New Evidence on Japan’s
      Productivity Growth in the 1990s,” Working Paper.

Levinsohn, and Petrin (2003): “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
      to Control for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies.

Melitz, M. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and
      Aggregate Industry Productivity,” Econometrica.

Olley, S., and A. Pakes (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the
      Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64(6), 1263–
      1298.

Petrin, A., and J. Levinsohn (2010): “Measuring Aggregate Productivity
      Growth Using Plant-Level Data,” Working Paper.

Solow, R. M. (1957): “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Func-
      tion,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 39(3), 312–320.

Wooldridge, J. (2009): “On Estimating Firm-Level Production Functions Us-
     ing Proxy Variables to Control for Unobservables,” Economic Letters.




                                       32
       Table 1: Percentage Growth Rates of Value-Added,
        Primary Input Costs and Aggregate Productivity
               in U.S. Manufacturing, 1977–1996.
         (1)        (2)                (3)            (4)         (5)
                                                               Aggregate
        Value   Production      Non-production      Capital   Productivity
Year    Added   labor costs       labor costs        costs      (APG)
1977     6.2        1.1                0.4            0.3         4.3
1978     5.5        0.9                0.5            0.4         3.6
1979     6.4        0.0                0.5            0.4         5.3
1980     -6.2      -2.1               0.6             0.4         -5.1
1981     2.7       -0.5               -0.0            0.5          2.7
1982     -8.0      -3.6               -0.4            0.5         -4.5
1983     5.9        0.0               -0.4            0.3         5.9
1984     8.6        1.4                0.2            0.1         6.8
1985     0.5       -0.5                0.3            0.4         0.3
1986     -0.3      -0.6               0.1             0.4         -0.3
1987     6.7        0.0               -0.3            0.3         6.7
1988     5.1        0.4                0.0            0.3         4.4
1989     -0.7      -0.2               0.0             0.3         -0.9
1990     -3.1      -0.7               -0.2            0.4         -2.5
1991     -2.4      -0.8               -0.1            0.4         -2.0
1992     3.4       -0.0               -0.5            0.2          3.7
1993     1.9        0.0               -0.3            0.3         1.9
1994     6.9        0.4               -0.2            0.2         6.5
1995     4.7        0.0                0.0            0.3         4.2
1996     2.9        0.0               -0.1            0.5         2.5
Mean     2.3       -0.2                0.0            0.3         2.2
s.d.     4.6        1.1                0.3            0.1         3.7
                          Note: (1) - (2) - (3) - (4)= (5)




                                               33
      Table 2: Aggregate Productivity Growth Decomposition
Technical Efficiency and Reallocation. U.S. Manufacturing 1977–1996
                            Percentage Growth Rates of ...
                                              (2)=(3)+(4)-(5)
         (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)               (5)
                                                                 Fixed
                  Aggregate     Technical                        Costs
        Value    Productivity   Efficiency   Reallocation       Residual
Year    Added      (APG)          (TE)          (RE)             Error
1977      6.2         4.3          -0.5           4.6             -0.3
1978      5.5         3.6           1.0            2.4            -0.2
1979      6.4         5.4           3.1            1.0            -1.3
1980     -6.2        -5.1          -3.9           -0.3             0.9
1981      2.7         2.8          -0.1           1.4             -1.4
1982     -8.0        -4.5          -2.9           -1.4             0.2
1983      5.9         5.9           4.2            1.6            -0.1
1984      8.6         6.8           1.9            4.9            -0.1
1985      0.5         0.3          -3.5           3.5             -0.4
1986     -0.3        -0.2          -4.3           3.9             -0.2
1987      6.7         6.7           3.1            2.9            -0.7
1988      5.1         4.4           2.1            2.4             0.0
1989     -0.7        -0.9          -2.3           1.7              0.2
1990     -3.1        -2.5          -0.4           -1.1             0.9
1991     -2.5        -2.0          -2.7           1.9              1.2
1992      3.4         3.7           3.0            1.2             0.5
1993      1.9         1.9           0.1            2.6             0.7
1994      6.9         6.5           3.9            3.0             0.4
1995      4.7         4.2           2.2            2.4             0.4
1996      2.9         2.5           0.6            3.2             1.3
Mean     2.3         2.2           0.2            2.1             0.1
s.d.     4.6         3.7           2.7            1.7             0.7
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by Wooldridge (2009) modification of
Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                             34
       Table 3a: Decomposition of Reallocation Term (equation 9):
                    U.S. Manufacturing, 1977–1996


                             Percentage Growth Rates of ...
            (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)
                                      Reallocation “Gap” terms
                                       Non-
        Reallocation   Production Production Materials Energy           Capital
Year       (RE)         workers      workers
1977         4.6          0.8           0.1          2.2        0.6      0.9
1978         2.4          0.5           0.1          1.5        0.0      0.2
1979         1.0          0.2           0.1          0.5       -0.4       0.6
1980        -0.3          -0.5          0.1         -0.5       -0.4       1.1
1981         1.4          0.0           0.0         -0.1       0.8        0.7
1982        -1.4          -0.6          0.2         -2.0        1.4      -0.4
1983         1.6          0.4           0.1          0.2        1.2      -0.3
1984         4.9          0.7          -0.1          3.4       0.7        0.1
1985         3.5          0.3          -0.1          0.9       1.1        1.3
1986         3.9          0.3           0.1          0.7        1.1      1.7
1987         2.9          0.2           0.2          1.0        0.3      1.2
1988         2.4          0.5           0.1          1.2        0.6      0.0
1989         1.7          0.7           0.0          0.4        0.1      0.5
1990        -1.1          0.8           0.1         -1.8       -1.7      1.5
1991         1.9          0.6           0.1         -0.7       -0.1      2.0
1992         1.2          0.4           0.1          0.9       -0.6       0.5
1993         2.6          0.5           0.1          0.2        0.4      1.3
1994         3.0          0.1           0.0          1.9        0.2      0.8
1995         2.4          0.1           0.1          1.3       -0.3       1.3
1996         3.2          -0.0          0.0          2.1       -0.1      1.2
Mean        2.1           0.3           0.1         0.7        0.2        0.8
s.d.        1.7           0.4           0.1         1.3        0.7        0.7
                        Note: (1) = (2) + (3) + (4) + (5) + (6)
                   (numbers may not add up exactly due to rounding.)
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by Wooldridge (2009) modification of
Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                      35
                                    Table 3b: Correlations of Reallocation Terms
                                                        Non-
                         Reallocation   Production   Production   Materials   Energy   Capital
                            (RE)         workers      workers
Reallocation                 1.00
Production Workers           0.35         1.00
Non-production Workers      -0.30         -0.29        1.00
Materials                    0.81         0.30         -0.48        1.00
Energy                       0.48         -0.20        0.09         0.17       1.00
Capital                      0.03         0.15         -0.03        -0.09     -0.39     1.00




                                           36
      Table 4: Aggregate Productivity Growth Decomposition
Technical Efficiency and Reallocation. U.S. Manufacturing 1977–1996
                 (Value-Added Production Functions)
                            Percentage Growth Rates of ...
                    APG=TE+RE
            (1)          (2)           (3)                     (4)
         Aggregate    Technical                               TE -
        Productivity Efficiency Reallocation             Intermediates
Year      (APG)         (TE)          (RE)                 Reallocation
1977         4.3         3.0           1.3                     0.2
1978         3.6         1.9           1.7                     0.4
1979         5.4         3.4           1.9                     3.3
1980        -5.1         -6.4          1.3                    -5.5
1981         2.8         1.3           1.5                     0.6
1982        -4.5         -4.7          0.2                    -4.1
1983         5.9         5.7           0.2                     4.3
1984         6.8         5.5           1.3                     1.4
1985         0.4         -1.0          1.4                    -2.9
1986        -0.3         -1.6          1.4                    -3.4
1987         6.7         5.5           1.2                     4.2
1988         4.4         3.3           1.1                     1.6
1989        -0.9         -1.0          0.1                    -1.4
1990        -2.5         -1.5          -1.0                    2.0
1991        -2.0         -2.3          0.3                    -1.5
1992         3.7         3.3           0.4                     3.1
1993         1.9         1.5           0.4                     0.9
1994         6.5         5.8           0.7                     3.6
1995         4.2         3.6           0.6                     2.6
1996         2.5         1.2           1.3                    -0.7
Mean        2.2           1.3          0.9                     0.4
s.d.        3.7           3.5          0.7                     2.8


Value-added Production Functions estimated by Wooldridge (2009) modification of
Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                      37
       Table 5a: Decomposition of Reallocation Term (equation 10):
                     U.S. Manufacturing, 1977–1996
                  (Value-Added Production Functions)
                              Percentage Growth Rates of . . .
             (1)            (2)           (3)                      (4)
                                         Non-
                        Production Production
         Reallocation     worker        worker                   Capital
Year        (RE)        “gap” term “gap” term                  “gap” term
1977          1.3           0.3           0.3                    0.7
1978          1.7           0.7           0.2                    0.9
1979          1.9           0.3           0.6                    1.0
1980          1.3          -0.2           0.2                    1.3
1981          1.5           0.2           0.1                    1.2
1982          0.2          -1.1           0.4                    0.9
1983          0.2          -0.7           0.1                    0.8
1984          1.3           0.4           0.1                    0.8
1985          1.4           0.0           0.0                    1.3
1986          1.4           0.0           0.1                    1.3
1987          1.2           0.2           0.0                    1.0
1988          1.1           0.4           0.0                    0.6
1989          0.1          -0.1           -0.4                   0.7
1990         -1.0          -1.5           -0.4                   1.0
1991          0.3          -0.6           0.1                    0.8
1992          0.4           0.0           -0.2                   0.6
1993          0.4          -0.4           -0.1                   0.9
1994          0.7           0.1           0.0                    0.7
1995          0.6          -0.1           -0.2                   0.9
1996          1.3           0.4           0.0                    0.9
Mean         0.9           -0.1           0.0                    0.9
s.d.         0.7            0.5           0.2                    0.2


Value-added Production functions estimated by Wooldridge (2009), modification of
Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                       38
                         Table 5b: Correlations of Reallocation Terms
                                                        Non-
                         Reallocation   Production   Production   Capital
                            (RE)         workers      workers
Reallocation                 1.00
Production Workers           0.86         1.00
Non-production Workers       0.66         0.32          1.00
Capital                      0.34         -0.06         0.23       1.00




                                           39
           Table 6: Summaries of Aggregate Productivity Growth Decompositions
                     By 2-digit SIC Manufacturing Industry, 1977–1996
                                         (1)       (2)     (3)      (4)       (5)           (6)
                                          Technical                       Value-Added     Positive
                                          Efficiency      Reallocation       Share      Reallocation
                                        Growth (%)        (% Growth)          (%)       (proportion
 SIC2     Industry                     (mean) (s.d.)     (mean) (s.d.)      (mean)       of years)
20 & 21   Food & Tobacco Products         4.4      7.7     -2.3     6.4        12.2         0.35
   22     Textiles                        1.1      5.1      1.6     1.6         2.3         0.80
   23     Apparel                        -0.9      3.0      2.2     1.6         2.3         0.90
   24     Wood Products                  -2.7      4.5      2.2     2.9         2.0         0.80
   25     Furniture                      -1.7      3.4      2.6     2.7         1.5         0.80
   26     Paper Products                  0.7      3.1      0.6     1.4         4.5         0.75
   27     Printing & Publishing          -1.6      2.2      1.7     1.9         5.1         0.75
   28     Chemicals                      -1.4      4.5      2.8     2.0        11.0         0.90
   29     Petroleum & Coal Products       2.7     16.1      0.2     5.1         1.8         0.55
   30     Rubber & Plastics               0.0      4.0      2.7     2.4         3.7         0.90
   31     Leather Products               -0.7      4.1      0.6     4.0         0.4         0.70
   32     Stone, Clay, & Glass            0.4      3.6      1.0     3.0         2.7         0.75
   33     Primary Metals                  0.1      7.2      1.4     0.9         5.1         0.95
   34     Fabricated Metal Products      -1.1      4.3      1.9     1.4         6.6         0.90
   35     Industrial Machinery            0.5      3.6      4.5     4.2        10.7         0.90
   36     Electronic Equipment            2.3      6.4      5.1     2.9         8.7         1.00
   37     Transportation Equipment       -1.0      5.1      1.7     3.6        11.9         0.70
   38     Instruments                    -1.8      2.8      4.2     1.9         6.1         1.00
   39     Miscellaneous                  -2.1      4.6      3.4     1.8         1.4         1.00
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by Wooldridge (2009) modification of
Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                            40
                          Table 7: Summaries of Reallocation “Gap” Terms
                                       Percentage Growth Rates
                          By 2-digit SIC Manufacturing Industry, 1977–1996
                                (1)               (2)               (3)                    (4)                    (5)
                                                 Non-
                          Production          Production      Materials               Energy                 Capital
                           workers             workers
Industry                (mean) (s.d.)       (mean) (s.d.)   (mean)        (s.d.)   (mean)        (s.d.)   (mean)        (s.d.)
Food & Tobacco            1.5         2.5     0.0    0.2     -0.4          4.2       0.8          3.2      -4.2          4.9
Textiles                  0.4         0.3    -0.1    0.2      0.3          1.3       0.1          1.1       0.9          0.3
Apparel                   0.1         0.9     0.1    0.4      0.2          0.9      -0.1          1.3       2.0          0.4
Wood Products             0.2         0.2     0.0    0.2      0.9          2.0       0.4          2.0       0.7          0.4
Furniture                 0.3         0.3     0.1    0.2      1.0          2.0       0.2          1.0       1.0          0.3
Paper Products            0.2         0.5     0.0    0.1      0.4          0.6       0.1          0.8      -0.1          0.3
Printing & Publishing     0.1         0.2     0.0    0.3      0.4          1.1       1.1          1.4       0.1          0.1
Chemicals                 0.1         0.1     0.0    0.2      1.2          1.8       0.3          1.3       1.2          0.3
Petroleum & Coal          0.1         0.6     0.0    0.4     -1.0          3.7       0.1          2.6       0.9          0.8
Rubber & Plastics         0.1         0.2     0.2    0.2      0.8          1.9       0.1          1.2       1.5          0.5
Leather Products          0.2         0.6     0.1    0.7     -0.8          3.7       0.3          1.7       0.7          0.5
Stone, Clay, & Glass      0.2         0.5     0.0    0.2      0.0          1.9       0.0          1.1       0.7          0.3
Primary Metals            0.2         0.5     0.1    0.2      0.0          1.9       0.4          1.6       0.7          0.3
Fabricated Metal          0.2         0.7     0.2    0.1      0.1          0.9       0.0          0.3       1.5          0.6
Industrial Machinery      0.2         0.8     0.2    0.3      2.0          3.3       0.0          0.6       2.1          1.0
Electronic Equip.         0.1         0.2     0.1    0.2      1.6          2.6      -0.1          1.2       3.5          1.2
Transportation Equip.    -0.1         1.5     0.1    0.4      0.2          1.8       0.1          2.1       1.3          1.4
Instruments               0.1         0.3     0.1    0.3      1.6          1.6       0.0          1.1       2.4          0.8
Miscellaneous             0.1         0.4     0.2    0.3      1.2          1.7       0.5          1.2       1.4          0.6
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by Wooldridge (2009) modification of
Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                              41
            Table 8: Aggregate Productivity Growth Decomposition
Baily, Hulten, & Campbell vs. Petrin-Levinsohn. U.S. Manufacturing 1977–1996
                                      Percentage Growth Rates of ...
                                         APG=TE+RE                    BHC=TE+BHC RE
         (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)                 (5)         (6)
                   Aggregate       Technical                BHC Productivity      BHC
        Value     Productivity     Efficiency Reallocation            Index    Reallocation
Year    Added       (APG)            (TE)         (RE)               (BHC)     (BHC RE)
1977      6.2           4.3             -0.5        4.8            -3.5             -3.0
1978      5.5           3.6              1.0         2.6            1.4             0.4
1979      6.4           5.4              3.1         2.3            4.4             1.3
1980     -6.2          -5.1             -3.9        -1.2           10.0            14.0
1981      2.7           2.8             -0.1        2.9             1.4             1.4
1982     -8.0          -4.5             -2.9        -1.6           -0.4             2.5
1983      5.9           5.9              4.2         1.8           -5.1             -9.3
1984      8.6           6.8              1.9         4.9           -3.9             -5.8
1985      0.5           0.3             -3.5        3.8            -3.1             0.4
1986     -0.3          -0.2             -4.3        4.0           -13.7             -9.4
1987      6.7           6.7              3.1         3.6            6.2             3.1
1988      5.1           4.4              2.1         2.4           11.5             9.5
1989     -0.7          -0.9             -2.3        1.4             3.3             5.6
1990     -3.1          -2.5             -0.4        -2.1           -9.1             -8.7
1991     -2.5          -2.0             -2.7        -0.7           -1.0             1.7
1992      3.4           3.7              3.0         0.7            5.5             2.5
1993      1.9           1.9              0.1         1.8          -20.3            -20.4
1994      6.9           6.5              3.9         2.6            2.3             -1.6
1995      4.7           4.2              2.2         2.0           10.2             8.0
1996      2.9           2.5              0.6         1.9            5.4             4.9
Mean     2.3           2.2              0.2         2.0            0.1             -0.1
s.d.     4.6           3.7              2.7         1.9            8.0             7.8
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by Wooldridge (2009) modification of
Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.


Correlations of Annual Growth Rates
                APG              TE
TE              0.86
BHC Index       0.14             0.27




                                               42
                Table A1: Percentage Growth Rates of Real GDP
               and Real Value-Added in Manufacturing, 1977-1996
                                    Real Value-Added in Manufacturing
                    (1)      (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                      Plant-level     Plant-level
                   Real     From      NBER-CES           ASM             ASM
     Year          GDP      NIPA       aggregates        (all)       (continuers)
     1977           4.5      n/a             5.6           6.1            6.2
     1978           5.0      n/a             5.2           4.7            5.5
     1979           0.3      n/a             3.8           3.3            6.4
     1980          -4.1      n/a            -4.5          -6.0           -6.2
     1981           1.7      n/a             1.9           0.8            2.7
     1982          -2.0      n/a            -3.5          -7.2           -8.0
     1983           5.3      n/a             3.6           3.1            5.9
     1984           6.6      n/a             5.8          11.0            8.6
     1985           3.6      n/a             2.2          -0.3            0.5
     1986           3.8      n/a             0.5          -0.3           -0.3
     1987           2.5      n/a             9.2           7.0            6.7
     1988           3.4      5.7             4.2           4.0            5.1
     1989           2.5      1.3            -0.9           4.5           -0.7
     1990           0.4      -1.1           -0.7          -1.5           -3.1
     1991          -0.8      -1.4           -2.3          -3.9           -2.4
     1992           2.6      3.3             7.2           9.9            3.4
     1993           2.0      4.2             3.4          -1.4            1.9
     1994           3.6      7.7             8.5          11.7            6.9
     1995           1.7      4.5            11.1          12.0            4.7
     1996           2.6      3.7            12.3          12.5            2.9
     Mean           2.5      3.1            3.6            3.5            2.3
   std. dev.        2.4      3.0            4.7            6.0            4.6


Correlations of Growth Rates
                GDP NIPA MFG             NBER        All ASM plants
ASM continuers   0.78    0.97             0.78            0.79

Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Annual Survey of Manufactures,
NBER-CES productivity database, and authors’ calculations.




                                       43
        Table A2a: Aggregate Productivity Growth Decomposition
    Technical Efficiency and Reallocation. U.S. Manufacturing 1977–1996
                                Percentage Growth Rates of ...
                                                  APG=TE+RE
         (1)         (2)            (3)                         (4)
                  Aggregate     Technical
        Value    Productivity   Efficiency                Reallocation
Year    Added      (APG)          (TE)                         (RE)
1977      6.2         4.3          0.8                        3.4
1978      5.5         3.6          0.4                        3.1
1979      6.4         5.4          1.4                        2.6
1980     -6.2        -5.1         -5.3                        0.7
1981      2.7         2.8         -0.1                        1.6
1982     -8.0        -4.5         -4.1                        -0.8
1983      5.9         5.9          4.8                        1.2
1984      8.6         6.8          3.3                        3.9
1985      0.5         0.3         -2.4                        2.2
1986     -0.3        -0.2         -2.4                        1.8
1987      6.7         6.7          4.1                        1.9
1988      5.1         4.4          2.4                        2.3
1989     -0.7        -0.9         -2.1                        1.4
1990     -3.1        -2.5         -2.4                        0.7
1991     -2.5        -2.0         -2.0                        1.1
1992      3.4         3.7          2.7                        1.5
1993      1.9         1.9          1.3                        1.5
1994      6.9         6.5          5.1                        2.0
1995      4.7         4.2          2.1                        2.5
1996      2.9         2.5          0.7                        3.0
Mean     2.3         2.2           0.4                         1.9
s.d.     4.6         3.7           3.0                         1.1
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                                44
    Table A2b: Aggregate Productivity Growth Decomposition
Technical Efficiency and Reallocation. U.S. Manufacturing 1977–1996
                          Percentage Growth Rates of ...
                                            APG=TE+RE
        (1)        (2)           (3)                      (4)
                Aggregate     Technical
       Value   Productivity Efficiency
Year   Added     (APG)          (TE)                     (RE)
1977     6.2        4.3           0.6                   3.7
1978     5.5        3.6           0.5                   3.1
1979     6.4        5.4           2.0                   3.4
1980    -6.2       -5.1          -3.9                   -1.2
1981     2.7        2.8          -0.3                   3.1
1982    -8.0       -4.5          -3.0                   -1.5
1983     5.9        5.9           4.4                   1.5
1984     8.6        6.8           2.4                   4.4
1985     0.5        0.3          -2.0                   2.3
1986    -0.3       -0.2          -2.3                   2.0
1987     6.7        6.7           4.2                   2.4
1988     5.1        4.4           1.9                   2.5
1989    -0.7       -0.9          -1.7                   0.8
1990    -3.1       -2.5          -1.4                   -1.1
1991    -2.5       -2.0          -1.5                   -0.5
1992     3.4        3.7           2.9                   0.8
1993     1.9        1.9           1.3                   0.6
1994     6.9        6.5           4.7                   1.8
1995     4.7        4.2           2.4                   1.8
1996     2.9        2.5           1.6                   0.9
Mean    2.3         2.2          0.6                     1.6
s.d.    4.6         3.7          2.6                     1.7
           Gross Output Production Functions estimated by OLS.




                                              45
           Table A3a: Decomposition of Reallocation Term (equation 9):
                         U.S. Manufacturing, 1977–1996


                                 Percentage Growth Rates of ...
            (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)                    (5)
                                          Reallocation “Gap” terms
                                     Non-
       Reallocation   Production Production Materials                  Capital
Year      (RE)         workers      workers
1977         3.4          0.8           0.2        1.5                   0.8
1978         3.1          0.7           0.2        1.0                   1.2
1979         2.6          0.1           0.2        1.0                   1.4
1980         0.7         -1.1          0.1         0.1                   1.6
1981         1.6          0.1          -0.0        -0.1                  1.5
1982        -0.8         -1.5          0.1         -0.7                  1.4
1983         1.2          0.2           0.1        -0.1                  1.0
1984         3.9          0.8          -0.0         2.3                  0.8
1985         2.2          0.1           0.0        0.6                   1.5
1986         1.8         -0.1          0.1         0.4                   1.3
1987         1.9          0.1           0.2        0.6                   1.0
1988         2.3          0.5           0.1        0.8                   0.8
1989         1.4          0.2           0.1        0.4                   0.7
1990         0.7         -0.6          0.0         -0.2                  1.4
1991         1.1         -0.2          0.2         -0.4                  1.5
1992         1.5          0.3          -0.0         0.4                  0.8
1993         1.5          0.2           0.1        0.3                   1.0
1994         2.0          0.3           0.0        0.8                   0.8
1995         2.5          0.0           0.2        1.2                   1.1
1996         3.0          0.2           0.0        1.7                   1.0
Mean        1.9           0.1          0.1         0.6                   1.1
s.d.        1.1           0.6          0.1         0.7                   0.3
       Note: (1) = (2) + (3) + (4) + (5) (numbers may not add up exactly due to rounding.)
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                       46
                                     Table A3b: Correlations of Reallocation Terms
                                                          Non-
                          Reallocation    Production   Production      Materials        Capital
                             (RE)          workers      workers
Reallocation                  1.00
Production Workers            0.68           1.00
Non-production Workers        0.14           -0.08       1.00
Materials                     0.62           0.73        -0.04             1.00
Capital                       0.64           0.08        0.04             -0.05          1.00
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                                 47
              Table A3c: Decomposition of Reallocation Term (equation 9):
                            U.S. Manufacturing, 1977–1996


                                    Percentage Growth Rates of ...
            (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)                  (6)
                                             Reallocation “Gap” terms
                                      Non-
       Reallocation   Production   Production Materials Energy                 Capital
Year      (RE)         workers      workers
1977         3.5          0.9           0.3        1.5         0.2               0.2
1978         2.9          0.7           0.2        1.0         0.1               0.8
1979         2.1          0.0           0.3        0.9         0.0               0.8
1980        -0.2         -1.1          0.1         0.1        -0.2               0.9
1981         1.7          0.1          -0.0        -0.1        0.7               0.9
1982        -1.3         -1.5          0.0         -0.8        0.2               0.7
1983         1.4          0.2           0.1        -0.1        0.7               0.5
1984         4.4          0.9          -0.0         2.3        0.7               0.5
1985         2.0          0.1           0.0        0.6         0.4               0.8
1986         1.9         -0.1          0.1         0.5         0.6               0.7
1987         1.7          0.1           0.2        0.6         0.3               0.6
1988         2.5          0.6           0.1        0.8         0.6               0.4
1989         1.1          0.2           0.1        0.5        -0.1               0.4
1990        -0.1         -0.6          0.1         -0.1       -0.4               0.9
1991         0.7         -0.2          0.2         -0.4        0.0               1.2
1992         1.3          0.3          -0.0         0.4        0.1               0.5
1993         1.4          0.2           0.1        0.3         0.3               0.6
1994         2.2          0.4          -0.1         0.8        0.6               0.5
1995         2.2          0.0           0.2        1.2         0.2               0.6
1996         2.2          0.2          -0.0         1.7       -0.3               0.5
Mean        1.7           0.1          0.1          0.6       0.2                0.7
s.d.        1.3           0.6          0.1          0.8       0.3                0.2
       Note: (1) = (2) + (3) + (4) + (5) + (6) (numbers may not add up exactly due to rounding.)
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by OLS




                                       48
                                     Table A3d: Correlations of Reallocation Terms
                                                         Non-
                         Reallocation    Production   Production   Materials   Energy   Capital
                            (RE)          workers      workers
Reallocation                  1.00
Production Workers            0.82          1.00
Non-production Workers        0.16          0.04        1.00
Materials                     0.71          0.71        0.03         1.00
Energy                        0.58          0.39        -0.26        0.12      1.00
Capital                      -0.34          -0.50       0.27         -0.50     -0.28     1.00
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by OLS




                                                49
           Table A4a: Aggregate Productivity Growth Decomposition
       Technical Efficiency and Reallocation. U.S. Manufacturing 1977–1996
                             Percentage Growth Rates
            (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
         Aggregate     Technical                   Production   Non-Production
        Productivity   Efficiency   Reallocation     worker         worker         Capital
Year      (APG)          (TE)          (RE)        “gap” term     “gap” term     “gap” term
1977         4.3           2.7          1.6            0.6            0.3             0.8
1978         3.6           1.3          2.3            0.7            0.3             1.3
1979         5.4           3.4          1.9            0.3            0.3             1.3
1980        -5.1          -6.3          1.2           -0.5           0.1              1.6
1981         2.8           1.2          1.5            0.1            0.0             1.5
1982        -4.5          -4.6          0.1           -1.3           0.1              1.4
1983         5.9           4.9          1.0           -0.3           0.1              1.2
1984         6.8           5.0          1.8            0.7            0.0             1.1
1985         0.4          -1.3          1.7            0.0            0.1             1.5
1986        -0.3          -1.8          1.5            0.0            0.1             1.4
1987         6.7           5.3          1.4            0.2            0.1             1.1
1988         4.4           3.0          1.4            0.5            0.0             0.9
1989        -0.9          -1.9          1.0            0.2            0.1             0.8
1990        -2.5          -3.2          0.7           -0.5           0.1              1.1
1991        -2.0          -2.7          0.7           -0.2           0.2              0.8
1992         3.7           2.9          0.8            0.1           -0.1             0.8
1993         1.9           1.0          0.9            0.0            0.0             0.9
1994         6.5           5.8          0.7            0.1           -0.1             0.8
1995         4.2           3.1          1.1            0.0            0.1             1.0
1996         2.5           1.4          1.1            0.2            0.0             0.9
Mean        2.2           1.0           1.2           0.0            0.1              1.1
 s.d        3.7           3.5           0.5           0.5            0.1              0.3


Value-added Production Functions estimated by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator




                                        50
           Table A4b: Aggregate Productivity Growth Decomposition:
       Technical Efficiency and Reallocation. U.S. Manufacturing, 1977–1996
                              Percentage Growth Rates
           (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
        Aggregate     Technical                   Production   Non-Production
       Productivity   Efficiency   Reallocation     worker         worker         Capital
Year     (APG)          (TE)          (RE)        “gap” term     “gap” term     “gap” term
1977        4.3           1.3           3.0           1.5            0.5           1.0
1978        3.6           0.3           3.3           1.4            0.6           1.3
1979        5.4           3.0           2.3           0.3            0.7           1.3
1980       -5.1          -5.4          0.3           -1.8           0.5            1.6
1981        2.8           1.2           1.6          -0.2           0.1            1.7
1982       -4.5          -2.6          -1.9          -3.1           -0.1           1.4
1983        5.9           5.0           1.0          -0.2           0.0            1.2
1984        6.8           4.1           2.8           1.5            0.1           1.1
1985        0.3          -1.3          1.7           -0.2           0.3            1.6
1986       -0.3          -1.4          1.2           -0.4           0.2            1.5
1987        6.7           5.3           1.4           0.3            0.0           1.1
1988        4.4           2.6           1.8           0.8            0.1           0.9
1989       -0.9          -2.0          1.1            0.1            0.0           1.0
1990       -2.5          -2.7          0.2           -1.1           0.1            1.2
1991       -2.0          -2.2          0.2           -0.9           0.2            1.0
1992        3.7           2.9           0.8           0.1           -0.3           0.9
1993        1.9           0.9           1.0           0.0           -0.2           1.2
1994        6.5           5.3           1.2           0.5           -0.2           0.9
1995        4.2           2.4           1.8           0.2            0.4           1.2
1996        2.5           1.0           1.4           0.3            0.0           1.1
mean        2.2          0.9           1.3           -0.1           0.2            1.2
s.d.        3.7          3.0           1.1            1.1           0.3            0.2


Value-added Production Functions estimated by OLS.




                                        51
               Table A5a: Correlations of Reallocation Terms
                      U.S. Manufacturing, 1977–1996


                                                          Non-
                          Reallocation    Production   Production       Capital
                             (RE)          workers      workers
Reallocation                  1.00
Production Workers            0.78            1.00
Non-production Workers        0.52            0.21        1.00
Capital                       0.31            -0.32       0.19           1.00


Value-added Production functions estimated by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator




                                         52
           Table A5b: Correlations of Reallocation Terms
                  U.S. Manufacturing, 1977–1996


                                                          Non-
                          Reallocation    Production   Production   Capital
                             (RE)          workers      workers
Reallocation                  1.00
Production Workers            0.93          1.00
Non-production Workers        0.52          0.21          1.00
Capital                      -0.10          -0.42         0.36       1.00


Value-added Production functions estimated by OLS




                                     53
          Table A6a: Summaries of Aggregate Productivity Growth Decompositions
                     By 2-digit SIC Manufacturing Industry, 1977–1996
                                         (1)       (2)     (3)      (4)       (5)               (6)
                                          Technical                       Value-Added         Positive
                                          Efficiency      Reallocation       Share          Reallocation
                                        Growth (%)        (% Growth)          (%)
 SIC2     Industry                     (mean) (s.d.)     (mean) (s.d.)      (mean)          (% of years)
20 & 21   Food & Tobacco Products         1.3      3.3      0.8     1.6        12.2             0.70
   22     Textiles                        1.8      5.6      1.0     1.3         2.3             0.85
   23     Apparel                        -0.5      3.2      1.8     1.6         2.3             0.80
   24     Wood Products                  -1.7      4.6      1.2     1.8         2.0             0.80
   25     Furniture                      -1.3      3.4      2.2     1.9         1.5             0.85
   26     Paper Products                  0.5      3.2      0.8     0.9         4.5             0.85
   27     Printing & Publishing          -1.0      2.4      1.1     0.9         5.1             0.90
   28     Chemicals                      -0.6      4.4      2.0     1.4        11.0             0.95
   29     Petroleum & Coal Products       1.8     14.1      0.9     5.1         1.8             0.65
   30     Rubber & Plastics               0.8      4.0      2.0     1.5         3.7             0.90
   31     Leather Products                0.4      4.8     -0.4     2.6         0.4             0.55
   32     Stone, Clay, & Glass            0.5      4.4      0.8     2.1         2.7             0.75
   33     Primary Metals                  0.5      7.7      0.7     1.5         5.1             0.80
   34     Fabricated Metal Products      -0.5      4.5      1.3     1.4         6.6             0.85
   35     Industrial Machinery            1.7      3.9      3.3     3.8        10.7             0.90
   36     Electronic Equipment            3.8      5.9      3.7     2.9         8.7             1.00
   37     Transportation Equipment       -1.1      6.0      1.9     2.0        11.9             0.85
   38     Instruments                    -0.8      2.9      3.2     1.6         6.1             1.00
   39     Miscellaneous                  -1.3      4.8      2.5     1.6         1.4             0.95
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by the Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                                54
          Table A6b: Summaries of Aggregate Productivity Growth Decompositions
                     By 2-digit SIC Manufacturing Industry, 1977–1996
                                        (1)       (2)    (3)     (4)        (5)           (6)
                                         Technical                      Value-Added     Positive
                                         Efficiency      Reallocation      Share      Reallocation
                                       Growth (%)        (% Growth)         (%)
 SIC2     Industry                    (mean) (s.d.)     (mean) (s.d.)     (mean)      (% of years)
20 & 21   Food & Tobacco Products        1.0     3.3      1.1    1.6       12.2           0.80
   22     Textiles                       2.0     4.9      0.8    1.3        2.3           0.70
   23     Apparel                       -0.2     3.1      1.5    1.7        2.3           0.85
   24     Wood Products                 -1.7     4.3      1.2    2.4        2.0           0.70
   25     Furniture                     -0.8     3.3      1.7    2.3        1.5           0.80
   26     Paper Products                 0.2     2.9      1.1    1.0        4.5           0.90
   27     Printing & Publishing         -1.1     2.1      1.2    1.1        5.1           0.80
   28     Chemicals                     -0.5     4.2      1.9    1.5       11.0           0.95
   29     Petroleum & Coal Products      2.0    13.3      0.9    4.7        1.8           0.70
   30     Rubber & Plastics              0.8     3.6      1.9    1.8        3.7           0.85
   31     Leather Products               0.6     4.9     -0.6    2.6        0.4           0.50
   32     Stone, Clay, & Glass           0.8     3.8      0.6    2.5        2.7           0.75
   33     Primary Metals                 0.7     6.7      0.8    1.3        5.1           0.75
   34     Fabricated Metal Products     -0.1     4.1      0.9    1.6        6.6           0.75
   35     Industrial Machinery           1.9     3.6      3.0    4.1       10.7           0.85
   36     Electronic Equipment           4.4     5.9      3.1    3.0        8.7           1.00
   37     Transportation Equipment      -0.4     5.0      1.1    2.6       11.9           0.60
   38     Instruments                   -0.4     2.8      2.7    1.6        6.1           0.95
   39     Miscellaneous                 -0.7     4.6      1.9    1.6        1.4           0.85
Gross Output Production Functions estimated by OLS.




                                               55
          Table A7a: Summaries of Aggregate Productivity Growth Decompositions
                     By 2-digit SIC Manufacturing Industry, 1977–1996
                                          (1)       (2)    (3)      (4)        (5)             (6)
                                           Technical                       Value-Added       Positive
                                           Efficiency      Reallocation       Share        Reallocation
                                         Growth (%)        (% Growth)          (%)         (proportion
 SIC2     Industry                      (mean) (s.d.)     (mean) (s.d.)      (mean)         of years)
20 & 21   Food & Tobacco Products         0.9      3.4     1.2      0.8        12.2            0.95
   22     Textiles                        2.2      4.7     0.5      0.4         2.3            0.90
   23     Apparel                         0.5      3.4     0.8      0.7         2.3            0.90
   24     Wood Products                  -1.6      4.9     1.0      0.8         2.0            0.85
   25     Furniture                      -0.7      4.0     1.5      0.6         1.5            1.00
   26     Paper Products                  0.6      3.3     0.6      0.6         4.5            0.90
   27     Printing & Publishing          -1.2      2.5     1.1      0.6         5.1            0.95
   28     Chemicals                       0.2      5.0     1.0      0.5        11.0            1.00
   29     Petroleum & Coal Products       4.8     29.0     1.1      1.2         1.8            0.75
   30     Rubber & Plastics               1.2      4.3     1.4      0.5         3.7            0.95
   31     Leather Products                0.0      6.5     0.0      1.2         0.4            0.50
   32     Stone, Clay, & Glass            0.6      5.0     0.8      0.5         2.7            0.95
   33     Primary Metals                  0.5      7.0     0.6      1.0         5.1            0.80
   34     Fabricated Metal Products      -0.3      4.6     1.1      1.0         6.6            0.90
   35     Industrial Machinery            3.5      5.7     1.7      1.4        10.7            0.90
   36     Electronic Equipment            6.0      7.4     1.4      0.5         8.7            1.00
   37     Transportation Equipment       -1.5      6.2     1.5      1.6        11.9            0.80
   38     Instruments                     0.2      2.9     2.0      0.9         6.1            0.95
   39     Miscellaneous                  -0.6      5.5     1.8      1.0         1.4            1.00
Value-added Production Functions estimated by the Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                                56
          Table A7b: Summaries of Aggregate Productivity Growth Decompositions
                     By 2-digit SIC Manufacturing Industry, 1977–1996
                                         (1)       (2)    (3)     (4)        (5)           (6)
                                          Technical                      Value-Added     Positive
                                          Efficiency      Reallocation      Share      Reallocation
                                        Growth (%)        (% Growth)         (%)       (proportion
 SIC2     Industry                     (mean) (s.d.)     (mean) (s.d.)     (mean)       of years)
20 & 21   Food & Tobacco Products        1.0      3.3      1.1    1.2       12.2           0.90
   22     Textiles                       2.1      4.3      0.6    1.1        2.3           0.75
   23     Apparel                       -0.1      3.3      1.5    1.3        2.3           0.90
   24     Wood Products                 -1.8      4.6      1.2    2.3        2.0           0.80
   25     Furniture                     -0.7      3.1      1.5    1.8        1.5           0.85
   26     Paper Products                 0.1      3.3      1.1    1.0        4.5           0.90
   27     Printing & Publishing         -1.1      2.5      1.0    1.1        5.1           0.85
   28     Chemicals                     -0.7      5.1      1.8    1.1       11.0           1.00
   29     Petroleum & Coal Products      4.5     29.0      1.4    1.7        1.8           0.85
   30     Rubber & Plastics              0.7      3.9      1.9    1.4        3.7           0.90
   31     Leather Products               0.7      6.5     -0.7    2.3        0.4           0.50
   32     Stone, Clay, & Glass           0.7      4.2      0.7    1.5        2.7           0.85
   33     Primary Metals                 0.7      6.5      0.4    2.0        5.1           0.75
   34     Fabricated Metal Products     -0.2      4.2      0.9    1.7        6.6           0.80
   35     Industrial Machinery           3.5      4.6      1.7    2.7       10.7           0.85
   36     Electronic Equipment           4.9      6.4      2.5    1.8        8.7           0.95
   37     Transportation Equipment      -0.6      5.0      0.6    2.6       11.9           0.60
   38     Instruments                    0.5      2.9      1.6    1.7        6.1           0.80
   39     Miscellaneous                 -0.2      5.2      1.4    1.6        1.4           0.85
Value-added Production Functions estimated by OLS.




                                               57
          Table A7c: Summaries of Aggregate Productivity Growth Decompositions
                     By 2-digit SIC Manufacturing Industry, 1977–1996
                                          (1)       (2)    (3)      (4)        (5)           (6)
                                           Technical                       Value-Added     Positive
                                           Efficiency      Reallocation       Share      Reallocation
                                         Growth (%)        (% Growth)          (%)       (proportion
 SIC2     Industry                      (mean) (s.d.)     (mean) (s.d.)      (mean)       of years)
20 & 21   Food & Tobacco Products         3.4      3.6     -1.4     3.8           12.2       0.40
   22     Textiles                        2.1      4.8      0.6     0.4            2.3       1.00
   23     Apparel                         0.4      3.4      0.9     0.7            2.3       0.90
   24     Wood Products                  -1.6      5.0      1.0     0.6            2.0       1.00
   25     Furniture                      -0.7      3.9      1.5     0.7            1.5       0.95
   26     Paper Products                  0.9      3.3      0.3     0.5            4.5       0.75
   27     Printing & Publishing          -0.8      2.4      0.7     0.6            5.1       0.90
   28     Chemicals                       0.1      5.0      1.1     0.4           11.0       1.00
   29     Petroleum & Coal Products       5.1     29.2      0.9     1.1            1.8       0.80
   30     Rubber & Plastics               1.0      4.4      1.6     0.5            3.7       1.00
   31     Leather Products               -0.1      6.5      0.1     1.1            0.4       0.50
   32     Stone, Clay, & Glass            0.6      5.0      0.9     0.4            2.7       0.95
   33     Primary Metals                  0.4      7.5      0.7     0.6            5.1       0.85
   34     Fabricated Metal Products      -0.3      4.7      1.1     0.8            6.6       0.95
   35     Industrial Machinery            3.7      5.7      1.5     1.4           10.7       0.90
   36     Electronic Equipment            5.3      7.5      2.1     0.6            8.7       1.00
   37     Transportation Equipment       -0.9      6.4      0.9     1.6           11.9       0.70
   38     Instruments                     0.2      2.9      1.9     1.0            6.1       0.95
   39     Miscellaneous                  -0.3      5.4      1.6     0.8            1.4       0.95
Value-added Production Functions estimated by Wooldridge (2009) modification of
Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.




                                                58
           Table A8a: Aggregate Productivity Growth Decomposition
Baily, Hulten, & Campbell vs. Petrin-Levinsohn. U.S. Manufacturing 1977–1996
                                     Percentage Growth Rates of ...
                                        APG=TE+RE                    BHC=TE+BHC RE
        (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)                 (5)         (6)
                  Aggregate       Technical                BHC Productivity      BHC
       Value     Productivity     Efficiency Reallocation            Index    Reallocation
Year   Added       (APG)            (TE)         (RE)               (BHC)     (BHC RE)
1977     6.2           4.3              0.8       3.5              1.4             0.5
1978     5.5           3.6              0.3       3.2              1.3             0.9
1979     6.4           5.4              1.3       4.0              3.4             2.0
1980    -6.2          -5.1             -5.3      0.2               3.1             8.5
1981     2.7           2.8             -0.1      2.7               3.4             3.3
1982    -8.0          -4.5             -4.1      -0.4            -21.0            -16.6
1983     5.9           5.9              4.8       1.1             -2.6             -7.4
1984     8.6           6.8              3.3       3.6             -0.2             -3.4
1985     0.5           0.3             -2.4      2.8              -9.1             -6.7
1986    -0.3          -0.2             -2.4      2.1             -20.3            -18.0
1987     6.7           6.7              4.1       2.6              0.5             -3.6
1988     5.1           4.4              2.4       2.1              5.8             3.4
1989    -0.7          -0.9             -2.1      1.2               2.3             4.3
1990    -3.1          -2.5             -2.4      -0.0              0.9             3.4
1991    -2.5          -2.0             -2.0      0.0              -9.9             -7.9
1992     3.4           3.7              2.7       1.0             -7.0             -9.7
1993     1.9           1.9              1.3       0.6              6.8             5.5
1994     6.9           6.5              5.1       1.4              1.8             -3.2
1995     4.7           4.2              2.1       2.1              6.5             4.6
1996     2.9           2.5              0.7       1.7              6.0             5.3
Mean    2.3           2.2              0.4       1.8              -1.3            -1.7
s.d.    4.6           3.7              3.0       1.3               8.1            7.4
  Gross Output Production Functions estimated by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) estimator.


Correlations of Annual Growth Rates
               APG              TE
TE             0.95
BHC Index      0.43             0.41




                                                 59
           Table A8b: Aggregate Productivity Growth Decomposition
Baily, Hulten, & Campbell vs. Petrin-Levinsohn. U.S. Manufacturing 1977–1996
                                     Percentage Growth Rates of ...
                                        APG=TE+RE                    BHC=TE+BHC RE
        (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)                 (5)         (6)
                  Aggregate       Technical                BHC Productivity      BHC
       Value     Productivity     Efficiency Reallocation            Index    Reallocation
Year   Added       (APG)            (TE)         (RE)               (BHC)     (BHC RE)
1977     6.2            4.3             0.6        3.7              2.7            2.1
1978     5.5            3.6             0.5        3.1              2.4            1.9
1979     6.4            5.4             2.0        3.4              4.4            2.4
1980    -6.2           -5.1            -3.9       -1.2              3.8            7.8
1981     2.7            2.8            -0.3       3.1               1.3            1.6
1982    -8.0           -4.5            -3.0       -1.5            -14.3           -11.3
1983     5.9            5.9             4.4        1.5             -1.5            -5.9
1984     8.6            6.8             2.4        4.4              1.2            -1.2
1985     0.5            0.3            -2.0       2.3              -4.7            -2.8
1986    -0.3           -0.2            -2.3       2.0             -15.3           -13.0
1987     6.7            6.7             4.2        2.4              0.1            -4.2
1988     5.1            4.4             1.9        2.5              4.0            2.1
1989    -0.7           -0.9            -1.7       0.8               1.4            3.1
1990    -3.1           -2.5            -1.4       -1.1              0.5            2.0
1991    -2.5           -2.0            -1.5       -0.5             -6.3            -4.9
1992     3.4            3.7             2.9        0.8             -4.0            -7.0
1993     1.9            1.9             1.3        0.6              6.6            5.4
1994     6.9            6.5             4.7        1.8              2.3            -2.4
1995     4.7            4.2             2.4        1.8              6.1            3.7
1996     2.9            2.5             1.6        0.9              8.7            7.2
Mean    2.3             2.2            0.6        1.6              -0.0           -0.7
s.d.    4.6             3.7            2.6        1.7               6.3           5.7
                      Gross Output Production Functions estimated by OLS.


Correlations of Annual Growth Rates
               APG              TE
TE             0.92
BHC Index      0.42             0.43




                                                  60
