NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SIX DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY
Don Fullerton
Working Paper 16703
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16703

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Don Fullerton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Six Distributional Effects of Environmental Policy
Don Fullerton
NBER Working Paper No. 16703
January 2011
JEL No. H23,Q58
ABSTRACT
While prior literature has identified various effects of environmental policy, this note uses the example
of a proposed carbon permit system to illustrate and discuss six different types of distributional effects:
(1) higher prices of carbon-intensive products, (2) changes in relative returns to factors like labor,
capital, and resources, (3) allocation of scarcity rents from a restricted number of permits, (4) distribution
of the benefits from improvements in environmental quality, (5) temporary effects during the transition,
and (6) capitalization of all those effects into prices of land, corporate stock, or house values. The
note also discusses whether all six effects could be regressive, that is, whether carbon policy could
place disproportionate burden on the poor.

Don Fullerton
Department of Finance
University of Illinois
BIF Box#30 (MC520)
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dfullert@illinois.edu

Existing literature in environmental economics emphasizes efficiency effects of
pollution controls. It shows how to measure the costs of reducing pollution or energy use
and how to measure the benefits. Overall benefits are balanced against overall costs to
determine the optimal amount of abatement and to determine the most cost-effective way
to achieve it. Fewer studies address the question of who bears those costs or receives
those benefits, even though any individual’s net gain or loss as a fraction of income may
greatly exceed the economy-wide gain or loss as a fraction of income.
A huge literature in public economics studies the distributional effects of taxes,
but for several reasons, the study of the distributional effects of environmental policy can
be much more difficult and interesting. First of all, most pollution policies are not taxes
at all, but instead employ permits or command and control (CAC) regulations such as
technology standards, quotas, and other quantity constraints. Second, the effects of
environmental policy are much more varied, intricate, and indirect. Standard methods of
tax incidence find effects on product prices and on returns to labor and capital, but energy
or environmental policy can have six separately identifiable effects. Very different kinds
of models and data are necessary to analyze each of these effects, and so no single study
could possibly incorporate all such effects simultaneously.
These six effects are identified in the literature reviewed by Fullerton (2009), but
that literature touches on many different policies and methods of estimation. 1 This short
note cannot review all that literature. Instead, for coherency, it illustrates all six effects
using a single comprehensive example, namely, a carbon permit system such the cap-andtrade legislation that passed the U.S. House of Representatives in 2009 (which then
stalled in the Senate). No other paper discusses all effects in the context of one policy, so
the contribution of this note is to illustrate how one climate policy can have all six effects
simultaneously. For any given person, the six effects may augment or offset each other.
In this particular case, many or all effects may all be regressive (net burden as a fraction
of income that is higher for the poor than for the rich). 2 An implication is that a reform
package can include features to offset losses to low-income families.
1

The tax incidence literature is reviewed by Fullerton and Metcalf (2002). Some of the distributional
effects of environmental policy are discussed in a chapter of the classic text by Baumol and Oates (1988).
Another recent review of literature on these distributional effects is in Parry, et al (2006).
2

A policy is regressive if the burden to income ratio is lower for those with more income. It is proportional
if burden/income is the same for all groups, and it is progressive if that ratio is higher for those with more
income. Even if the amount spent on electricity rises with income, the fraction of income spent on that
good falls with income. Thus, any increase in the price of electricity is likely regressive.

-2The rest of this section summarizes the six effects of climate policy and how each
might be regressive. The following six sections discuss each effect in more detail.
First, a carbon permit policy is likely to raise the price of products that intensively
use fossil fuels, such as electricity, heating fuel, and gasoline. Low-income families use a
relatively high fraction of their income to buy these goods, so they have high burdens on
the “uses side” of income. Second, if abatement technologies are capital-intensive, then
any mandate to abate pollution likely induces firms to use new capital as a substitute for
polluting inputs. If so, then capital demand rises relative to labor, depressing the relative
wage. Low-income families receive a relatively high fraction of income from wages, so
they may have high burdens on the “sources side” of income. Third, pollution permits
handed out to firms bestow scarcity rents on well-off individuals who own those firms.
Fourth, climate policy provides benefits if it helps improve local air quality,
reduce global warming, and avoid sea-level rise. Low-income individuals may place
more value on food and shelter than on incremental improvements in air quality, while
high-income households may own the ocean-front property saved by climate policy. If
so, then this effect is regressive as well. Fifth, the transition to cap-and-trade will impact
households differentially. Unemployment may be experienced by loggers and coal
miners, while premiums go to skilled workers in renewables and other energy-efficient
technologies. Sixth, each of those five effects might be capitalized into the price of an
asset such as a house or corporate stock. If so, then the owner gets not just those effects
on income flows, but the present value of expected future flows. Capitalization effects
shift around the burden. If climate policy will reduce sea level rise and save certain
oceanfront homes, for example, then the benefit may be experienced not by the person
who buys the house later and enjoys the oceanfront, but by the person who owns the
house at the time of enactment. If climate policy also raises ambient air quality, benefits
might not accrue to low-income renters who have to pay higher rents, but to well-off
landlords who own the house. Climate policy may also raise the market value of hightech energy stocks and reduce those of traditional fossil fuel companies.
These effects are best analyzed in a general equilibrium model that accounts for
all markets simultaneously, including changes in production that affect the relative price
of each input, each output, and each asset. A comprehensive model of this type is called
a computational general equilibrium (CGE) model or an integrated assessment model

-3(IAM). 3 For expositional purposes, however, all six effects can be explained in a partial
equilibrium diagram of a single market (as in Fullerton, 2009). In the case of climate
policy, firms could reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions per unit of output (e.g., per
kwh of electricity). The simplest way to show all effects in one diagram, however, is
temporarily to assume fixed emissions per unit. Then the supply and demand for carbon
is essentially the same as the supply and demand for the output.
Figure 1: Categories of Gains and Losses

In Figure 1, using this example, the demand curve reflects the private marginal
benefit (PMB) of electricity. The supply curve reflects private marginal cost (PMC). Yet
production causes an externality, because the cost of pollution is borne by others, not by
the firm. Then the total cost of each unit is the social marginal cost (SMC), including
both private marginal cost (PMC) and marginal external cost (MEC). In this diagram, the
unfettered private market produces to the point where PMB=PMC, namely output Qo.
The optimal output is where SMB=SMC, at reduced output Q'. An ideal policy would
somehow restrict output to Q'. In the simple case with fixed emissions per unit output, a
set number of CO2 permits could restrict sales to Q'. In effect, supply is vertical at Q', so
the new intersection of supply and demand is at equilibrium gross price Pg. After firms
pay for permits, the new net price is Pn. The price of a permit is the difference (Pg – Pn).
If the industry is competitive, then pure profits are zero: net sales revenue is just enough
to pay for all other inputs to production, such as labor, capital, fuel, and materials.
3

Examples of such models are described in Nordhaus (2008), Elliott et al (2010), and Rauch et al (2010).

-41. COSTS TO CONSUMERS
Since the cap-and-trade policy raises the consumer’s price of electricity to Pg, it
reduces consumer surplus by the trapezoid area A+D. The amount of this price increase
and the resulting burden depend on various considerations that need to be analyzed. It is
relatively large, as drawn, because the negative elasticity of demand (ηD) has smaller
absolute value than the elasticity of supply (ηS). 4 Thus economic analysis in each case
needs both a demand and supply elasticity, and data on the fraction of each group's
income spent on the good. For example, climate policy would raise the price of gasoline,
for which West and Williams (2004) estimate a set of demand parameters. They calculate
four different measures of consumer surplus (area A+D) for each income group, and they
find that the increase in gasoline price is regressive. 5 In some analyses it is not strictly
regressive, because the very poorest households cannot afford a car (Poterba, 1991).
The effects of climate policy on multiple output prices are calculated in CGE
models by Elliott et al (2010) and by Rausch et al (2010), but a simpler analytical general
equilibrium model of Fullerton and Heutel (2010) aggregates carbon-intensive goods and
finds that an increase in the CO2 price from $15/ton to $30/ton would raise that output
price by 7.2%. They then use data on spending and incomes of thousands of households
in the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) to find that the ratio of burden to income
rises monotonically across annual income deciles. The first eight deciles lose more than
average, while the highest two income deciles lose less than average.
In analyzing distributional effects, a major issue is how to define who is rich or
poor. A problem is that the lowest annual income group includes some whose income is
temporarily low and others who are stuck at that level. An alternative is to classify households by their total annual consumption expenditures, because it is a proxy for permanent
income (assuming people smooth their consumption by spending less than their annual
income in good years and more in bad years). When households in the CEX are classified
by annual consumption, climate policy is less regressive.

4

The permit price (Pg – Pn) is analogous to a tax wedge. Fullerton and Metcalf (2002) show that the
fraction of a tax borne by consumers is ηS/(ηS – ηD). This fraction is higher with a larger ηS or smaller ηD.
5

One measure assumes no price responses, one assumes all groups have the same price response, ones uses
each group's own price response, and the fourth is the equivalent variation for each group. The higher gas
price is most regressive with no return of revenue, less regressive when revenue is used to cut wage taxes,
and becomes progressive when revenue is used to provide the same lump-sum rebate to each household.

-5Finally, of course, distributional effects could be measured not just across income
groups, but across regions, age groups, or demographic characteristics. Climate policy
would disproportionately burden Southern states in the U.S., where people spend more
than average on electricity to run their air conditioners. And, of course, higher fuel and
electricity costs would hurt current generations more than future generations who would
benefit from technological progress that reduces the cost of renewable fuels and energyefficient appliances. Distributional effects also could be measured across countries. For
the same carbon price, nations that rely disproportionately on coal would face higher
electricity prices than those who use less-carbon-intensive fuel like natural gas. Denmark
uses a lot of wind power, while Sweden uses hydroelectric power.
2. COSTS TO PRODUCERS OR FACTORS
Energy or environmental policy may also impose burdens on producers or factors
of production. In Figure 1, the loss in producer surplus is area B+E. This area is small, as
drawn, because the supply curve (PMC) is relatively elastic. These losses are larger if
instead production involves industry-specific resources in relatively fixed supply, such as
a specific type of energy, land with specific characteristics, or labor with particular skills.
If so, then the cut-back in production burdens the owners of those limited resources.
Again, CGE models like those of Elliott et al (2010) or Rausch et al (2010) can be
used to compute a new economy-wide wage, rate of return, or land rent. Sophisticated
dynamic general equilibrium models could be used to solve for short run effects, capital
deepening, and the transition to a new balanced growth path with a new labor/capital
ratio. The analytical general equilibrium model of Fullerton and Heutel (2010) is not a
growth model, since labor and capital are both in fixed supply, but it can show intuitively
the effect of a carbon tax on multiple output prices and factor prices – including the wage
for labor and the return to capital. The “clean” sector uses only labor and capital, but the
“dirty” sector uses labor, capital, and pollution. With three inputs, any two can be
complements or substitutes. The “substitution effect” places less burden on whichever
factor is a better substitute for pollution (and more burden on the other one). Because the
carbon policy raises output price and reduces production, the “output effect” is likely to
place more burden on whichever factor is intensively used in the dirty sector. 6 Rausch et
al (2010) also consider other sources of income such as from natural resources and from
6

In this model, environmental quality is separable in utility. In a more complicated model, the increase in
environmental quality itself could affect the relative demands for goods and thus returns to factors.

-6existing U.S. transfer programs. Government transfers are often indexed to inflation, so
an increase in energy prices leads to automatic cost-of-living adjustments. This aspect of
existing policy makes carbon pricing less regressive or even progressive.
3. BENEFITS OF SCARCITY RENTS
Any restriction on the quantity of the polluting good in Figure 1 makes the good
scarce and gives rise to scarcity rents (area A+B). If the policy is a carbon tax or auction
of permits, then government captures the scarcity rents as revenue. If it is a handout of
permits or a simple quota, then area A+B becomes profits to the firms that are allowed to
produce and sell the restricted quantity. Normally firms want to restrict output but are
prevented by antitrust policy. Yet here, climate policy requires firms to restrict output. It
allows firms to raise price, and so they make profits. That simple theory may be obvious
in the case of Figure 1, where pollution is a fixed ratio to output, because a restriction on
pollution also restricts output. But what if firms can abate pollution per unit of output?
Policy can still generate profits when firms can vary pollution itself, as shown by
Maloney and McCormick (1982). They provide evidence for two different regulations,
using data on stock market returns around the imposition of each regulation. First, the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration imposed new cotton-dust technology
standards uniformly on all textile firms in 1974. They look at a portfolio of 14 textile
stocks, and they find a significantly positive abnormal return when this rule is imposed.
Also, in 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of environmental groups that sued
the EPA to “prevent significant deterioration” of air quality in areas already complying
with national standards. The new stricter standard only affected new entrants such as
nonferrous ore smelting plants that emit sulfur oxides and particulates, so the authors
consider stock prices of existing copper, lead, and zinc smelters. Significant positive
abnormal returns were found for existing firms in those industries.
One might normally think that firms would oppose costly new environmental
regulations, but Maloney and McCormick show that “the interests of environmentalists
and producers may coincide against the welfare of consumers” (pp. 99-100). This point
is key both for the politics of environmental legislation and for distributional effects.
In the case of climate policy, high abatement costs must be borne by somebody in
society, but Parry (2004) shows how grandfathered permits generate profits that accrue to
shareholders. Thus, this policy can benefit high-income groups while imposing costs on

-7others. His analytical model has explicit formulas that show the impacts of underlying
parameters, but the profits in his model are essentially area A+B. Figure 1 also shows
how consumers pay a higher price for goods like electricity. For this reason, the House
Bill would dedicate some permit value to reducing electric bills.
4. BENEFITS OF PROTECTION
The gain from environmental protection in Figure 1 is area C+D+E, the sum of
“marginal external costs” over the range that emissions are reduced (from Qo to Q').
What groups receive these benefits? Those who benefit from climate policy are exactly
those who would otherwise bear the costs of global warming, including lost biodiversity,
sea level rise, and extreme weather events like droughts, floods, and hurricanes. Capand-trade may thus provide benefits to those who enjoy wildlife, but also to drug
companies that use biodiversity to develop new medications. It would benefit those who
own coastal property. This carbon policy might also reduce emissions of local pollutants,
and thus reduce morbidity and mortality. 7 No study provides a comprehensive measure
of these distributional effects by income group.
Many of the effects are regional. Global warming might help those in cold areas,
while imposing more costs on those in warm climates, dry climates, and low-lying areas
subject to hurricanes or floods. For just one example, Daniel et al (2009) summarize 117
estimates from 19 U.S. hedonic house price studies of the effect of flood risk on house
values, controlling for other differences in house and neighborhood characteristics. 8
They conduct a “meta-analysis” to summarize those studies, finding that a 0.01 increase
in the probability of flood each year reduces house value by 0.6%, all else equal. Owners
in low-lying areas benefit if climate policy prevents increases in flood probabilities.
Climate policy would reduce burning of fossil fuel and thus affect local pollutants
and health, but it may also affect deaths from extreme hot or cold. Deschênes and
Greenstone (2007) use annual temperature variation in two climate models to find that
climate change will increase U.S. mortality by a small amount that is not statistically

7

The U.S. EPA (1999) finds that most benefits of the Clean Air Act are mortality reductions. Older or less
healthy individuals have higher baseline mortality risk, and thus might benefit more from a reduction in the
risk of dying this year. If so, climate policy benefits the elderly and infirm. On the other hand, they may
have fewer years to live and be willing to pay less for a reduction in the risk of dying this year.
8

With data on many house sales, the price can be estimated as a hedonic function of house characteristics
and neighborhood characteristics such as air quality, water quality, or distance from a toxic waste site. The
coefficient on such a variable indicates the market's willingness to pay for environmental improvement.

-8significant, but it would raise infant mortality more significantly. To offset some of those
effects, people will increase residential air conditioning and thus energy use by 15-30%,
and they may move location to avoid hotter temperatures. Thus, climate policy may
reduce all these costs on those who now live in hotter climates.
These studies are mere examples of possible effects on different U.S. groups from
climate change. A GHG policy would mitigate these effects within the U.S. as well as
other distributional effects between countries. Mendelsohn et al (2006) use predicted
climate changes across the globe to calculate each country’s gain or loss. Currently,
agricultural productivity is highest in temperate regions, and so countries in hot climates
tend to be poor already. Thus, even the same increase in temperature would reduce
productivity in poor countries more than in rich countries. In this sense, climate policy to
reduce global warming may provide the most benefit to the poorest countries.
5. COSTS OF TRANSITION
Other distributional effects of climate policy include the costs of adjustment and
transition. These costs may be large, even if temporary. In Figure 1, area E+F is the
value of capital and labor leaving the industry. With perfect mobility, they immediately
earn the same return elsewhere. With imperfect mobility, however, a policy shift can
make existing plants obsolete and impose capital adjustment costs. It can disrupt labor
markets as well, and impose costs of retraining, relocation, and possibly long spells of
unemployment between jobs.
Few have studied labor adjustment costs, especially from climate policy. In one
exception, Deschênes (2010) looks at the effect of energy costs on labor demand. He
finds a negative cross-price elasticity. Since the cap-and-trade bill that passed the U.S.
House of Representatives in 2009 would raise electricity prices by about 4%, his
preferred estimate suggests that U.S. employment would fall by 460,000 (about 0.6%).
That estimate captures the effects on industries that react to their own higher
electricity costs by reducing employment. It does not capture other effects. Climate
policy does not operate through electricity prices, for example, if it reduces employment
in mining or logging. These occupations constitute major sources of income for entire
towns in some areas. Those workers may have acquired industry-specific human capital,
and they lose that investment when the industry shrinks. At the same time, the new

-9policy may increase employment in abatement technology, renewable fuel production,
and reforestation. In other words, some lose from climate policy and others gain.
6. EFFECTS ON ASSET PRICES
Those five types of gains or losses are measured annually, in Figure 1, but they
also can be capitalized into asset prices. For example, a corporate stock price might rise
immediately from the expected future annual flow of scarcity rents (area A+B). Also, the
current price of agricultural land can rise to reflect future benefits from reduced global
warming, and the price of oceanfront property can reflect benefits of reduced sea level
rise (areas C+D+E). If a policy to reduce carbon dioxide also reduces other emissions,
then it likely provides different air quality improvements to different neighborhoods. If
so, then the present value of those gains can be captured by certain homeowners at the
time of the change. 9 The homeowner may then sell the house at a premium to someone
else. If so, then the person who breathes the cleaner air is not the person who benefits
from the environmental improvement. When assets change hands, capitalization effects
make it particularly difficult to measure the distributional effects of climate policy.
Sieg, et al (2004) use data from 1989-91 in Southern California to estimate
parameters of a structural model, and they use those estimates to calculate the welfare
effects of air quality improvements from 1990 to 1995 (when ozone levels in different
neighborhoods fell from 3% to 33%). Areas with the most improvement might see
upward pressure on house prices, but then some households sell at a gain and move to
other cheaper neighborhoods. These shifts induce further house price changes, until all
prices achieve a new general equilibrium. In one location where ozone fell by 24% in
their study, they found that house prices rise nearly 11%. Moreover, landlords reap gains
while renters may lose. Areas with the most environmental improvement may see the
most increase in rents, which forces out low-income renters.
Climate policy may cause major cutbacks in particular industries such as logging,
mining, and coal-fired electricity generation. Corporate stock prices may fall by a large
amount, but those losses in certain industries are not necessarily a major problem to any
one person if investors diversify their portfolios. But workers may devote years of

9

The asset price increase exactly equals the present value of future benefits only if markets clear with
perfect information and no transaction costs. With major moving costs, however, the allocation of houses
to owners may not perfectly reflect their willingness to pay. Also, the capitalization is moderated by any
elasticity in the supply of land. The price may rise less if fringe land can be converted to residential use.

-10training and learning on the job in such an industry, and then become unable to find any
work in that industry after cut-backs. If so, the burden is not just the lost wage in a given
year, but the entire present discounted value of lost wages in all future years. This human
capital investment is not diversifiable, and so it can impose a much larger percentage loss
for certain individuals than other asset price capitalization effects of climate policy.
7. CONCLUSION
Prior literature emphasizes the economic efficiency effects of environmental
policy, but economists are now beginning to study distributional effects that can be much
more difficult and challenging. This paper illustrates the many types of distributional
effects that can arise from just one new climate policy, and it thereby makes clear why no
single study could possibly incorporate all of them. Initial studies have looked at output
price and factor price changes, and generally find the impact to be regressive. If the
permits are sold at auction, then revenue is available to rebate to low-income households
and offset those regressive effects. But only careful analysis of all six effects can ensure
improvements in environmental protection without adverse distributional consequences.
REFERENCES
Baumol, W. and W. Oates, The Theory of Environmental Policy, New York: Cambridge
University Press, Second Edition, 1988.
Daniel, V., R. Florax, and P. Rietveld, “Flooding Risk and Housing Values: An
Economic Assessment of Environmental Hazard”, Ecological Economics, 69(2),
2009: 355-65.
Deschênes, O. “Climate Policy and Labor Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 16111,
Cambridge, MA, 2010.
Deschênes, O. and M. Greenstone, “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation:
Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US,” NBER Working Paper
No. 13178, Cambridge, MA, 2007.
Elliott, J., I. Foster, S. Kortum, T. Munson, F. Cervantes, and D. Weisbach, “Trade and
Carbon Taxes,” American Economic Review, 100(2), 2010, 465-469.
Fullerton, D., “Introduction.” In D. Fullerton, ed., Distributional Effects of Environmental
and Energy Policy, Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2009.

-11Fullerton, D., and G. Heutel. “Analytical General Equilibrium Effects of Energy Policy
on Output and Factor Prices.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy
10(2), Symposium, 2010.
Fullerton, D., and G. Metcalf. “Tax Incidence”, in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein, eds.
Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: North Holland, 2002.
Maloney, M. and R. McCormick, “A Positive Theory of Environmental Quality
Regulation”, Journal of Law & Economics 25(1), April 1982, 99-123.
Mendelsohn, R., A. Dinar, and L. Williams, “The Distributional Impact of Climate
Change on Rich and Poor Countries”, Environment and Development Economics
11, 2006, 159–78.
Nordhaus, W., A Question of Balance, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2008.
Parry, I., “Are Emissions Permits Regressive?”, Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 47(2), March 2004, 364-87.
Parry, I., H. Sigman, M. Walls, and R. Williams, “The Incidence of Pollution Control
Policies,” in H. Folmer and T. Tietenberg, eds., International Yearbook of
Environmental and Resource Economics 2006/2007 , Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar Publishers, 2006.
Poterba, J., “Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?”, in D. Bradford, ed., Tax Policy and the
Economy 5, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991, 145-64.
Rausch, S., G. Metcalf, J. Reilly, and S. Paltsev. “Distributional Implications of
Alternative U.S. Greenhouse Gas Control Measures.” The B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 10(2), Symposium, 2010.
Sieg, H., V. K. Smith, S. Banzhaf, and R. Walsh, “Estimating the General Equilibrium
Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public Goods,” International
Economic Review 45(4), November 2004, 1047-77.
West, S., and R. Williams, “Estimates from a Consumer Demand System: Implications
for the Incidence of Environmental Taxes,” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 47(3), May 2004, 535-58.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), “The Benefits and Costs of the Clean
Air Act, 1990-2010”, Report to the U.S. Congress, Washington, DC, 1999.

