NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY ARE TARGET INTEREST RATE CHANGES SO PERSISTENT?
Olivier Coibion
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Working Paper 16707
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16707

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

We are grateful to Frederic Mishkin and Glenn Rudebusch for helpful comments and Peter Ireland,
Giorgio Primiceri, and Glenn Rudebusch for sharing their data with us. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Olivier Coibion and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Why Are Target Interest Rate Changes So Persistent?
Olivier Coibion and Yuriy Gorodnichenko
NBER Working Paper No. 16707
January 2011, Revised March 2011
JEL No. E4,E5,E6
ABSTRACT
While the degree of policy inertia in central banks’ reaction functions is a central ingredient in theoretical
and empirical monetary economics, the source of the observed policy inertia in the U.S. is controversial,
with tests of competing hypotheses such as interest-smoothing and persistent-shocks theories being
inconclusive. This paper employs real time data; nested specifications with flexible time series structures;
narratives; interest rate forecasts of the Fed, financial markets, and professional forecasters; and instrumental
variables to discriminate competing explanations of policy inertia. The presented evidence strongly
favors the interest-smoothing explanation and thus can help resolve a key puzzle in monetary economics.
Olivier Coibion
Department of Economics
College of William and Mary
115 Morton Hall
Williamsburg, VA 23188
ocoibion@wm.edu
Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

“In their discussion of the relative merits of smaller and more frequent adjustments versus larger and less
frequent adjustments …, [FOMC] participants generally agreed that large adjustments had been
appropriate when economic activity was declining sharply in response to the financial crisis. In current
circumstances, however, most saw advantages to a more incremental approach that would involve
smaller changes … calibrated to incoming data.”
Minutes of the FOMC videoconference meeting, October 15th, 2010.
“The debate about the sources of gradualism is ongoing and I cannot hope to render a definitive
verdict today on the relative merits of these rationales.”
Ben Bernanke, May 20th, 2004 Speech.
I

Introduction

As the U.S. economy slowly recovers from the deepest recession since the Great Depression, attention is
increasingly turning to the Federal Reserve’s “exit strategy.” At what pace will the Federal Reserve
reverse measures deployed to combat the financial crisis, how rapidly will the Fed allow excess reserves
to be drawn down, and at what speed will interest rates rise in the coming years? While the Fed
demonstrated a willingness to act with remarkable speed in the heart of the financial crisis, central banks
have traditionally been characterized as being subject to significant inertia in the policy-making process,
consistent with the quote above. In a 2004 speech devoted precisely to the question of monetary policy
inertia, then-Governor Bernanke noted that this form of gradualism (or interest rate smoothing) in
monetary policy has several potential benefits: it may be optimal when policymakers are uncertain about
the quantitative effects of policy changes (as in Brainard 1967), it gives policymakers more control over
long-term interest rates via the expectations channel (Woodford 2003a), and it may reduce financial
sector instability because of the increased predictability of interest rates. While little evidence is available
for nontraditional monetary policy actions, a long literature has argued that the Federal Reserve’s
historical interest rate decisions have followed precisely this modus operandi. Starting with Clarida et al.
(2000), much of the literature characterizing the Fed’s historical reaction function has found that interest
rate decisions can be closely replicated by modeling the current interest rate as a weighted average of the
lagged interest rate and the desired interest rate for the central bank, where the latter depends on current
and expected macroeconomic conditions as in Taylor (1993), with empirical estimates consistently
finding large weights on lagged interest rates consistent with the policy inertia motive.
At the same time, the apparent willingness of the Federal Reserve to respond rapidly to certain
episodes, particularly in its role of lender-of-last-resort such as after the 1987 stock market crash, suggests
that this apparent conservatism in decision-making may be more fiction than fact. This point has been
made most forcibly by Rudebusch (2002, 2006) who argues that the inertia identified in previous work is
likely a reflection of omitted variables in the Fed’s reaction function. If the central bank reacts to factors
other than those included in stylized Taylor rules, such as asset prices, liquidity conditions, or market
1

uncertainty, then to the extent that these variables are persistent, this will misleadingly lead to the
appearance of inertia in estimated Taylor rules when none is in fact present. Rudebusch documents that a
standard Taylor rule augmented to include persistent shocks as a proxy for other factors is statistically
indistinguishable from a reaction function characterized by interest smoothing. Subsequent work using
nested specifications with both policy inertia and persistent shocks has confirmed that there is little
statistical basis for rejecting either hypothesis, but that allowing for persistent shocks significantly lowers
the estimated degree of monetary policy inertia.1 In his speech on the topic, Bernanke summarizes the
literature by concluding that this question remains unresolved.
Yet breaking this empirical impasse and characterizing the inherent degree of inertia in monetary
policy is important for a number of reasons. First, the amount of policy inertia plays a key role in
forecasting not just the unwinding of the Fed’s many actions during the financial crisis but the response of
monetary policymakers to shocks more generally. For example, the degree of policy inertia would
significantly affect one’s forecast of the pace of the endogenous response of the central bank (and therefore
of macroeconomic conditions more generally) to non-monetary policy innovations such as technology or
oil price shocks. Second, the underlying parameters of structural macroeconomic models are effectively
estimated by comparing their predicted impulse responses to those observed in the data. Understanding
whether the conditional response of the economy to shocks is subject to policy inertia will therefore matter
for the estimates of all parameters of the model, not just those related to the policy rule. Third, whether one
assumes policy inertia or persistent shocks in the specification of the Fed’s reaction function matters for
historical interpretations. For example, we document in section 2 that the Taylor Principle would have
been satisfied during the Greenspan era under the policy inertia specification, but not under the persistent
shocks view. The monetary policy interpretation of the Great Moderation advocated by Lubik and
Schorfheide (2004) and others in which changes in the monetary policy rule during the Volcker and
Greenspan eras moved the U.S. economy away from indeterminacy is therefore dependent on the assumed
source of the persistence in interest rates. Similarly, Ireland (2011) shows that determining whether
interest rates were too accommodative in the mid-2000s, as suggested by Taylor (2007), hinges on the
degree of policy inertia in the Fed’s reaction function.
Using a variety of methods, we present new evidence which decisively favors the policy inertia
interpretation of the Fed’s historical behavior. First, we revisit empirical estimates of nested specifications
of the Taylor rule which previous research has found to be unable to conclusively discriminate between the
two hypotheses. However, this prior research restricted interest smoothing and persistent shocks to first
1

English et al. (2003), Gerlach-Kristen (2004) and Consolo and Favero (2009) all estimate Taylor rules nesting both
interest smoothing and persistent shocks using single-equation methods and report evidence for both motives, albeit to
differing degrees. Carrillo et al. (2007) and Smets and Wouters (2007) estimate nested specifications within fully
specified structural macroeconomic models and also find evidence for both explanations.

2

order autoregressive processes even though theoretical models of policy inertia suggest that higher order
smoothing could be optimal (Woodford 2003b) and there is no a priori reason to believe that persistent
shocks are best described as an AR(1) process. By allowing for more general forms of each, we show that
the data is much more informative about the underlying source of interest rate persistence than previously
uncovered. Using information criteria to select across a wide set of nested specifications with higher order
interest smoothing and persistent shocks, the data strongly support specifications with only interest
smoothing, with two lags of interest rates being the preferred specification. In addition, we show that
when one allows for second order interest smoothing in the Taylor rule, autoregressive parameters in the
error term either become insignificantly different from zero or negative.
Our second contribution is to provide a new method to test the relative merit of the two
hypotheses. The key insight is that while both interest smoothing and persistent monetary policy shocks
can adequately account for the observed persistence in interest rates, they have different implications for
the conditional response of interest rates to non-monetary policy shocks. Specifically, interest rate
smoothing implies that an inertial policy response should be observable after any shock, whereas this
should not be the case under persistent monetary shocks. With the latter, the extra persistence in interest
rates should obtain only after monetary policy shocks. Thus, we propose to test the hypothesis that
persistent interest rates reflect persistent monetary policy shocks by identifying the conditional response
of policymakers to non-monetary policy shocks. To do so, we employ an instrumental variables strategy
in which our instruments are identified non-monetary policy shocks, including technology shocks, oil
supply shocks, news shocks and exogenous fiscal shocks. These instruments serve to identify historical
innovations to the Federal Reserve’s forecasts of inflation, output growth and the output gap driven by
shocks other than monetary policy. As a result, they allow us to assess whether policy inertia is present in
response to these shocks, a finding confirmed in the data. All of the estimates of interest smoothing are
high, close to those obtained under OLS, and statistically significant at standard levels. Hence, this
alternative approach also strongly supports the interest rate smoothing motive.
Our third contribution is to revisit the primary source of support for the persistent shocks
explanation, namely the evidence provided by Rudebusch (2002) that future interest rate changes are
largely unpredicted by financial market participants. His key insight was that if policy inertia is as high
as implied by typical Taylor rule estimates, then interest rate changes two to three quarters in the future
should be fairly predictable given current information. Using Eurodollar futures prices, he documents
little predictability of interest rates at these horizons by financial market participants. We present similar
evidence using professional forecasts of future short term interest rate changes. However, there are
several factors that could reduce the ability of private agents to forecast future interest rate changes even if
policy inertia is strong. First, there could be uncertainty on their part about the form of the policy rule,
3

such as whether the central bank responds to the output gap or output growth, what measure of inflation it
focuses on, or whether policy inertia is important. Second, private agents typically have a more restricted
information set than the Federal Reserve. Third, even with the same information, agents may use different
models than the staff of the Fed to formulate forecasts, leading to different predictions about the future path
of policy. Romer and Romer (2000), for example, document that Greenbook forecasts systematically
outperform professional forecasters, which indicates that the Fed either has access to superior information
about the economy or is more successful in converting that information into accurate forecasts.
These informational constraints potentially facing private-sector forecasters imply that the extent
to which these agents can predict subsequent interest rate changes may not be adequate to identify the
presence of policy inertia. On the other hand, the Federal Reserve staff should be better able to predict
future interest rate changes because internal members of the Fed are more likely to correctly identify the
policy rule and employ the same information as that utilized by the FOMC in its interest rate decisions.
As a result, we revisit the predictability of interest rate changes using the assumptions about future
Federal Funds Rates and other short-term interest rates made by the Fed staff in generating the Greenbook
forecasts as proxies for their expectations of future interest rates. Because these need not represent the
staff’s unconditional best forecasts of future interest rates, they provide only a lower bound on the
predictability of future interest rates changes by members of the Federal Reserve. Despite this, we find
that the Greenbook assumptions about the path of future interest rates can predict a larger fraction of
future interest rate changes (both Fed Funds Rate and 3-month T-Bill rate) than private sector forecasts,
and that these forecasts are unbiased even at two and three quarter forecasting horizons, unlike private
sector forecasts. Thus, we find that even the empirical strategy which previously yielded the strongest
evidence for persistent shocks is actually consistent with the presence of significant inertia in historical
interest rate decisions.
Further evidence that the inability of private agents to forecast interest rates as well as the Fed
likely reflects informational constraints comes from the fact that when we extend the end of the sample
from 1999 to the mid-2000’s, both financial market and professional forecasts are better able to predict
future interest rate changes even though the overall predictability of interest rates, as measured by the
Greenbook forecasts’ accuracy, is unchanged over this extended time period. This is suggestive of
informational constraints on private sector forecasters because the Fed began to include statements about
its perceptions of future risks after each FOMC meeting in 2000. These statements likely provided an
important guide to the private sector as to the likely direction of future interest rate changes which
resulted in an improvement in their ability to predict the path of policy decisions.
Our fourth approach is to consider the statements of policymakers themselves about the interestrate setting process. We present suggestive narrative evidence from FOMC discussions during which
4

monetary policymakers explicitly framed their decisions in a policy smoothing context. In particular, we
focus on the 1994-1995 period when the Federal Reserve significantly raised interest rates to preempt a
resurgence of inflation. During internal policy discussions in this period, Greenspan and other FOMC
members made explicit statements about their perceptions of the optimal level of interest rates but made no
suggestions to move directly to these levels. Instead, any disagreement among FOMC members was
almost exclusively about the speed at which interest rates should move toward the desired level, with the
consensus view favoring a very gradual adjustment of policy rates toward desired levels. A similar pattern
occurred in 2004 as the Federal Reserve began systematically raising interest rates after a prolonged period
of low interest rates. Then-Governor Bernanke clearly advocated—both in FOMC meetings and in his
May 20th, 2004 speech—a gradual process for raising interest rates which is not only consistent with the
policy inertia interpretation but also strongly suggests that the unwinding of the Fed’s accommodative
stance is again likely to be “measured” (2004 Fed speak) and “incremental” (2010 Fed speak).
Finally, we consider the broader possibility that the excess persistence observed in interest rates
relative to the predictions of simple Taylor rules is the result of of the Federal Reserve responding to
factors other than those traditionally included in the reaction function. Controlling for different measures
of financial market conditions, the estimated degree of interest smoothing is unaffected. Similarly,
controlling for the revisions in the Fed’s forecasts also does not qualitatively affect the results. A third
possibility is that the missing persistence could stem from a time-varying inflation target. Using different
target inflation measures from Cogley et al. (2010), Ireland (2007) and Coibion and Gorodnichenko
(2011), we again find that the estimated degree of interest smoothing is unchanged while the role of
persistent policy shocks is diminished. We also document that any evidence of persistent policy shocks
disappears after we incorporate into the Taylor rule the difference between Greenbook and private
consensus forecasts thus suggesting that the serial correlation in policy shocks may simply reflect
informational flows between agents. This would be consistent with the notion that the central bank
utilizes the information in private forecasts along with its internal forecasts as well as the possibility that
the central bank considers how private forecasters may try to learn about the central bank’s information
from its policy actions or announcements. Once these factors are incorporated in the estimated policy
reaction function, interest rate smoothing may be reasonably described as AR(1) rather than a higher
order autoregressive process. Hence, these results suggest that the correlated policy shocks found in the
previous work may have stemmed from movements in unobservable targets and/or sensitivity on the part
of policymakers to the private sector’s expectations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents preliminary evidence on the
performance of estimated Taylor rules assuming either interest rate smoothing or persistent shocks and
illustrates how simple nested specifications do not convincingly differentiate between the two in the data.
5

Section 3 considers more general forms of interest smoothing and persistent shocks and documents that
interest rate smoothing is strongly preferred to persistent shocks once one allows for higher order
descriptions of each process. Section 4 proposes and applies an instrumental variable procedure to assess
the support for the two explanations of interest rate persistence while section 5 presents new evidence on
the predictability of interest rate changes by private agents versus Federal Reserve forecasts. Section 6
considers narrative evidence about policymakers’ decisions and section 7 allows for the possibility of
other factors being responsible for the persistence in interest rates. Finally, section 8 concludes.

II

Interest Rate Smoothing vs. Persistent Monetary Policy Shocks

In this section, we first consider simple versions of Taylor rules with interest rate smoothing and/or
persistent monetary policy shocks using real-time measures of the Federal Reserve’s forecasts of
macroeconomic conditions. We document the near statistical equivalence of reaction functions with either
interest smoothing or persistent shocks despite their remarkably different implications for the historical
behavior of the Federal Reserve. In addition, we show that nested specifications relying on first-order
autoregressive specifications of each motive fail to decisively differentiate between the two hypotheses.

2.1

Baseline Evidence on the Sources of Persistent Interest Rate Changes

Since Taylor (1993), macroeconomists have relied on simple interest rate reaction functions to
characterize the endogenous response of monetary policy-makers to economic fluctuations. While early
work assumed that policy-makers responded to contemporaneous inflation and output gaps, more recent
work has emphasized the importance of controlling for the real-time expectations of the central bank
(Orphanides 2003, Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2011). In this spirit, we consider the following baseline
specification for monetary policy-makers’ desired interest rate (∗ )
∗ =  + 

 

+

  

+ 

 

+ 

(1)

where E denotes the central bank’s forecast of macroeconomic variables, π is inflation, dy is the growth
rate of output, and x is the output gap. The rule allows for the central bank to respond to the forecast of
future macroeconomic variables (horizon h), consistent with the notion that monetary policy changes take
time to affect the economy so policy-makers should be forward-looking in their policy decisions. The
rule also departs from the classical Taylor (1993) specification in that it allows for responses to both the
output gap and the growth rate of output, a feature that receives strong empirical support as first
documented in Ireland (2004).
For example, estimating this rule by OLS from 1987Q4 until 2004Q4 using the Greenbook
forecasts prepared by the staff of the Federal Reserve before each FOMC meeting and the target Federal
Funds Rate (FFR) for the interest rate yields
6

  ,  −

0.11   + 0.64   + 
0.09
0.07
#$ = 0.75, %&  = 0.89

 = 1.06 + 1.76
0.50 0.14

where Newey-West HAC standard errors are in parentheses.2 As emphasized by Taylor (1993), a simple
specification such as this can account for much of the policy changes over this time period, with an R2 of
nearly 90%. The point estimate on inflation is greater than one, implying that the Federal Reserve
satisfied the Taylor rule over this time period, while also responding with higher interest rates to rising
output gaps. The response to output growth is not significantly different from zero. Figure 1 plots the
actual time path of the target FFR over this time period, the predicted time path from the estimated
reaction function, as well as the residuals from the regression, illustrating how well the Taylor rule can
account for historical policy changes over this time period. However, the predictions of the Taylor rule
are noticeably more volatile than actual interest rates: the average size of the predicted change in interest
rates (in absolute value) is approximately sixty percent larger than actual changes in interest rates (57bp to
35bp). Actual interest rates are also significantly more persistent than predicted interest rates (AR(1)
parameter of 0.98 versus 0.93). Finally, the residuals are serially correlated: the Durbin-Watson statistic
is well under 1 and we can reject the null of no serial correlation of the residuals at standard levels.
The often-noted gradualism in actual interest rate targets has led many to adopt an alternative
representation of monetary policy actions, in which the actual interest rate is a weighted average of the
current desired rate and the previous period’s interest rate:
 = () * + 1 − () ∗
where ρi is the degree of interest rate smoothing. This type of inertia in monetary policy implies that
central bankers will move interest rates toward their desired levels in a sequence of steps rather than in an
immediate fashion as predicted by the baseline Taylor rule. Estimating this equation by OLS using the
same data and time period as before yields
 = −0.57 + 0.42
0.16 0.05

0.18   + 0.14   + 0.82 * + 
0.03
0.02
0.03
#$ = 0.26, %&  = 0.99

  ,  +

The implied long-run response to inflation (0.42/(1-0.82)) is greater than 2 so that the Taylor Principle was
satisfied by the Federal Reserve. Allowing for interest smoothing yields a positive estimated response of
interest rates to both the output gap and output growth. The estimated degree of interest rate smoothing of
0.82 is similar to those found in the literature, such as Clarida et al. (2000) and points to a very significant
degree of policy inertia. Allowing for interest smoothing raises the ability of the specification to account
for historical policy changes by a significant amount, with the R2 rising to 99%. Furthermore, allowing for
2

For all quarterly estimates of the Taylor rule, we use data from the meeting closest to the middle of each quarter.
We find similar results using data at the frequency of FOMC meetings.

7

interest smoothing eliminates much of the serial correlation in the residuals. For these reasons, interest
smoothing has become a central feature of how monetary policy rules are characterized in modern
macroeconomic models that play an increasingly important role in policy analysis.
An alternative explanation for the apparent inertia in interest rates suggested by Rudebusch
(2002) is that it reflects persistent monetary policy shocks (or persistent deviations from the Taylor rule)
rather than policy inertia. Under this interpretation, policy follows the Taylor rule in equation (1) but the
shocks to the interest rate follow a persistent process such as
 = ($ * + -
Applying the same data and time sample, we re-estimate equation (1) allowing for AR(1) errors and find
 = −1.91 + 0.28
4.38 0.11

  ,  −

0.05   + 0.47   + ,
0.11
0.03

 = 0.98 * + -
0.03

#$ = 0.39, %&  = 0.97
As with the specification under interest smoothing, we find strong evidence for extra persistence in
interest rates, in this case measured by an autoregressive parameter of 0.98 for the error term. Allowing
for persistent errors also significantly improves the fit of the empirical specification, with the R2 rising to
97%, and eliminates much of the serial correlation in the error - . Strikingly, the implied response of
interest rates to inflation is strictly less than one, suggesting that the Federal Reserve may not have
satisfied the Taylor Principle during the Greenspan era, a finding which is in sharp contrast to that
obtained under the baseline Taylor rule or the rule augmented with interest smoothing.
Figure 2 plots the actual target Federal Funds Rate over this time period as well the predicted levels
from the specifications with either interest-smoothing or persistent shocks. As can readily be seen, the two
specifications are nearly indistinguishable to the naked eye and both interest rate smoothing and persistent
monetary policy shocks are able to account for the excessive volatility of interest rate changes predicted by
the baseline Taylor rule, improve the fit of the empirical reaction function, and control for much of the
observed persistent deviations of actual interest rates from the predicted rates of the baseline Taylor rule.
Yet, as discussed above, determining whether the persistence of interest rates reflects interest rate smoothing
or persistent shocks is a crucial determinant in a variety of macroeconomic analyses.

2.2

The Limited Informativeness of Nested Specifications

Because both approaches appear to fit the data so well, empirically determining the relative importance of
interest rate smoothing and persistent shocks has been challenging. Rudebusch (2002) proposes a nested
specification
 =  + 

 

+

  

+ 

 

+ () * +  ,

 = ($ * + -

(2)

8

but finds that the data are not sufficiently informative to reject either hypothesis and that small changes to
the time period under consideration can lead to evidence that favors either hypothesis. Subsequent work
using this approach has yielded similar results. English et al. (2003) find that both serially correlated
shocks and interest rate smoothing are important, while Gerlach-Kristen (2004) similarly finds a role for
both mechanisms but indicates that interest smoothing appears to be less important than suggested by the
previous literature. Carrillo et al. (2007) use a structural macroeconomic model to estimate the Taylor
rule and again document evidence for both mechanisms, but like Gerlach-Kristen, they argue that serially
correlated shocks significantly reduce the importance of policy inertia.
One limitation common to each of these studies is their reliance on ex-post data rather than the
ex-ante expectations of the Federal Reserve. As emphasized by Orphanides (2003), controlling for the
real-time information available to central bankers, particularly in terms of measurements of the output
gap, can significantly affect the historical interpretation of policy decisions. As a result, we estimate
nested specifications, with results reported in Table 1. The point estimate for the degree of interest rate
smoothing is 0.81, almost identical to the original specification without persistent shocks, and is
statistically significantly different from zero. The coefficient on the persistence of monetary policy
shocks, however, is now much lower at 0.46 but remains statistically different from zero. Hence,
conditional on the Federal Reserve’s real-time information set, the data favors the interest smoothing
motive over the persistent shock interpretation, but does not unambiguously reject either specification.
Thus, like much of the previous literature, we find that a simple nested specification cannot
overwhelmingly differentiate between the two explanations.
Table 1 presents additional results of the nested Taylor rule using different specifications of the
Taylor rule. For example, using the Greenbook forecast of inflation in the next quarter rather than in the
next two quarters (column 2) does not qualitatively affect the results. However, as noted by Rudebusch
(2002), the results of the nested specifications are generally not very robust. For example, assuming that
the central bank responds to the forecast of the current quarter’s inflation rate (column 5), the coefficient
on interest smoothing declines to 0.70 while the persistence of monetary policy shocks is now estimated
to be 0.89. Thus, this specification points to a stronger role for persistent shocks, although both the AIC
and SIC indicate that our baseline specification is statistically preferred to one in which the central bank is
assumed to respond to contemporaneous inflation. Similarly, allowing for a response to expected output
growth in the next quarter rather than the current quarter or eliminating the response to output growth
altogether (columns 3 and 4) leads to higher point estimates of the persistence of monetary policy shocks.
In all cases, we can reject the null of either interest smoothing or persistent shocks being the sole
mechanism that accounts for the excess persistence in interest rates observed in the data.

9

Table 2 presents additional results from estimating our preferred specification of the Taylor rule
over different time periods. First, if we restrict the time sample to end in 1999Q4, as in Rudebusch
(2002), the results are almost identical: we find evidence for both interest smoothing and persistent
shocks, although the coefficient on interest smoothing is much larger than the estimated persistence of the
shocks. Extending the sample to 1983Q1 strengthens the case for interest-smoothing, as the estimated
persistence of monetary policy shocks falls and becomes insignificantly different from zero. Table 2 also
includes results when we estimate the baseline Taylor rule at the frequency of FOMC meetings,
approximately every six weeks over this time period, rather than at the quarterly frequency. Over the
Greenspan period, the results point more strongly toward the interest smoothing motive: the coefficients
on lagged interest rates are around 0.90 and statistically significant at conventional levels, while the
estimated persistence of monetary shocks is small and insignificantly different from zero.

One

interpretation of these results is that previous work, having focused exclusively on analysis at the
quarterly frequency, may have overstated the evidence of persistent shocks. Using the entire post-1982
era yields slightly more mixed evidence, with the autoregressive parameter governing the dynamics of the
error term becoming positive and statistically significant at the 10% level. Thus, across specifications and
time periods, the results are remarkably mixed: while most of the specifications point to an important role
for policy inertia, it is difficult to systematically rule out persistent shocks as an alternative explanation
for the interest rate inertia apparent in the data.

III

Generalized Specifications of Interest Rate Smoothing and Persistent Shocks

While the evidence from the previous section suggests that interest rate smoothing is a somewhat more
potent explanation for the persistence of interest rate changes observed in the data than persistent shocks,
the evidence is mixed at best as minor variations in the specification of the Taylor rule can move the
relative importance of the two mechanisms substantially. However, an important caveat is that, like
previous work, we have only considered the simplest forms of each specification, namely first-order
autoregressive specifications for both interest rate smoothing and persistent monetary policy shocks. On
the other hand, other work on estimating Taylor rules has identified evidence that interest smoothing
could be higher order: Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011), for example, find that interest smoothing is
best characterized as a second order autoregressive process but do not consider the possibility that
monetary policy shocks are persistent. Furthermore, Woodford (2003b) proves that the optimal interest
rate rule should have an AR(2) interest rate smoothing and, therefore, there are theoretical arguments to
have interest rate smoothing with higher autoregressive orders. There is also no a priori reason to suspect
that the persistence of monetary policy shocks, or more broadly deviations from the Taylor rule, is best

10

characterized as a first order autoregressive process. In this section, we allow for higher order processes
for both interest smoothing and persistent shocks, i.e. we consider empirical specifications of the form
 =  + 

 

+

  

+ 

 

+ ∑/)0 () *) +  ,

(3)

2

 = ∑10 ($,1 *1 + - .
We assess the relative merit of interest rate smoothing and persistent shocks using two methods.
First, we compute the BIC criteria associated with the same specifications of the desired interest rate as in
the previous section, but now allowing both I and J to range from zero to four. Thus, we include
specifications with only interest-smoothing, only persistent shocks, neither, and a variety of specifications
with both interest-smoothing and persistent shocks. As a result, this kind of model-selection criterion can
shed some light on the relative merit of the two approaches while allowing for more general forms of both
interest smoothing and persistent shocks than in the previous section. The results are presented in Table 3
for different time periods using data at both the quarterly frequency and the FOMC meetings frequency.
The results strongly favor the interest smoothing motive: all but one of the specifications of the Taylor
rule estimated at the quarterly frequency achieve the lowest BIC with two lags of the interest rate and no
persistence in monetary policy shocks. The sole exception, when the central bank is assumed not to
respond to output growth, yields a specification with one lag of the interest rate and first-order
autoregressive shocks. However, the BIC for this specification of the Taylor rule is substantially higher
than for versions of the Taylor rule which include output growth. The results using data at the frequency
of the FOMC meetings are similar. Most of the preferred specifications since 1987 include no persistent
shocks. Only when the time period is extended to 1983 do we find some evidence for persistent shocks.
As a second approach, we present results from estimating equation (3) assuming two lags of the
interest rate and a second order autoregressive process for monetary policy shocks for each of the Taylor
rule specifications considered before over the time period 1987Q4 to 2004Q4. These results are in Table 4.
Consistent with the results in Table 3, both interest rate lags are statistically significant for each of the
Taylor rule specifications, and the sum of the coefficients is between 0.75 and 0.95 so that the degree of
interest smoothing is always high.

On the other hand, the first autoregressive parameter for shock

persistence is never statistically different from zero, while the second autoregressive parameter, when
different from zero, is negative.3 Hence, whereas previous work has found that nested specifications could
not decisively differentiate between the two explanations for interest rate persistence, we find that once one
allows for higher order interest smoothing, the evidence robustly favors the interest smoothing motive. In
addition, one should note that the fact that second-order interest smoothing fares well in the data is
qualitatively consistent with the optimal interest smoothing rules in Woodford (2003b). However, the
3

Similar results obtain using higher order autoregressive specifications of the error term: the coefficients are either
insignificantly different from zero or negative.

11

point estimates differ quantitatively from optimal policy inertia: Woodford (2003b) shows that an optimal
interest rate rule would be super-inertial, a feature which is consistently absent in our empirical estimates
of historical reaction functions.

IV

Conditional Monetary Policy Reaction Functions

While the nested specifications lend greater support to the interest rate smoothing motive than previously
noted, we want to consider alternative approaches which might shed light more directly on what the
underlying source of persistent interest rate changes is. In this section, we consider a novel test of the two
hypotheses. If the persistence of interest rate changes observed in the data is primarily driven by persistent
monetary policy shocks, then the conditional response of interest rates should be slow after monetary
policy shocks but not other macroeconomic shocks. Intuitively, interest rate smoothing implies policy
inertia regardless of the source of the underlying fluctuations, whereas the persistent monetary policy
shocks explanation imposes additional interest rate persistence in response only to monetary policy shocks.
To see this more formally, note that after log-linearization and solving for the rational expectations
solution, variables (z) in macroeconomic models can generically be expressed in MA(∞) form
6
= ∑7
)08 ∑50 4),5 -5,*)

 3

(4)

where i refers to periods and ε refers to structural shocks denoted by s, here ordered numerically from 1 to
S. We can then define the component of z driven by monetary policy shocks as
9:
 3

= ∑7
)08 4),9: -9:,*)

(5)

and the component driven by all other shocks as
*9:
 3

=

 3

−

9:
 3

(6)

Assuming structural shocks are uncorrelated with each other and across time, then the component of z
driven by exogenous monetary policy shocks and that driven by all other shocks will be uncorrelated as
well. The desired interest rate can then be expressed as
*9:

 = 

9:

+ 

+ 

(7)

which decomposes changes in the desired interest rate into two components capturing the endogenous
*9:

responses of monetary policy to macroeconomic fluctuations (
9:

fluctuations and 

for non-monetary policy shock driven

for monetary-policy driven fluctuations) and the exogenous shocks to interest rates (u).

This decomposition provides an alternative approach to assess the source of the interest rate
persistence in the data. In the case with persistent monetary policy shocks but no interest smoothing, the
endogenous response of interest rates to non-monetary policy shocks should not be subject to excess
persistence, whereas under interest smoothing, the need for additional persistence should be apparent in
response to non-monetary policy shocks. This insight can be applied to the analysis of the Taylor rule if one

12

can identify variations in the endogenous response of interest rates to shocks other than monetary policy.
This can be done by instrumental variables estimation of the Taylor rule, using exogenous structural shocks
as instruments. The latter will be uncorrelated with monetary policy shocks and the endogenous response of
9:

interest rates to policy shocks (

+  ), thereby allowing us to assess whether interest smoothing is

present in the face of non-monetary policy driven fluctuations in macroeconomic conditions.4
To apply this method to historical monetary policy, we estimate equation (3) using instrumental
variables. Specifically, our instruments are permanent technology shocks from Gali (1999), purified
innovations to the Solow residual as in Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006), news shocks as in Beaudry and
Portier (2006), oil supply shocks as identified by Kilian (2009), and tax shocks from Romer and Romer
(2010). We could not reject the null that these non-monetary shocks are uncorrelated with popular
measures of monetary shocks identified via a conventional VAR approach or as in Romer and Romer
(2004) and the overidentifying restrictions test could not reject the null that the instruments are
uncorrelated with the error term in the estimated equation. Therefore, one may reasonably expect that the
exclusion restriction is satisfied for our instrumental variables. Results from applying this procedure to
different time samples at the quarterly frequency are presented in Table 5.5 In each case, the coefficient on
interest smoothing is high, on the order of 0.8, and statistically different from zero. Hence, inertia in policy
actions exists in response to variations in macroeconomic conditions arising from non-monetary policy
shocks. This result indicates that interest-rate smoothing likely does not simply reflect persistent monetary
policy shocks, but rather captures a fundamental component of the policy process of the Federal Reserve,
consistent with the results using nested specifications of interest smoothing and persistent shocks.

V

Predictability of Interest Rate Changes

While the evidence from the analysis of Taylor rules using real-time data clearly favors the interestsmoothing explanation, Rudebusch (2002) suggests an alternative metric to assess the two explanations
which he argues is consistent with the persistent shocks interpretation. His insight is that if policy was
driven by interest rate smoothing, then interest rate changes should be quite predictable. Using futures
markets for interest rates, he finds that markets are quantitatively unable to predict future interest rate
changes, a result that he argues is difficult to reconcile with policy inertia.
The specific test employed by Rudebusch (2002) consists of the following empirical
specification:
4

We verified in Monte Carlo simulations that IV estimation of the Taylor rule using exogenous shocks as
instruments could correctly identify the absence of interest smoothing when the data generating process is driven
entirely by persistent shocks. Results available upon request.
5
We do not present equivalent results at the FOMC meetings frequency because most of the shocks used as
instruments are only available at the quarterly frequency.

13


where =,

− 

*

=  + ;< =,

− =,

* > + -

(8)

are the interest rate on Eurodollar deposits during quarter t+h that is expected at the end of

quarter t. Eurodollar futures have been the trading vehicle of choice for hedging short-run interest rate
movements since the mid-1980s and therefore provide one measure of financial market participants’
forecasts of future interest rate changes.

Assuming a constant risk premium (incorporated in the

intercept), efficient markets and full information on the part of market participants imply a null hypothesis
of ; = 1. Furthermore, if interest rate decisions exhibit significant inertia, then market forecasts should
be able to predict a non-trivial component of future interest rate changes.
In Table 6, we reproduce the original results of Rudebusch (2002) over the time sample of
1987Q4 to 1999Q4. At the one quarter ahead forecasting horizon, β is not different from one but
significantly greater than zero. With an R2 of more than 50%, this indicates that markets are able to
predict short-term changes in the FFR quite well. However, as emphasized by Rudebusch (2002), these
results rapidly deteriorate at longer forecasting horizons.

At the two and three quarter forecasting

2

horizons, the null of β = 1 can be rejected and the R ’s fall to 11% and 3% respectively. Using
simulations from a New Keynesian model with a Taylor rule containing interest smoothing, Rudebusch
finds that such a low predictability of future interest rate changes is an unlikely outcome, i.e. outside the
95% confidence intervals of R2 from the simulations, for levels of interest smoothing like those estimated
in the data. Thus, the low predictability of interest rates at the two and three quarter forecasting horizons
suggests that policy inertia may not be the key driving source of interest rate persistence in the data.
On the other hand, there are several factors which could, even in the presence of policy inertia, lead
financial market futures to be poor predictors of subsequent interest rates. One such factor emphasized by
Rudebusch (2002) is the possibility of a time-varying risk premium. But there are also a number of
informational constraints facing private sector forecasters which could systematically reduce their ability to
predict future interest rate decisions by the Fed even in the presence of significant policy inertia. One such
constraint is uncertainty about what the policy rule actually is, e.g. does the central bank respond to output
growth or the output gap, by how much does the central respond to different macroeconomic variables, is
there policy inertia in the decision making process, etc. Second, private agents could have less information
than the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve has a much larger staff of economists available to digest and
process incoming economic information than any private organization, likely leaving the latter at an
informational disadvantage. Evidence of this is documented by Romer and Romer (2000) in the case of
professional forecasters: they find that Greenbook forecasts systematically outperform professional forecasts
of inflation. Ang et al. (2007) show that professional forecasts of inflation dominate asset-price based
forecasts of inflation, so Greenbook forecasts likely have a significant informational advantage over
financial market forecasts. Finally, agents could be unsure about the underlying model used by the Federal
14

Reserve to translate its information set into forecasts of macroeconomic variables. In this case, even if
agents had the same information about current and past macroeconomic conditions, this might lead them to
generate different forecasts than the Federal Reserve, which would translate into additional interest rate
prediction errors. As a result, the inability of financial market participants to forecast future interest rate
changes could reflect a variety of factors other than a lack of policy inertia.
To evaluate the importance of these factors, we re-assess the predictability of future interest rate
changes using the forecasts of the FFR embodied in the Greenbook forecasts of the Federal Reserve. The
staff of the Board of Governors makes assumptions about the future path of the FFR in generating
forecasts of other macroeconomic variables, which can be interpreted as forecasts of future policy actions.
Because these forecasts are generated at the same time as the forecasts of other macroeconomic variables
in the Greenbooks, they should embed consistent assumptions about the policy rule, consistent
information sets, and a consistent model used to convert information into forecasts. In short, these
forecasts of the FFR should possess much more information about the predictability of interest rates
driven by policy inertia than market forecasts. However, because these assumptions do not necessarily
represent the staff’s best unconditional forecasts of future policy actions, they should be interpreted as a
lower bound on the ability of Federal Reserve staff to predict subsequent policy decisions. Figure 3 plots
the historical FFR and selected forecasts from both financial markets and the Greenbooks (from the first
quarter of each year). Overall, forecasts from the Greenbooks seem to dominate other forecasts. Only
since 2000 do the financial market forecasts appear to do nearly as well as Greenbook forecasts.
Table 6 shows the estimated parameters from estimating equation (8) using the Greenbook
assumptions about future interest rates in lieu of financial market forecasts over the same time sample. The
results are in stark contrast to those obtained using financial market forecasts. Even at the two and three
quarter forecasting horizons, the point estimates of β are very close to one and statistically different from
zero at standard levels. The R2 of 20% and 12% at the two and three quarter ahead forecasting horizons are
also significantly higher than obtained using financial market forecasts and lie within the 95% confidence
intervals constructed by Rudebusch (2002) that one would expect to find in the presence of substantial
policy inertia. This result implies that future interest rate changes are in fact approximately as predictable as
one would expect under significant interest rate smoothing, conditional on having sufficient information
about the policy rule and macroeconomic conditions. The inability of financial market forecasts to predict
future interest rate changes is thus likely to primarily reflect variations in the risk premium or informational
constraints, not an absence of inertia in interest rate setting decisions. Thus, the ability of Federal Reserve
staff to predict future changes in interest rates is further evidence that interest smoothing is an inherent
component of the policy-making process rather than a statistical artifact of estimated Taylor rules.

15

We also produce analogous results for changes in 3-month T-Bill rates using the Greenbook
forecasts of the latter as well as the median forecasts from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF).
Professional forecasts present an additional source of information about the ability of private agents to
forecast future policy changes and are typically of high quality: Ang et al. (2007) document that
professional forecasts of inflation outperform most time series models and financial market forecasts.
Figure 3 plots the 3-month T-Bill rate, along with forecasts from professional forecasters and Greenbooks.
While the SPF appear to do better than financial market forecasts, the Greenbooks still appear to give
better forecasts of the path of future interest rates. The empirical results from estimating equation (8) using
both SPF and Greenbook forecasts of the 3-month T-Bill rate, presented in Table 6, are qualitatively
similar to those using FFR forecasts. Professional forecasters, like financial market participants, are unable
to predict interest rate changes much beyond the one quarter ahead forecasting horizon, while the
Greenbook forecasts continue to yield point estimates of β which are significantly greater than zero and
close to one, with R2’s of the same order as that obtained using financial market forecasts.
The inability of financial markets and professional forecasters to predict future interest rates as
well as the Federal Reserve during this time period has also been noted, albeit informally, by Fed insiders
as illustrated by Blinder (1998)
“Here are two clear examples from recent U.S. history. I was not at the Federal Reserve in late
1993 and early 1994, just before it started tightening monetary policy. But I am fairly certain that
the Fed’s own expectations of future Federal funds rates were well above those presumably
embedded in the term structure at the time, which seemed stuck at the unsustainably low level of
3%. A year later, I was at the Fed and I am certain that the market’s expectations of how high the
funds rate was likely to go – to as high as 8% according to various asset prices and Wall Street
predictions – were well above my own. In both cases, the markets got it wrong – once on the
high side and once on the low side. In both cases, the faulty estimate was largely attributable to
misapprehensions about the Fed’s intentions. And in both cases, the bond market swung wildly
when it corrected. Such misapprehensions can never be eliminated, but they can be reduced by a
central bank that offers markets a clearer vision of its goals, its ‘model’ of the economy, and its
general strategy.”
Blinder attributes the superior forecasting ability of Fed forecasts to informational factors: a better
understanding of the Fed’s model and the basis for its forecasts, as well as the policy objectives and the
way in which policymakers respond to incoming information. This recognition that greater transparency
on the part of the central bank could help financial markets and other economic agents better forecast
future policies, thereby stabilizing expectations, played an important role in increasing the information
released by the Federal Reserve during this time period. For example, the Federal Reserve began to

16

release post-FOMC meeting statements in 1994 and augmented this with statements about the perceived
balance of risks in 2000.6
One way to assess the importance of these informational constraints on the part of both financial
market participants and professional forecasters is to compare their forecasting performance with respect
to the Fed using a longer sample when communications from the Fed were expanded. Table 6 therefore
presents estimates of equation (8) for each type of forecast for the extended time sample of 1987Q4 to
2004Q4. The results using the Greenbook forecasts are qualitatively unchanged, with estimates of β
remaining close to one at all forecasting horizons and R2’s of similar, if slightly lower, magnitudes. The
results for financial market and professional forecasts, on the other hand, are improved relative to the
period ending in 1999. Coefficient estimates on forecasted changes are consistently closer to one and the
R2’s are all larger than over the restricted sample. Thus, the ability of financial markets and professional
forecasters to predict subsequent interest rate changes went up after the increased information disclosures
on the part of the Fed, even though the overall predictability of interest rates, as measured by the Fed’s
own forecasts, was largely unchanged.
In short, these results suggest several conclusions. First, the Federal Reserve’s ability to forecast
subsequent interest rate changes is consistent with the presence of significant policy inertia. Second, the
inability of financial markets and professional forecasters to predict interest rates as well as the Federal
Reserve during the sample studied by Rudebusch likely reflects informational constraints on these agents
such as more limited information sets and uncertainty about the policy rule, not the absence of inertia in
policy. This point is consistent with the evidence from a longer time period during which the Federal
Reserve expanded its communications: even though the overall predictability of interest rates was
unchanged, as measured by the Fed’s own forecasts, private sector forecasts of future interest rates
improved significantly and in a manner consistent with the presence of policy inertia.

VI

Narrative Evidence on Policy Changes

The source of the inertia in interest rates could in principle be identified from policymakers themselves.
While it is beyond the scope of this paper to pursue a full narrative history of the motives behind each
policy change during the Greenspan era, we present suggestive evidence which illustrates that
policymakers explicitly formulated their policy decisions in line with the interest smoothing
interpretation. As a particularly revealing example, we first focus on the March 22nd, 1994 meeting of the
FOMC. After a year of the target Federal Funds Rate remaining at 3%, the Federal Reserve began a
prolonged period of increasing target rates in February of 1994 in response to rising inflationary
6

The November 14th, 2007 speech by Bernanke (available on the Fed’s website) describes past and current changes
in Federal Reserve disclosures.

17

pressures, culminating in a target rate of 6% in 1995. During the March 22nd meeting, the discussion
among FOMC members concentrated on the question of how high and how rapidly rates should rise.7
Chairman Greenspan began this discussion by highlighting his preferred action and reasons,
“My own view is that eventually we have to be at 4 to 4-1/2 percent. The question is not whether
but when. If we are to move 50 basis points, I think we would create far more instability than we
realize, largely because a half-point is not enough to remove the question of where we are
ultimately going. I think there is a certain advantage in doing 25 basis points because the
markets, having seen two moves in a row of 25 basis points at a meeting, will tend almost surely
to expect that the next move will be at the next meeting – or at least I think the probability of that
occurring is probably higher than 50/50. If that is the case and the markets perceive that – and
they perceive we are going to 4 percent by midyear, moving only at meetings – then we have
effectively removed the Damocles Sword because our action becomes predictable with respect to
timing as well as with respect to dimension.”
This statement contains the key ingredients of the interest smoothing motive: the Chairman has a desired
target rate in mind based on his expectations of future macroeconomic conditions and suggests moving to
toward that target in a sequence of small incremental steps to stabilize the private sector’s expectations.
The subsequent discussion by other FOMC members illustrates similar considerations. For example,
Governor Lindsey offered the following justification for his agreement with the Chairman,
“We definitely want to send a signal to the market, and I think that there are two ways of doing
that. One, which is not an option before us, is to go to a number that is a credible – a round
number that people would say is the natural rate. One might contemplate a 75 basis point
increase to 4 percent. I’m not recommending that, but one could suggest that. It would be clear
to market participants that we had stopped. Going to 3.75 percent in my mind doesn’t indicate
anything. It doesn’t suggest that we are going to stop at 4 percent; it doesn’t suggest that we are
going to stop at 4-1/4 percent; it doesn’t suggest that we are going to stop at 4-1/2 percent. It
does suggest that we have another increase coming down the road. Since I don’t think a 75 basis
point move is credible and I don’t think 50 basis points sends the signal of certainty, I found your
suggestion of 25 basis points preferable… So, while I have no disagreement at all that we want
to get there as quickly as possible, in my mind a move of 25 basis points now, 25 in May and 25
on July 5th seems to be a pattern that will get us there in splendid time. No one can accuse us of
upsetting the markets, and we will establish more certainty in the market that we are headed to a
fixed point that is higher than I think we would achieve with 50 basis points.”
Governor Lindsey’s statement is particularly illustrative because he explicitly considers the possibility of
moving interest rates immediately to the desired rate, but rejects it out of hand as “not an option” and “not
credible”. Like Greenspan, he emphasizes the stabilizing effect on market expectations of a gradual
adjustment of interest rates. President Stern of the Minneapolis Fed suggests an alternative justification,
“As most people have already stated, it certainly seems appropriate to act now. How far we
ought to go and how fast we ought to try and get there, are the difficult questions. My best
judgment is that we’ll be at this for some time; it may well be that the funds rate has to go to 4
percent or more by the time we are done. But I don’t have a strong conviction about how far we
will need to go. As for the timing issue, it seems to me that we are probably going to be at this
7

The minutes of FOMC meetings are available on the website of the Federal Reserve Board.

18

until we are either more confident than we are today that we have established an environment for
renewed disinflation or until we actually see renewed disinflation. It may surprise us and occur
earlier or something else may happen that changes our view about appropriate policy. But having
said all that, I think we should bear in mind, and I’m certainly willing to be humble about all this,
that the confidence interval around any forecast is very wide. And I think that argues for caution.
So, I’m comfortable with your ¼ point recommendation now. I think that is the appropriate
magnitude.”
While Chairman Greenspan and Governor Lindsey emphasize the stabilizing effects of gradualism on
market expectations, President Stern expresses concern about the uncertainty surrounding future
conditions and views that as justifying “caution” in altering policy.

This motivation, originally

formalized in Brainard (1967), was also emphasized by Alan Blinder (1998) (who served as ViceChairman of the Federal Reserve Board during part of this time period) as a guiding strategy for monetary
policymakers after he left the FOMC,
“Step 1: Estimate how much you need to tighten or loosen monetary policy to “get it right.”
Then, do less.
Step 2: Watch developments.
Step 3a: If things work out about as expected, increase your tightening or loosening toward
where you thought it should be in the first place.
Step 3b: If the economy seems to be evolving differently from what you expected, adjust policy
accordingly.”
Furthermore, while some members of this particular FOMC meeting disagreed with the
policy advocated by Greenspan in favor of a more aggressive response to rising inflationary
pressures, none advocated a complete adjustment to the desired rate and instead called for a larger
increase of 50 basis points. Thus, no FOMC member proposed to act in a manner inconsistent with
the interest smoothing motive; any disagreement was about the degree of interest smoothing. The
statement by President Boehne of the Philadelphia Fed makes this clear,
“Well, I think the case for a less accommodative policy today is quite persuasive. We did press
hard on the monetary accelerator to get the economy moving, and now as the economy
approaches cruising speed we have to ease off the accelerator to avoid having to slam on the
brakes down the road. The real issue – the major issue as you point out, Mr. Chairman – is how
much to move. I prefer a ½ percentage point increase in the federal funds rate compared to ¼
because I think we have some distance to go to get to a neutral policy, and it’s better to cover that
distance earlier rather than later.”
Other narrative evidence suggests that this characterization of monetary policy decisions is representative
of other periods as well. For example, Stephen Axilrod was responsible for presenting and defending policy
alternatives (i.e. the Bluebooks) at FOMC meetings from the time of Burns to the end of Volcker’s tenure. In
describing the policy-making process that he observed for over a decade, he relates (Axilrod 2009),
“[Policymakers] have an inherent disposition to conservatism in decision making. They usually
prefer to adjust policies gradually, which is a far from irrational way of operating. Given all of

19

the uncertainties they face, gradual changes more often than not guard them against finding
themselves too far off base when circumstances turn unexpectedly.”
Similarly, in his 2004 speech on monetary policy inertia (which he refers to as “gradualism”), thenGovernor Bernanke indicated a preference for the inertial policy interpretation of historical Fed actions8
“My sense … is that policymakers’ caution in the face of many forms of uncertainty and their
desire to make policy as predictable as possible both contribute to the gradualist behavior we
seem to observe in practice.”
Bernanke’s views are, of course, particularly important because they are indicative of how important
policy inertia is likely to be during the recovery from the Great Recession. While no detailed transcripts
are available from recent FOMC meetings, his presence on the Board of Governors between 2002 and
2005 implies that one can study both his public statements as well as views expressed in FOMC meetings
to get a sense of how he characterized the policy choices facing the Fed during this time. Because interest
rates were at historic lows in 2003 and early 2004 (the FFR was at 1%) in response to the jobless recovery
and the possibility of deflation, this time period also bears some similarities to current times. Bernanke’s
May 20th speech in 2004 on policy inertia preceded the first in a long line of interest rate increases by a
month and was clearly, at least ex-post, meant to serve as an indicator of the likely path of policy in the
coming months and years, a path which he implied in “Fed speak” was going to follow the historical
pattern of monetary policy inertia
“As I have discussed today, given the highly uncertain environment in which policy operates, a
gradual adjustment of rates has the advantage of allowing the FOMC to monitor the evolution of
the economy and the effects of its policy actions, making adjustments along the way as needed.
On the margin, a more gradual process may also help ease the transition to higher rates for
participants in money markets and bond markets, as well as for households, banks, and firms. In
my own view, economic developments over the next year are reasonably likely to be consistent
with a gradual adjustment of policy.”
In FOMC meetings, Bernanke was more direct. In the June 29th-30th, 2004 meeting in which the first
25bp increase in the FFR was announced (the FFR would eventually rise by 400 bp over the next two
years), he stated “Given these uncertainties, it seems to me that the best tactic is to temporize, embarking
on a program of gradual rate increases but remaining alert and ready to adjust in response to incoming
information.” In the August 10th meeting, he argued “Overall, our plan to tighten at a measured pace
looks pretty good right now. The gradualist approach moves us predictably toward rate neutrality yet
leaves the economy some breathing space and gives us time to observe economic developments.”
Finally, in the September 21st, 2004 FOMC meeting, Bernanke provided the following assessment of the
previous and future path of interest rates,
8

The equivalence between “gradualism” as used by Bernanke and our terminology is clearly laid out in Bernanke’s
speech: “This relatively slow adjustment of the policy rate has been referred to variously as interest-rate smoothing,
partial adjustment, and monetary policy inertia. In today’s talk, I will use the term gradualism.”

20

“Overall, I think our strategy of removing accommodation at a measured pace has worked out
well, not only in providing support to the economy and avoiding nasty surprises in financial
markets but also in allowing us time to assess ongoing developments. I support our plan of
measured withdrawal of emergency stimulus… As we go forward, however, we should remain
flexible in slowing or speeding up the process as dictated by incoming data. Financial markets
are well prepared for this type of flexibility, and I believe it fits well with our declared strategy of
removing accommodation at a measured but not mechanistic pace.”
Thus, the narrative evidence is also supportive of a clear historical role for policy inertia in the
decision-making process of the Federal Reserve. The statements from Bernanke in mid-2004 when the
Federal Reserve began raising interest rates indicate that he advocated this style of policy-adjustment.
The opening quote from the October 20th, 2010 FOMC meeting’s minutes expressing that “In current
circumstances, however, most [FOMC participants] saw advantages to a more incremental approach
that would involve smaller changes … calibrated to incoming data.” is clearly reminiscent of the
language employed in 2004 and therefore strongly suggests that the Bernanke Fed will, in the absence
of a dramatic change in economic conditions, follow a very similar qualitative policy path.

VII

Omitted Variables and the Persistence of Interest Rates

While much of the evidence strongly supports the interest smoothing motive over the persistent monetary
policy shocks explanation of interest rate persistence, a broader interpretation of the latter is difficult to
rule out. For example, Rudebusch (2002, 2006) suggests that the excess persistence in interest rates is
most likely to come from historical responses of the central bank to factors not typically included in the
Taylor rule. Credit conditions are one particularly prominent example of such an omitted factor likely to
elicit a central bank response, and their exclusion from standard Taylor rules could give the appearance of
either inertial policy or persistent shocks.

Similarly, the gradual adjustment of the central bank’s

information set, and their need to adjust policy based on their revised estimates of the state of the
economy, could point to either policy inertia or persistent shocks. In this section, we consider a variety of
factors which, when omitted from the estimated reaction function of the central bank, could lead to the
appearance of excessive interest rate persistence.
We first consider the role of credit and asset price conditions. These are particularly likely to have
played an important historical role in affecting interest decisions. For example, the October 1987 stock
market crash led the Federal Reserve to lower the effective FFR by fifty basis points between October 19th
and October 20th and engage in a variety of other activities to maintain liquidity in financial markets
(Carlson 2007). To assess whether credit and asset market conditions can account for either interest
smoothing or persistent shocks, we consider estimates of equation (3) augmented with lagged measures of
financial conditions using quarterly data from 1987Q4 to 2004Q4. We use three such measures: 1) the
spread between Moody’s Baa corporate bond rate and the ten-year U.S. treasury note, 2) the log of the
21

quarterly average of the S&P500 index, and 3) Bloom’s (2009) measure of financial market uncertainty.
Table 7 presents empirical estimates of our baseline Taylor rule allowing for two lags of interest smoothing,
a second order autoregressive process for the error term, and our three measures of financial market
conditions. All three measures are insignificantly different from zero and have no qualitative effects on
interest smoothing and shock persistence. Thus, there is little evidence that systematic responses by the
Federal Reserve to financial market conditions, above and beyond their effects on expectations of current
and future macroeconomic conditions, account for the persistence in interest rates in the data.
An alternative explanation could come from imperfect information on the part of the central bank.
Because of lags in the release of data as well as data revisions, the Fed can revise its forecasts of the
current state by significant amounts. Interest rate changes could therefore arise not just from changes in
the central bank’s expectations about future economic developments but also from revisions to its
expectations about the current state. To assess whether this source of interest rate changes could account
for the excess persistence in interest rates, we follow Romer and Romer (2004) and augment the baseline
Taylor rule with revisions in the central bank’s forecasts of inflation, output growth and the output gap.
Results from this specification are in Table 7. As with financial market controls, we find no evidence of a
systematic response to forecast revisions and controlling for these measures does not alter the relative
importance of interest smoothing and persistent shocks.
A third possible explanation for the excess persistence in interest rates relative to simple Taylor
rule predictions is persistent variation in the central bank’s target rates of inflation, output gap and output
growth. In the baseline specifications of the Taylor rule, each of these targets is assumed to be constant
and integrated into the intercept of the regression. However, Boivin (2006), Kozicky and Tinsley (2009)
and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011) estimate versions of the baseline Taylor rule with time-varying
coefficients and document non-trivial changes in the intercept, and therefore in the targets of the FOMC.9
Kozicki and Tinsley (2009) and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011) further document that, controlling for
time-variation in both the intercept and the response coefficients, the degree of interest-smoothing after
the early 1980s has remained high, statistically significant, and stable. Since much of this time-variation
in targets is likely to emanate from changes in the inflation target, we consider estimates of equation (3)
in which we replace the measure of expected inflation with a measure of the expected deviation of
inflation from a time-varying target. We employ three measures of the target rate of inflation: 1) Cogley
et al.’s (2010) measure extracted from a VAR with drifting parameters and stochastic volatility; 2)
Coibion and Gorodnichenko’s (2011) measure extracted from Taylor rule estimates with drifting
parameters; and 3) Ireland’s (2007) measure constructed from an estimated New Keynesian dynamic
9

Time variation in the intercept can also reflect changes in the equilibrium real rate of interest, as in Trehan and Wu
(2007).

22

stochastic general equilibrium model. Figure 4 plots these three measures of target inflation, which
exhibit broadly similar patterns despite the different approaches employed to estimate them. By and
large, Table 7 documents that in this alternative specification of the policy reaction function the serial
correlation in the error terms becomes less important and for two out of three measures statistically
insignificant. The fit of this alternative specification is somewhat worse than the fit of the baseline
specification which probably reflects the fact that these measures of the target inflation rate are
constructed and may contain measurement errors. In any case, to the extent that these measures capture
salient movements in the target inflation rate, these results support the hypothesis that serial correlation in
the error term could be absorbing variation in the inflation target rate.
The final possibility that we consider is that the central bank responds not just to its expectations of
current and future macroeconomic conditions but also to those of private sector agents. There are several
reasons why the central bank might wish to pursue such policies. First, while the Federal Reserve’s
forecasts are typically superior to those of professional forecasters, as documented by Romer and Romer
(2000), policy-makers may be concerned about the quality of their forecasts when they differ substantially
from those of other agents. This could lead policymakers to respond less strongly to their own forecasts to
hedge against the possibility that their forecasts are incorrect. As a result, this phenomenon could also
account for why actual interest rates appear to be less volatile than interest rates predicted from a Taylor
rule employing only Greenbook forecasts. Second, policymakers could be concerned about the effect of
their decisions on the expectations of other agents.

For example, if the central bank has superior

information than private agents, then its interest rate decisions will reveal part of the central bank’s
information to the rest of the population and therefore alter their expectations, as considered in e.g. Walsh
(2010). This could be potentially destabilizing: if the central bank is concerned about rising inflation but
observes no movement in the private sector’s expectations of inflation, it could be optimal on the part of
the central bank to avoid raising interest rates too rapidly so that agents do not infer from the policy actions
that the central bank is concerned about rising inflation, a result which could exacerbate inflationary
pressures as higher private sector inflation expectations would increase wage and price pressures. Indeed,
section VI shows that such arguments could be an important part of policy making at the Fed.
Figure 5 illustrates the deviations in the Greenbook forecasts from equivalent forecasts from
professional forecasters in the Philadelphia Fed’s Survey of Professional Forecasters for both inflation and
output growth. In addition, Figure 5 includes the residuals from the simple Taylor rule with no smoothing
or persistent shocks, i.e. equation (1) in section 2. There is a clear negative correlation between the Taylor
rule residuals and the deviation of Greenbook forecasts from professional forecasts. The periods in 1989,
1995, 1998 and 2000-2001 when actual interest rates were above those predicted by the baseline Taylor
rule all coincide with periods in which Greenbook forecasts of inflation were lower than professional
23

forecasts of inflation, and the reverse pattern occurs in 1990, 1996, and late 2001 during which interest
rates were below those predicted by the Taylor rule while professional forecasters were expecting lower
inflation than staff members of the Fed’s Board of Governors. The relationship between Taylor rule
residuals and output growth forecast differentials may appear less systematic to the naked eye, but there are
episodes where negative comovement is clear such as from 1991 to 1996 and again from 1998 to 2001.
We evaluate the statistical strength of these relationships by estimating equation (3) augmented
with the difference between the Greenbook forecast of future inflation and that of professional forecasters
in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the analogous measure for the difference in forecasts of
contemporaneous output growth. We do not control for potential differences in the estimates of the
output gap between the Fed and professional forecasters because no forecast of the output gap is available
for the latter. The results, presented in Table 7, are consistent with the described mechanisms. The
coefficients on both the inflation forecast and output growth forecast differentials are negative and
statistically significant, indicating smaller interest rate changes when the Fed forecasts point to more
expansionary and/or inflationary conditions than private sector forecasts. Furthermore, controlling for
these informational elements eliminates the persistence of the errors: the coefficients on both
autoregressive parameters are insignificantly different from zero. At the same time, the degree of interest
smoothing is now well represented by an AR(1). Thus, the higher order autoregressive process for
interest smoothing may have been capturing the central bank’s response to the private sector’s
information set. This suggests a novel potential explanation for deviations of actual interest rates from
standard Taylor rule prescriptions. Understanding the basis for this systematic response of monetary
policymakers to private agents’ forecasts is an important topic for future research.

VIII

Conclusion

The way in which policymakers endogenously respond to economic fluctuations plays a key role in
determining the dynamic effect of shocks to the economy. Understanding the historical contribution of
endogenous policy reactions to economic fluctuations therefore requires a careful characterization of the
nature of policy decisions and the rate at which policy changes occur. The gradual adjustment of interest
rates by the Federal Reserve is one issue that has been a source of contention among monetary
economists. We provide novel evidence using a variety of methods that consistently supports the notion
that inertia in monetary policy actions has indeed been a fundamental and deliberate component of the
decision-making process by monetary policymakers. More specifically, our evidence strongly favors
interest-rate-smoothing theory over serially-correlated-policy-shocks theory as an explanation of highly
persistent policy rates set by the Fed.

24

This result has several important implications. First, it should help guide forecasters in more
accurately predicting the path of future interest rates. For example, the expected duration of near-zero
interest rates and the pace at which interest rates will rise upon exiting the zero-bound hinge on the amount
of monetary policy inertia. In particular, Bernanke’s clear advocacy of a gradual rise in interest rates in
2004 suggests that a similar policy path is likely to be followed in coming months and possibly years. In
addition, the extra uncertainty about the effects of new policy tools such as changing interest rates on
reserves suggests that the incentive to be inertial will be particularly high during this period, as in Brainard
(1967). Second, assuming that policy inertia in interest rate decisions is likely to transfer to other monetary
tools, the evidence provided in this paper indicates that the exit strategy with respect to tools other than
interest rates is likely to be gradual, even if the economy recovers more rapidly than currently expected.
Third, our results should help guide future research using structural macroeconomic models as to how best
to formulate the endogenous response of monetary policymakers to endogenous economic fluctuations.
Fourth, from a normative perspective, our results imply that the degree of policy inertia in historical Federal
Reserve interest rate decisions, while large, is still significantly less than theory suggests would be optimal.
In addition, two results in the paper are particularly noteworthy. First, the superiority of the
Greenbook assumptions about the path of future interest rates over financial market and professional
forecasts is strongly suggestive of important informational frictions facing these agents, as found in
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2010) in the case of inflation forecasts from both professional forecasters and
financial markets. Consistent with the presence of significant information rigidities, we document an
increase in the ability of financial markets and professional forecasters to predict subsequent interest rate
changes after the Federal Reserve began to release more detailed information about the basis for their
interest rate decisions. This suggests that further transparency on the part of the Federal Reserve, such as
releasing its internal forecasts on a more frequent basis, could likely improve the ability of private sector
agents to forecast future policy actions and help dampen market reactions to perceived policy surprises.
In a similar vein, the finding that the Federal Reserve systematically responds to deviations of its
forecasts from those of private forecasters raises a number of questions that call for further research. The
most basic concerns the source of this relationship. One potential explanation is that FOMC members are
hedging their bets when private sector forecasts differ markedly from the Greenbook forecasts.
Alternatively, this could reflect a desire on the part of FOMC members to reduce the possibility that
private sector agents will draw conclusions from the Fed’s policy decisions that run counter to the Fed’s
objectives. For example, if the central bank’s forecasts of inflation exceed those of the private sector,
preemptive tightening on the part of the Fed could reveal their expectation of inflation to the private sector,
thereby generating additional inflation pressures via the expectations channel, as suggested in Walsh

25

(2010). Quantifying these mechanisms would yield a better understanding of the implications of imperfect
information on the part of different economic agents, as well as their interaction.
References
Ang, Andrew, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei, 2007. “Do macro variables, asset markets, or surveys
forecast inflation better?” Journal of Monetary Economics 54(4), 1163-1212.
Axilrod, Stephen H., 2009. Inside the Fed: Monetary Policy and its Management, Martin through
Greenspan to Bernanke, The MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, and Miles Kimball, 2006.
“Are Technology Improvements
Contractionary?” American Economic Review 96(5), 1418-1448.
Beaudry, Paul, and Franck Portier, 2006. "News, Stock Prices and Economic Fluctuations,” American
Economic Review 96(4), 1293-1307.
Blinder, Alan S. 1998. Central Banking in Theory and Practice. The MIT Press, Cambridge
Massachusetts.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica 77(3), 623-685.
Brainard, William, 1967. “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,” American Economic Review
57(2), 411-425.
Carlson, Mark, 2007. “A Brief History of the 1987 Stock Market Crash with a Discussion of the Federal
Reserve Response,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics
Discussion Series #2007-13.
Carrillo, Julio, Patrick Feve, and Julien Matheron, 2007. “Monetary Policy Inertia or Persistent Shocks:
A DSGE Analysis,” International Journal of Central Banking 3(2), 1-38.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler, 2000. “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(1), 147-180.
Cogley, Timothy, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2010. “Inflation-Gap Persistence in the
U.S.,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(1), 43-69.
Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2010. “Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation
Process: A Simple Framework and New Facts,” NBER Working Paper w16537.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2011. “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation and the Great
Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation,” American Economic Review 101(1).
Consolo, Agostino, and Carlo A. Favero, 2009. “Monetary policy inertia: More a fiction than a fact?”
Journal of Monetary Economics 56(6), 900-906.
English, William B., William R. Nelson, and Brian P. Sack, 2003. “Interpreting the Significance of the
Lagged Interest Rate in Estimated Monetary Policy Rules,” Contributions to Macroeconomics
3(1), Article 5.
Gali, Jordi, 1999. “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain
Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review 89(1), 249-271.
Gerlach-Kristen, Petra, 2004. “Interest-rate Smoothing: Monetary Policy Inertia or Unobserved
Variables?” Contribution to Macroeconomics 4(1) Article 3.
Ireland, Peter N., 2004. “Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 86(4), 923-936.
Ireland, Peter N., 2007. “Changes in the Federal Reserve’s Inflation Target: Causes and Consequences,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39(8), 1851-1882.
Ireland, Peter N., 2011. “A New Keynesian Perspective on the Great Recession,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 43(1), 31-54.
Kilian, Lutz, 2009. “Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in
the Crude Oil Market,” American Economic Review 99(3), 1053-1069.
Kozicki, Sharon, and Peter A. Tinsley. 2009. “Perhaps the 1970s FOMC Did What It Said It Did,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 56(6), 842-855.
26

Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams, 1999. “Robustness of Simple Monetary Policy
Rules under Model Uncertainty,” in John B. Taylor, ed. Monetary Policy Rules (Chicago
University Press, Chicago) 263-299.
Lubik, Thomas A., and Frank Schorfheide. 2004. “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to U.S.
Monetary Policy.” American Economic Review 94(1), 190-217.
Orphanides, Athanasios, 2003. “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 50(5), 983-1022.
Romer, Christina, and David H. Romer, 2000. “Federal Reserve Information and the Behavior of Interest
Rates,” American Economic Review 90(3), 429-457.
Romer, Christina, and David H. Romer, 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and
Implications,” American Economic Review 94(4), 1055-1084.
Romer, Christina and David H. Romer, 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates
Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review 100(3), 763-801.
Rudebusch, Glenn D., 2002. “Term structure evidence on interest rate smoothing and monetary policy
inertia,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49(6), 1161-1187.
Rudebusch, Glenn D., 2006. “Monetary Policy Inertia: Fact or Fiction?” International Journal of
Central Banking 2(4), 85-135.
Smets, Frank R., and Raf Wouters, 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A Bayesian
DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review 97(3), 586-606.
Taylor, John B., 2003. “Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
Taylor, John B., 2007. “Housing and Monetary Policy.” In Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary
Policy, pp. 463–76. Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Trehan, Bharat, and Tao Wu, 2007. “Time-Varying Equilibrium Real Rates and Monetary Policy
Analysis,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 31(5), 1584-1609.
Walsh, Carl E., 2010. “Transparency, the Opacity Bias, and Optimal Flexible Inflation Targeting,”
manuscript.
Woodford, Michael, 2003a. “Optimal Interest Rate Smoothing,” Review of Economic Studies 70, 861886.
Woodford, Michael, 2003b. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

27

Figure 1: Target Federal Funds Rate and the Prediction of a Simple Taylor Rule
10
Residual (left axis)
Actual FFR (right axis)
Predicted FFR (right axis)

8
6

2

4
2

1

0
0
-1
-2
88

90

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

Note: The figure plots the actual target FFR, the predicted FFR from equation (1) in section 2, and the
residuals of the regression. See section 2.1 for details.

28

Figure 2: Target Federal Funds Rate and the Predictions of Augmented Taylor Rules

10
Target FFR
Predicted FFR: Policy Inertia
Predicted FFR: Persistent Shocks

8

6

4

2

0
88

90

92

94

96

98

00

02

04

Note: The figure plots the actual target FFR and the predicted FFR’s from estimating augmented versions
of the Taylor rule including either interest smoothing (policy inertia) or persistent shocks. See section 2.1
for details.

29

Figure 3: Interest Rate Forecasts of the Fed, Financial Markets, and Professional Forecasters
Panel A: Forecasts of the FFR from Financial Markets and Greenbooks
12

10

8

6

4

2

0
1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Panel B: Forecasts of the 3-Month TBill Rate from Professional Forecasters and Greenbooks
10

8

6

4

2

0
1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Note: The top figure plots the Federal Funds Rate (black solid line) and the forecasts from the first quarter
of each year from financial markets using Eurodollar futures (red lines with triangles) and Greenbooks of
the Federal Reserve (blue lines with circles). The bottom figure plots the 3-month TBill rate (solid black
line) and the forecasts from the first quarter of each year from the Survey of Professional Forecasters
(green lines with triangles) and Greenbooks of the Federal Reserve (blue lines with circles).
30

Figure 4: Measures of the Federal Reserve’s Target Inflation Rate

4.4
Cogley et a. (2010)
Ireland (2007)
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011)

4.0
3.6
3.2
2.8
2.4
2.0
1.6
1.2
1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Note: The figure plots the estimates of the annualized inflation target rate of the Federal Reserve from
Cogley et al. (2010), Ireland (2007), and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2011).

31

Figure 5: Deviations from the Taylor Rule and Forecast Differentials between Greenbooks and Professional Forecasters
Panel A: Inflation Forecast Differentials

Panel B: Output Growth Forecast Differentials

1.5

0.8

1.0

1.5

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.4
0.5
0.0

0.0
-0.5

-0.4

-1.0

0.0

0.0

-0.5
-0.5
-1.0
-1.0

-0.8
-1.5

-1.5

Taylor Rule Residuals (left axis)
Inflation Forecast Differentials (right axis)

-2.0

-1.2
1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Taylor Rule Residuals (left axis)
Output Growth Forecast Differentials (right axis)

-2.0
1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Note: Each figure plots the residuals from the simple Taylor rule in equation (1) in the text, which represent the deviation of actual interest rates
from predicted interest rates using only Greenbook forecasts of inflation, output growth, and the output gap. Panel A also includes the difference
between the Greenbook forecast of inflation over the next two quarters and the equivalent median forecast from professional forecasts in the SPF.
Panel B includes the difference between the Greenbook forecast of output growth in the current quarter and the equivalent median forecast from
professional forecasts in the SPF.

32

-1.5

Table 1: Taylor Rule Estimates Nesting Interest Smoothing and Persistent Shocks
(1)
 :

 , |

 :
 :

(2)

0.37***
(0.06)

(3)
0.48***
(0.08)

(4)
0.27***
(0.08)

0.25***
(0.05)

 |

0.25***
(0.03)

0.32***
(0.05)

-0.00
(0.05)
0.25***
(0.07)
0.07**
(0.03)

0.10***
(0.03)
0.72***
(0.03)
0.59***
(0.09)
0.988
0.257
0.206
0.401

0.65***
(0.07)
0.85***
(0.08)
0.987
0.270
0.292
0.454

0.74***
(0.09)
0.89***
(0.06)
0.987
0.274
0.330
0.524

|

 : |
  : |
  : 

($ : *

R2
s.e.e.
AIC
SIC

0.16***
(0.02)
0.12***
(0.02)

0.13***
(0.03)
0.14***
(0.03)

|

() : *

(5)

0.81***
(0.03)
0.46***
(0.11)
0.989
0.246
0.120
0.314

0.87***
(0.04)
0.44***
(0.12)
0.988
0.258
0.213
0.407

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the Taylor Rule equation (2) in section 2.2 of the text.  is
the short-run response to inflation expectations,  is the short-run response to the expected output gap,
and   is the short-run response to expected output growth. () is the estimated degree of interest
smoothing while ($ is the persistence of monetary policy shocks. All estimates are done using
Greenbook forecasts from 1987Q4 until 2004Q4. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively, using Newey-West HAC standard errors. See section 2.2 for
details.

33

Table 2: Taylor Rules Nesting Interest Smoothing and Persistent Shocks for Different Time
Samples
Quarterly data
1987Q42004Q4
(1)
 :

1987Q41999Q4
(2)

Data by FOMC meeting
1983Q12004Q4
(3)

1987Q42004Q4
(4)

1987Q41999Q4
(5)

1983Q12004Q4
(6)

0.37***
0.35***
0.35***
0.26***
0.19***
0.20***
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.05)
0.16***
0.15***
0.08***
0.09***
0.07***
0.05***
 : |
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.01)
0.12***
0.11***
0.20***
0.09***
0.08***
0.12***
A : |
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
0.81***
0.80***
0.87***
0.88***
0.90***
0.92***
() : *
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.02)
0.46***
0.46***
0.19
0.07
0.02
0.18*
($ : *
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.12)
(0.08)
(0.10)
(0.09)
2
R
0.989
0.981
0.981
0.992
0.986
0.989
s.e.e.
0.246
0.260
0.359
0.210
0.218
0.266
AIC
0.120
0.256
0.856
-0.241
-0.148
0.220
SIC
0.314
0.488
1.029
-0.114
0.010
0.331
Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the Taylor Rule equation (2) in section 2.2 of the text.  is
the short-run response to inflation expectations,  is the short-run response to the expected output gap,
and   is the short-run response to expected output growth. () is the estimated degree of interest
smoothing while ($ is the persistence of monetary policy shocks. *,**, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively, using Newey-West HAC standard errors. See
section 2.2 for details.
 , |

34

Table 3: Information Criteria Selection of Interest Rate Smoothing vs Persistent Shocks

IS

87Q4-04Q4
AR BIC

IS

87Q4-99Q4
AR BIC

IS

83Q1-04Q4
AR BIC

Panel A: Quarterly data
∗ =  +    ,  +     +   
∗ =  +     +     +   
∗ =  +    ,  +      +   
∗ =  +    ,  +   
∗ =  +    +     +   

2
2
2
1
2

0
0
0
1
0

0.116
0.193
0.274
0.454
0.447

2
2
2
1
2

0
0
0
1
0

0.365
0.405
0.480
0.556
0.468

2
2
2
1
3

0
0
0
1
0

0.983
1.064
1.279
1.239
1.131

Panel B: Data by FOMC meeting
∗ =  +    ,  +     +   
∗ =  +     +     +   
∗ =  +    ,  +      +   
∗ =  +    ,  +   
∗ =  +    +     +   

1
1
3
3
2

0
0
0
0
0

-0.146
-0.083
-0.256
0.004
0.065

1
1
3
2
1

0
0
0
2
0

-0.036
0.012
-0.158
0.034
-0.086

1
1
1
3
1

1
1
1
2
1

0.331
0.385
0.464
0.603
0.414

Notes: The table presents the results from specification searches over equation (3) in the text allowing for
up to 4 lags of interest smoothing and 4 lags of persistent shocks. For each time period and interest rate
rule, we report the preferred specification using the BIC in terms of number of lags for interest smoothing
(IS), number of lags for persistent monetary policy shocks (AR) and the BIC statistic associated with the
selected specification. Bold values indicate the preferred specification of the Taylor rule according to the
BIC criterion for each time sample. See section 3 for details.

35

Table 4: Estimates of Taylor Rules with Higher Order Nested Specifications
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.39***
0.50***
0.46***
 :  , |
(0.05)
(0.06)
(0.07)
0.35***
 :  |
(0.05)
 : |
 : |
  : |
  : 

0.11***
(0.02)
0.13***
(0.02)

|

(), : *
(), : *
($, : *
($, : *

R2
s.e.e.
SIC
AIC

0.11***
(0.02)
0.13***
(0.02)

1.22***
(0.08)
-0.40***
(0.07)
-0.01
(0.14)
-0.30***
(0.09)
0.992
0.217
0.148
-0.111

1.26***
(0.08)
-0.41***
(0.07)
-0.08
(0.14)
-0.36***
(0.13)
0.992
0.222
0.199
-0.060

(5)

0.18***
(0.02)

0.16***
(0.02)

0.11**
(0.05)
0.04
(0.02)
0.17***
(0.03)

0.11***
(0.04)
1.21***
(0.10)
-0.45***
(0.08)
0.00
(0.13)
-0.19*
(0.11)
0.990
0.241
0.363
0.104

1.30***
(0.07)
-0.55***
(0.07)
0.01
(0.13)
-0.31***
(0.09)
0.987
0.268
0.528
0.302

1.31***
(0.14)
-0.36***
(0.12)
0.13
(0.20)
0.06
(0.11)
0.988
0.266
0.558
0.299

Notes: The table presents estimates of equation (3) in the text assuming two lags of the interest rate for
the interest smoothing component ((), and (), ) and an autoregressive process for the error term of order
2 (($, and ($, ). All estimates are quarterly, done using Greenbook forecasts, and over the period
1987Q4 to 2004Q4. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels
respectively, using Newey-West HAC standard errors. See section 3 for details.

36

Table 5: Instrumental Variable Estimation of the Taylor Rule
1987Q4-2004Q4
1983Q4-2004Q4
IV
IV
OLS
shocks
OLS
shocks
only
only
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.42***
0.58***
0.34***
0.57***
 :  , |
(0.05)
(0.14)
(0.07)
(0.13)
0.14***
0.14
0.07***
0.08**
 : |
(0.02)
(0.09)
(0.01)
(0.03)
0.18***
0.28***
0.22***
0.28***
  : |
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.02)
(0.04)
0.82***
0.80***
0.88***
0.80***
() : *
(0.03)
(0.10)
(0.03)
(0.05)
2
R
0.988
0.981
0.981
0.953
s.e.e.
0.262
0.328
0.361
0.567
AIC
0.225
0.857
SIC
0.387
0.998
Notes: The table presents OLS and IV estimates of the Taylor rule in equation (3) in the text. In columns
(2) and (4), instruments include a constant and two lags of technology shocks from Gali (1999), TFP
residuals from Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2004), oil supply shocks from Kilian (2008), news shocks
from Beaudry and Portier (2006), and fiscal shocks from Romer and Romer (2010). *,**, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively, using Newey-West HAC standard
errors. See section 4 for details.

37

Table 6: The Predictability of Interest Rate Changes
1987Q4-1999Q4
  − 
  −   
(1)
(2)

B

− 
(3)





 − 
(4)

1987Q4-2004Q4
  −  

(5)

B

− 
(6)

Euro-dollar forecasts
of FFR
R2

0.81***
(0.17)
0.563

0.44**
(0.18)
0.110

0.35
(0.29)
0.032

0.99***
(0.11)
0.676

0.70***
(0.22)
0.203

0.47
(0.30)
0.050

Greenbook forecasts
of FFR
R2

1.21***
(0.16)
0.653

0.95***
(0.24)
0.196

1.02**
(0.50)
0.115

1.29***
(0.12)
0.703

0.96***
(0.22)
0.159

1.00**
(0.44)
0.088

SPF forecasts
of 3mo T-Bills
R2

1.45***
(0.36)
0.330

0.65
(0.64)
0.042

0.30
(0.53)
0.010

1.69***
(0.29)
0.425

0.85*
(0.46)
0.066

0.54
(0.36)
0.040

Greenbook forecasts
of 3mo T-Bills
R2

1.13***
(0.16)
0.527

0.79***
(0.25)
0.145

0.97*
(0.53)
0.121

1.15***
(0.11)
0.562

0.86***
(0.21)
0.135

1.00**
(0.47)
0.095

Notes: The table reports estimates of equation (8) in the text. The reported coefficients are for the slope
of expected changes in future interest rates on the ex-post changes in interest rates for forecasting
horizons ranging from one quarter to three quarters. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively, using Newey-West HAC standard errors. See section 5 for details.

38



Table 7: Omitted Variables and the Persistence of Interest Rates
Dependent variable: C
 :  , |
 :

 , |

−

∗


  : |
 : |
D : C*
D : C*
($ : *
($ : *

(1)
0.39***
(0.05)

0.13***
(0.02)
0.11***
(0.02)
1.22***
(0.08)
-0.40***
(0.07)
-0.01
(0.14)
-0.30***
(0.09)

BLOOMSHOCKS*
SPREAD*
S&S500*
 , |

−

(2)
0.31***
(0.07)

0.12***
(0.02)
0.13***
(0.03)
1.17***
(0.11)
-0.35***
(0.09)
-0.01
(0.16)
-0.26***
(0.08)
0.20
(0.57)
-0.02
(0.08)
-0.16
(0.12)

| − |*
−

0.12***
(0.03)
0.11***
(0.02)
1.24***
(0.09)
-0.40***
(0.08)
-0.01
(0.14)
-0.29***
(0.09)

6TU
 , |

6TU
| − |

R2
s.e.e.
AIC
SIC

(4)
0.51***
(0.07)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.15***
(0.03)
0.16***
(0.03)
0.98***
(0.14)
-0.19
(0.13)
0.19
(0.14)
-0.08
(0.08)

0.23***
(0.06)
0.17***
(0.02)
0.03
(0.02)
1.28***
(0.11)
-0.35***
(0.10)
0.20
(0.15)
-0.06
(0.11)

0.28***
(0.10)
0.18***
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.02)
1.31***
(0.11)
-0.34***
(0.11)
0.20
(0.15)
-0.02
(0.11)

0.32***
(0.07)
0.17***
(0.02)
0.03*
(0.01)
1.31***
(0.08)
-0.36***
(0.08)
0.12
(0.16)
-0.18*
(0.11)

-0.31**
(0.14)
-0.11***
(0.04)
0.993
0.210
-0.148
0.176

0.988
0.253
0.200
0.459

0.988
0.260
0.256
0.515

0.989
0.248
0.163
0.426

0.14
(0.11)
-0.01
(0.04)
0.01
(0.06)

 , |*

| − |*

 , |

(3)
0.36**
(0.06)

0.992
0.217
-0.111
0.148

0.992
0.219
-0.058
0.298

0.992
0.219
-0.048
0.307

Notes: Target inflation rate ∗ in columns (5), (6), and (7) are taken from Cogley et al. (2010), Coibion
6TU
and Gorodnichenko (2011), and Ireland (2007) respectively. 6TU
, | and | are mean forecasts of
inflation (two quarters ahead) and output growth rate (current quarter) reported in the Survey of
Professional Forecasters. BLOOMSHOCKS are Bloom’s (2009) measure of financial uncertainty,
SPREAD is the difference between Moody’s corporate Baa bonds and 10-year Treasury notes, and
S&P500 is the log of the quarterly average of the S&P 500 index. *,**, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively, using Newey-West HAC standard errors. See
section 7 for details.

39

