NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHITE SUBURBANIZATION AND AFRICAN-AMERICAN HOME OWNERSHIP,
1940-1980
Leah Platt Boustan
Robert A. Margo
Working Paper 16702
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16702
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

We acknowledge the able research assistance of Mary Ann Bronson and Zhuofu Song and financial
support from the Ziman Center for Real Estate at UCLA. Nathaniel Baum-Snow generously shared
data with us. Comments from Stuart Rosenthal, Tara Watson, and workshop participants at the 2010
ASSA meetings, the NBER Development of the American Economy Program Meeting, the All-UC
Economic History conference, Sciences Po, UC-Irvine, the UCLA KALER group, and the University
of Pittsburgh are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Leah Platt Boustan and Robert A. Margo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

White Suburbanization and African-American Home Ownership, 1940-1980
Leah Platt Boustan and Robert A. Margo
NBER Working Paper No. 16702
January 2011, Revised August 2013
JEL No. J71,N92,R21
ABSTRACT
Between 1940 and 1980, the homeownership rate among metropolitan African-American households
increased by 27 percentage points. Nearly three-quarters of this increase occurred in central cities.
We show that rising black homeownership in central cities was facilitated by the movement of white
households to the suburban ring, which reduced the price of urban housing units conducive to owneroccupancy. Our OLS and IV estimates imply that 26 percent of the national increase in black homeownership over the period is explained by white suburbanization.
Leah Platt Boustan
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
lboustan@econ.ucla.edu
Robert A. Margo
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
margora@bu.edu

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

I. Introduction
In 1940, 19 percent of African-American households living in metropolitan areas were
homeowners. By 1980, the metropolitan black owner-occupancy rate had risen to 46 percent, an
increase of 27 percentage points (see Table 1). The dramatic expansion in black owneroccupancy between 1940 and 1980 was not part of a secular trend; indeed, the black home
ownership rate changed very little from 1900 to 1940, and was virtually unaltered between 1980
and 2010 (Collins and Margo, 2011).
Of course, as Table 1 demonstrates, metropolitan white households also increased their
owner-occupancy rate substantially between 1940 and 1980. Among whites, this increase was
associated with a substantial geographic shift from central cities to the suburbs. The suburban
housing stock was (and is) predominately composed of single-family dwellings, the housing
structure type most conducive to owner-occupancy during the period (and today). As a result,
owner-occupancy rates for suburban households, white or black, were always higher than those
of central city dwellers throughout the period.1 A shift-share analysis using the figures in Table 1
establishes that 59 percent of the overall increase in white owner-occupancy in metropolitan
areas between 1940 and 1980 can be explained by the rising share of white households living in
the suburban ring.2 In contrast, the geographic shift to the suburbs can explain only seven
percent of the overall rise in black homeownership between 1940 and 1980 and none whatsoever
from 1940 to 1960. Rather, for black households, the primary proximate cause of the postwar
1

In 1960, 79 percent of suburban housing units were detached, single-family dwellings. Over 80 percent of singlefamily dwellings were owner-occupied in that year, compared with fewer than 20 percent of multi-family dwellings
(see Table 2 for more detail on the relationship between structure and tenancy type). In recent decades occupancy
rates in multi-family dwellings have risen because of the spread of condominium ownership. There were essentially
no condominiums in the United States prior to 1960 and the ownership form had only begun to diffuse by the 1970s
(Lasner, 2012).
2
In a shift-share analysis, the direct effect for whites of the shift to the suburbs is equal to the owner-occupancy rate
of whites living in the suburban ring in 1940 (0.522, see Table 1) multiplied by the increase in percent suburban
between 1940 and 1940 (0.355). The product is 0.171, which accounts for 59 percent of the overall increase in white
owner-occupancy ( = 0.171/0.288 x 100 percent).

1

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

rise in metropolitan homeownership was a substantial increase in rates of owner-occupancy
within central cities.3
We argue that postwar white suburbanization and rising black homeownership in central
cities were not independent phenomena but that the former – white suburbanization – was a
causal factor in the latter – rising black owner-occupancy. In particular, we document that the
rise in black owner-occupancy in central cities was not uniform across the country but increased
faster, on average, in metropolitan areas that experienced greater white outflows to the suburbs.
The positive relationship between rising black ownership and white suburbanization is highly
robust and persists when instrumenting for white suburbanization with the construction of the
interstate highways, suggesting that the relationship is causal.
We propose that white suburbanization contributed causally to the growth in black
owner-occupancy through the economic functioning of the postwar urban housing market. In
1940, before mass suburbanization, African-American city dwellers faced relatively high
housing prices and rents due to informal barriers that prevented blacks from settling in white
neighborhoods, thereby restricting black housing supply (Kain and Quigley, 1972; King and
Mieszkowski, 1973; Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor 1999). As whites began leaving central cities
the user costs of owner-occupancy faced by African Americans relative to renting decreased and
black households responded by increasing their level of homeownership. The effect was
particularly strong in those central cities that featured a substantial pre-existing stock of

3

For blacks, the effect of the increase in owner-occupancy rates in the central city in the shift-share analysis is the
share living in central cities in 1980 (0.724) multiplied by the change in black owner-occupancy rate in central cities
between 1940 and 1980 (0.271). The product is 0.196, which accounts for 73 percent of the overall rise in black
metropolitan owner-occupancy (=0.196/0.270 x 100 percent). If the same calculation is performed for the 1940 to
1960 period, the product is 0.146, which accounts for 80 percent of the overall rise in the black metropolitan owneroccupancy. Beginning in the 1970s, African-Americans started to suburbanize, a trend that accelerated after 1980.
As Table 1 shows, the overall rate of black owner-occupancy was approximately constant between 1980 and 2010
but within central cities or the suburbs, owner-occupancy was lower in 2010 than in 1980. The constancy of the
overall rate can be attributed entirely, therefore, to black suburbanization after 1980.

2

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

detached, single family dwellings occupied by white homeowners prior to postwar white
suburbanization.4
A large literature has attributed historical and contemporary racial disparities in home
ownership to racial differences in “permanent” income and access to mortgage finance and to
housing market discrimination (see, for example; Gyourko, Linneman, and Wachter, 1999;
Deng, Ross, and Wachter, 2003; Gabriel and Rosenthal, 2005; Haurin, Herbert, and Rosenthal
2007). Changes in each of these factors likely contributed to the rise in black homeownership in
the mid-twentieth century. Labor economists, for example, have documented substantial gains in
African-American real incomes and educational attainment between 1940 and 1980 (Smith and
Welch 1989; Donohue and Heckman 1991), attributes that are positively related to owneroccupancy. A vast expansion in mortgage finance took place between 1940 and 1980, some of
which reached African-American households, despite “redlining” and other discriminatory
practices of the era (Collins and Margo 2011; Fetter, 2013). Fair housing legislation aimed at
eliminating housing market discrimination was passed at the federal level in 1968, and similar
laws preceded the federal act in some states and cities. However, none of these factors plausibly
account for the strong geographic relationship we observe at the metropolitan area level between
black central city homeownership and white suburbanization.5

4

It is usually more efficient (that is, user costs are lower) when the owner of a detached, single-family dwelling is
also the occupier (Henderson and Ioannides, 1983; Glaeser and Shapiro, 2003). We discuss this relationship in more
detail in section II.
5
There are three reasons why these conventional explanations for the racial gap in home ownership cannot explain
the observed relationship between white suburbanization and black owner-occupancy. First, we show that this
relationship holds even after controlling for median income at the city level or for household income in a sample of
black households in central cities. Second, both the postwar expansion of mortgage finance and the federal fair
housing laws occurred throughout the nation, not in select metropolitan areas with above-average levels of white
suburbanization. Finally, we observe the suburbanization effect prior to 1970, before the federal fair housing law
could have had much impact. Similar laws passed at the state and local level prior to 1968 are also thought to have
been largely ineffective; see Collins (2004).

3

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Our findings are based on a new panel dataset of household counts that we construct for
98 metropolitan areas from 1940 to 1980 by race, location (central city or suburb), and
ownership status that corrects for changes over time in central city boundaries. Our baseline OLS
estimate implies that every 1,000 white departures from the typical central city generated 87
black owner-occupiers.
The OLS estimate may be biased away from zero – that is, may be too large in absolute
value – in the presence of reverse causality, say because rising black incomes encouraged black
households to buy units in white neighborhoods, thereby prompting “white flight” to the suburbs
(Card, Mas, Rothstein, 2008; Boustan, 2010). Conversely, the OLS estimate may be biased
towards zero, for example, because of measurement error. We address endogeneity by
instrumenting for the number of white households in the central city with features of the
Interstate Highway System. New road construction encouraged white households to move to the
suburbs by reducing the cost of commuting from bedroom communities to downtown firms. We
use Baum-Snow’s (2007) detailed dataset on highway construction to compute the predicted
number of completed highway rays passing within one mile of each central city by decade. Our
IV estimate of the effect of white departures on black homeownership is slightly larger but not
significantly different from our OLS estimate, suggesting that any endogeneity bias is small.
Using the IV coefficient we find that, nationwide, 26 percent of the increase in black owneroccupancy in central cities between 1940 and 1980 can be attributed to white suburbanization.
We provide further evidence consistent with our housing market story by documenting
heterogeneity in the relationship between white suburbanization and black ownership across
cities. We find that the estimated treatment effect depends positively on the initial stock of
single-family dwellings conducive to owner-occupancy in the central city. Furthermore, we show

4

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

that the national estimates are driven by cities that were losing white population to the suburbs
over this period, cities that, for historical reasons, attracted relatively large numbers of black
residents. Some suburbanization, especially in the South and West, did not lead to population
loss in the city center but instead was a byproduct of general regional growth; in these growing
cities, the housing market effect we have in mind is not present.
Aside from its contribution to our understanding of racial owner-occupancy gap, our
paper also contributes to a large literature in economics and sociology on the effects of
residential segregation on African-American outcomes. Cutler and Glaeser (1997) argue that,
theoretically, neighborhood segregation can be either beneficial or harmful to minority groups.
Much of the prior literature has found evidence of the latter; blacks living in more segregated
metropolitan areas have suffered from low earnings and educational attainment, at least since
1970 (Massey and Denton, 1993; Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor, 1999; Collins and Margo, 2000;
Ananat, 2011). Our paper demonstrates that white suburbanization, a major source of segregation
between city and suburb during the period of analysis, may have had a “silver lining” in that it
facilitated black owner-occupancy in an era when broader opportunities for black wealth
accumulation were limited.. Homeownership contributes to wealth accumulation at the
household level (Green and White 1997; Turner and Luea, 2009) and is an important factor in
reducing the overall black-white wealth gap (Blau and Graham, 1990; Charles and Hurst, 2002).
Indeed, despite the fiscal crises that befell some cities in the late 1960s and 1970s, the value of
black owner-occupied housing in central cities appreciated at a rate equal to the general
metropolitan housing stock (2.6 percent average annual) from 1940 to 1980 (Collins and Margo
2003).

5

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

II. White Suburbanization and Black Central City Homeownership: A Conceptual
Framework, 1940-1980
This section provides a series of historical and conceptual arguments that together
establish a possible connection between white departures from central cities and rising rates of
urban black homeownership in the mid-twentieth century.
First, from 1940 to 1980, white urban households relocated to the suburban ring while
black urban households remained in the central city. Suburbanization was driven, in large part,
by rising real incomes after World War II and by the construction of the new Interstate Highway
System (Margo, 1992; Baum-Snow, 2007). Table 1 illustrates that the share of white
metropolitan households living in the suburban ring increased from 36 to 68 percent over our
period, while the share of black metropolitan households in the suburbs rose only from 19 to 28
percent. Although black households had lower incomes, on average, than their white
counterparts, the racial disparity in suburbanization rates cannot be explained by differential
income levels.6 Instead, low rates of black suburbanization can likely be attributed to formal and
informal barriers against black entry into predominately-white suburban towns.7
Second, despite being weighted toward multi-family apartment buildings, the housing
stock in central cities was composed of a combination of single-family and multi-family units. In
the urban core, land is expensive relative to capital. As a result, housing tends to be densely
constructed in order to economize on land use. That said, except in isolated cases – Manhattan is

6

For example, in 1960, we estimate that a 10 percent increase in income (or, around $4,000 in 2010 dollars) among
metropolitan whites was associated with a 1.2 percentage point rise in the likelihood of living in the suburbs; this
relationship is strongly statistically significant (see also Margo 1992). However, a 10 percent increase in income for
metropolitan blacks ($2,200) raises the likelihood of living in the suburbs by only 0.02 percentage points, a
vanishingly small amount that cannot be statistically distinguished from zero.
7
There is considerable qualitative evidence that, in the mid-twentieth century, overt acts of racial discrimination
constrained black housing choices, especially in suburban areas (see, for example, Sugrue, 1996 and Wiese, 2004).
Prior to the passage of federal legislation in 1968, private individuals in many states – real estate agents, bankers,
owners of housing developments – were legally free to steer black customers away from white neighborhoods or to
refuse to sell or rent property to black households outright (McAllister, 2009).

6

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

the prime example – there are neighborhoods of single family dwellings in every central city. In
1960, for example, the middle of our period, 44 percent of white households in central city
neighborhoods lived in detached, single-family units (see Table 2).
Third, detached single family units are more likely to be owner-occupied, both in theory
and in empirical fact. Theory suggests that the optimal contractual form for detached, singlefamily dwellings is owner-occupancy (Henderson and Ioannides, 1983; Glaeser and Shapiro,
2003). Because landlords are unable to fully monitor tenants, the externality of efficient care of
the property can only be internalized if the owner of the dwelling is also the occupant. The
public-goods aspects to the maintenance or upgrading of multi-family dwellings imply that
individual owners may be tempted to free ride on the effort of others. The user cost to the renter
in this case may be less than the user cost under owner-occupancy subject to the free-riding
problem.8
Consistent with these theoretical arguments, there is a very strong empirical relationship
between structure type and ownership rates. Table 2 presents the ownership-structure type
patterns for white and black households living in central cities in 1960; this relationship is nearly
identical in the suburbs and is stable across decades.9 Ownership falls monotonically with the
number of separate housing units at a given address. 83 percent of white residents in detached
single-family dwellings are owner-occupiers, compared to only 8 percent of white residents in

8

The externality can be mitigated by legal arrangements such as cooperatives or condominiums. Historically,
cooperatives were very limited in the United States, and condominium ownership only began to diffuse in the 1970s;
see Lasner (2012).
9
We find qualitatively similar relationships between structure type and ownership in 1930 and 1980. Data on units
in the structure is not available in 1940; however, we are able to examine a somewhat similar census variable
reporting the number of households living at the same address in 1930 (this variable cannot distinguish ownership
status for detached versus attached single family units, unlike the variable for 1960 and 1980). In 1930, 58 percent
of white central city households living at a single-household address were owner-occupiers, compared to only 9
percent of white households living at an address with three or more households. In 1980, 85 percent of white central
city households living in a detached, single-family unit were owner-occupiers, compared to 12 percent of white
households in a building with three or more units.

7

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

buildings with three or more housing units. Despite lower overall levels of homeownership for
blacks, a similar relationship between structure type and owner-occupancy holds for black
households.10
Fourth, as white households left central cities at mid-century, the demand for and prices
of centrally-located single-family units declined because whites left behind an existing housing
stock that was highly durable. As Glaeser and Gyourko (2005) argue, housing supply is inelastic
in the face of declining demand given that it takes 20 to 30 years for a typical housing unit to
depreciate sufficiently to be removed from the housing supply. Therefore, white departures are
expected to reduce housing prices in the central city through a decline in demand.11 Table 3
demonstrates that white departures from central cities are associated with reductions in the
median value of owner-occupied housing and the ratio of median housing values to median
rents.12 For the typical city, which lost 25,700 white households from 1940 to 1980, white
departures resulted in an $1,850 decline in the price of owner-occupied housing (in 2000
dollars), leading the ratio of prices to annual rents to fall by one-fifth of a standard deviation. As
our hypothesis predicts, the effect of white departures on the price of owner-occupied housing is
driven by the loss of white homeowners, rather than white renters.13

10

Although very strong, it is important to note that the relationship between structure type and ownership status is
not absolute; at any point in time, some single-family detached units will be rented. Such rentals may be transitory
while the owner waits for a bona fide buyer or while the owner is living elsewhere for some period of time.
11
White movement to the suburbs would not necessarily be expected to lead to a corresponding increase in suburban
housing prices. Housing developers would likely respond to heightened demand by constructing new units in the
suburban ring until the price of suburban housing returned to construction costs.
12
The housing values and rents are not adjusted for the quality of the housing stock, both because the available
Census data on housing quality is poor (including only average number of rooms and average year of unit
construction) and because, in some years, no quality measures are available at all. Therefore, the observed
relationship between white departures and declines in housing prices could be due, in part, to changes in the quality
of housing stock as whites leave the central city.
13
These findings are consistent with Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor (1999) who demonstrate that increases in residential
segregation driven by white departures from integrated areas are associated with falling rents faced by black renters
because white departures free up housing supply for black residents.

8

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Fifth, in addition to lowering the price of single-family units in the central city, white
departures may have influenced the level of discrimination that prospective black home-buyers
face in the city. If the white households that chose to relocate to the suburban ring were those
most averse to racial diversity, their departures may have lowered the likelihood that a black
homebuyer would have encountered a discriminatory home-seller, thereby expanding the share
of the housing stock open to potential black purchase.
Sixth, the falling price of single-family units in the central city coupled with possible
declines in housing discrimination would together increase black homeownership in the central
city. The probability of being an owner-occupier depends, in part, on the price of owneroccupied units relative to rents. Consider a simple user cost model of owner-occupancy, which
holds that:

Pr(owner-occupancy) = f(Z, permanent income, relative user cost of owner-occupancy)

(1)

where Z includes demand shifters such as marital status, family size and the age of the household
head (see, for example, Rosen, 1979 and Goodman, 1988). The probability of owner-occupancy
is assumed to increase with permanent income and decrease with the relative user cost of owneroccupancy. In this case, a decline in the relative price of single-family dwellings in the central
city would encourage some households to shift from renting into ownership. Low-income or
low-wealth households that face credit constraints, as many black households certainly were at
the time, may be particularly sensitive to changes in the relative price of owner-occupancy.14 In

14

To get a sense of the relative incomes of blacks and whites in 1940, consider that, in the typical metropolitan area,
only 23 percent of black renters earned above than the 25th percentile of the white homeowners’ income distribution
and thus could plausibly be in the market for a home purchase. This share was slightly higher in robust industrial

9

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

our empirical work, we control for demand shifters and measures of permanent income by using
either aggregate or individual-level measures of household income and additional demographic
and socio-economic indicators. In some specifications, we add direct indicators of the relative
user cost of owner-occupancy as measured by the ratio between median housing values and
median rents.
To summarize this logic, we argue that white departures from the central city reduced
demand for existing single-family units in the central city, thereby lowering the price of
centrally-located housing conducive to owner-occupancy. As the relative cost of ownership
declined, some black households that were on the margin between renting and ownership became
homeowners.
Berry (1976) and Hirsch (1998) provide detailed historical evidence of the proposed
relationship between white suburbanization and black homeownership at work in a single
metropolitan area, Chicago. Prior to World War Two, the black population in Chicago grew
substantially but black neighborhoods were geographically constrained and housing prices in the
ghetto were high relative to household income. After the war, “there was a vast increase in
housing available in the [suburban ring], and… rapid residential relocation [of white households]
produced a substantial sag in demand in areas of traditional minority residence” (Berry, p. 417).
Hirsch (p.28) confirms that “as vacancies began to appear around established black communities
in the late 1940s and 1950s, black ‘pioneers,’ eager to escape ghetto conditions and both willing
and able to compete economically for the inner-city housing becoming available, moved into
previously all-white neighborhoods.” Local officials in Chicago estimated that “for every 100
units built in the suburbs… 15 dwelling units [in the city shifted] from white to black

cities like Milwaukee, WI and Pittsburgh, PA (around 30 percent) and was highest in small cities in the West such as
Portland, OR.

10

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

occupancy” (cited in Hirsch, p. 28). Berry classifies 76 percent of the housing transactions in
central city Chicago from 1968 to 1972, a four year period of (very) rapid change, as sales from
white to black households. He calculates that approximately 37,000 black households in the
central city purchased their own home over this period as a result of this turnover.
Although the evidence from Chicago is consistent with our argument, it is based on a
single case study and it is not clear whether it can be generalized to other cities. In the next
section, we use a newly constructed panel data set of metropolitan areas to estimate a broader
treatment effect of white suburbanization on black central city homeownership in a large set of
cities. Later in the paper we extend the empirical analysis to consider heterogeneous effects
across cities.

III. Empirical Analysis
A. Data and estimating equations
Our primary dataset consists of newly-collected aggregate counts of black and white
households by location in the metropolitan area (central city or suburb) and tenure status (renters
and owners). We compile these figures for 98 metropolitan areas over five Census decades (1940
to 1980).15 A key feature of our data is that the geographic area of the central city and the
surrounding suburbs are held constant over time using the 1950 central city boundary.
Annexation of peripheral land was a common means of city growth during the 1950s and 1960s.
As a city expands in land area, the number of white households in the central city rises
mechanically, potentially masking any white mobility out of neighborhoods near the urban core.
It is important, therefore, to correct for these boundary changes. To do so, we follow Baum15

Our sample includes metropolitan areas that either: (1) were anchored by one of the l00 largest cities in 1940 or
(2) had at least 250,000 residents by 1980. Note that the sample has fewer than 100 areas because some metropolitan
areas have more than one central city.

11

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Snow’s (2007) division of Census tracts into those inside and outside of the 1950 city
boundaries. We then use tract data from 1960, 1970 and 1980 for Census tracts inside the 1950
city to calculate geographically consistent counts of households living within the 1950 central
city boundaries.16 By this definition, any household living outside of the 1950 central city is
considered to be suburban, even if the land on which it resides was later annexed into the city.
For our main analysis, we pool household counts from 1940 to 1980 and estimate:

NUM_BLACK_OWNijt = β(NUM_WHITE)ijt+ ΓXijt + αi + δt + (λj · δt) + εijt

(2)

where the subscript i indexes metropolitan areas, j indicates the state, and t is the Census year.
NUM_BLACK_OWN is the number of black households in the central city of metropolitan area
i who are owner-occupiers and NUM_WHITE is the total number of white households in that
city. Because metropolitan areas differ in population size, the vector X contains three population
controls – the number of black households in the city; the number of white households in the
metropolitan area; and the number of black households in the metropolitan area.17 We also
include metropolitan area (αi) and Census year (δt) fixed effects, along with interaction between
state and Census year (λj · δt).
The coefficient β indicates how the number of black homeowners changes with increases
or decreases in the number of white households in the central city. The magnitude of β is easily
interpretable as the number of units that are converted into black owner-occupied housing for

16

This approach is not affected by changes in Census tract coverage over time because all of the central cities in our
sample were fully tracted by 1960, the year in which we start using tract data to recreate the 1950 central city
boundaries. The Census Bureau did add tract coverage in suburban areas and in smaller cities from 1970 onward
(see Rosenthal, 2008 for details on the expansion of Census tract coverage over time).
17
In particular, it is necessary to control for the number of black households in the central city because an increase
in this number is mechanically related to the number of black owner-occupants. The coefficients of the population
control variables are not reported in the tables but are available from the authors on request.

12

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

every white household that leaves the central city. We predict that black homeownership will
increase as white households leave the city (that is, β < 0).
As a robustness check, we conduct an analysis with household-level records from the
Integrated Public-Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) in 1940 and 1980. Limitations of the micro
data prevent us from incorporating observations in the intervening years (1950 through 1970).18
Our sample includes nearly 47,000 African-American households that lived in a central city in
one of the 98 metropolitan areas from our aggregate dataset that can be consistently identified in
the micro-data in 1940 and 1980.
In our household-level regressions, we stack the micro data from 1940 and 1980 and
estimate:

I(OWN)kit = γ(NUM_WHITE)jt + ΓXijt + ΔZkit + αi + δt + εkit

(3)

where k indexes households in the central city of metropolitan area i at time t.19 I(OWN) is an
indicator function equal to one if a sample household owns the home that it occupies and Z is a
vector of characteristics of the household head. These household-level controls include a
quadratic in the age of the household head, dummy variables for the head’s gender, marital
status, and educational attainment, and the logarithm of household income. Standard errors are

18

Homeownership status is not reported in the 1950 IPUMS. The 1960 IPUMS does not identify the metropolitan
area in which a household resides. In 1970, one sample identifies a household’s metropolitan area but not its
location within the area (central city versus suburb), while the other does not identify the metropolitan area of
residence.
19
In 1980, the Census adopted the “householder” definition of household headship – the household head was the
person who either owned the home or, if the dwelling was rented, the person in whose name the unit was leased.
Prior to 1980, the Census did not adopt a formal rule linking headship to ownership although it is widely presumed
by scholars that, in the case of owner-occupied housing, the owner was designated as the household head; see
Collins and Margo (2011).

13

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

clustered by metropolitan area. In this regression we expect that γ < 0; that is, as more whites
leave the central city, the probability of black homeownership increases.20

B. OLS estimates: White departures from cities and black homeownership
We begin our empirical analysis with the aggregate household data. The first columns in
Table 4 report estimates of β from OLS regressions of the household counts specification in
equation 2. Regressions contain metropolitan area and year fixed effects and allow each state to
have its own time trend. In the basic specification, we find that, for every 1,000 white household
departures from the central city, 87 black households transition into homeownership. Column 2
controls for median family income and the price-to-rent ratio, both measured at the city level.21
Adding these controls reduces the coefficient interest by 10 percent but it is still large and
statistically significant. As we would expect from the arguments presented earlier and the
evidence in Table 3, raising the price of owner-occupied units relative to rental rates reduces the
number of black homeowners, although this relationship is not precisely estimated. In column 3,
we separately enter the number of white owner-occupiers and the number of white renters in the
city on the right-hand side. Reassuringly, black homeownership is more strongly related to the
departure of white owners than to the departure of white renters. We would not expect the
coefficient on white renters to be zero because 30 percent of white renters lived in detached,
single-family units conducive to owner-occupancy in 1960.22

20

At the metropolitan area level, the dependent variable in specification (3) is equivalent to the black owneroccupancy rate, not the count of black homeowners. As noted in the text, however, we control for the number of
black households in the central city in specification (2) and thus the empirical analyses are conceptually similar.
21
Note that the median family income and price-to-rent ratio variables are measured for the actual city boundaries.
We cannot measure these variables using consistent 1950 boundaries because both income and housing prices are
reported as medians at the tract level, which cannot then be aggregated up to the (constant) city level.
22
We also estimated the relationship between white departures and black homeownership on a decade-by-decade
basis. The strongest association between these variables occurs in the 1960s, during which 1,000 white departures is
associated with 134 new black homeowners. This pattern is consistent with the fact that, in this decade, the racial

14

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

C. Predicted highway rays as an instrument for white departures
OLS estimates will be biased if white location decisions are directly influenced by black
homeownership or are correlated with unobserved characteristics of the city that also predict
black homeownership. A correlation between white suburbanization and black homeownership
could arise if, for example, the demand for black homeownership increases and the housing stock
in black neighborhoods is not conducive to owner-occupancy, leading prospective black
homeowners to move into white neighborhoods. White households concerned about living near
black neighbors may then move to the suburbs, generating a positive relationship between black
homeownership and white suburbanization and biasing the OLS estimates upward (that is, too
large in absolute value). Alternatively, the coefficient may be biased towards zero by
measurement error.
To address endogeneity bias, we look for an instrumental variable that is correlated with
the share of whites living in the suburban ring but is otherwise uncorrelated with the black
homeownership rate. We instrument for the white suburban share using the predicted number of
interstate highway rays built within one mile of the central city between 1950 and 1980
(PREDICTED_RAYS). The original plan for the Interstate Highway System was drafted in 1947
with the dual goals of serving national defense and inter-city commerce. Baum-Snow (2007)
determined the total number of rays that were assigned to each central city in the 1947 plan.
After the plan was established, local politicians could lobby the federal government to build
extra highway miles through their city and were more likely to do so if there was a high demand
for suburbanization in their area. Therefore, we predict the number of completed rays in each
city i at time t by interacting the number of assigned rays in the 1947 plan with the national share

barriers in mortgage finance and in residency in certain neighborhoods began to break down. That being said, we
find no relationship between white departures and black homeownership from 1970 to 1980.

15

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

of highway construction completed by date t. Our assumption is that the national rate of highway
construction is not influenced by the demand conditions in any one city.23
Our first stage regression relates the number of white households in the central city to the
predicted number of highway rays passing through the city, controlling for metropolitan area and
Census year fixed effects and the full set of population controls in equation 2:

NUM_WHITE it = ρ(PREDICTED_RAYS)it + ΦXijt + αi + δt + εit

(4)

Baum-Snow (2007) demonstrates that this instrument is correlated with overall population loss
from central cities; thus, not surprisingly, we find a strong first stage relationship between
predicted highway rays and white departures. The fourth column of Table 4 (last row) presents
our estimate of ρ from equation 4. The coefficient is negative and large; each new planned
highway that we predict to be built through the central city leads to the departure of 8,000 white
households from the central city (on a base of around 100,000). The F-statistic on predicted
highway rays is 16.94, well above the conventional value of 10 used to judge an instrument’s
strength.
The fourth column of Table 4 (first row) presents the IV coefficient of white departures
using predicted highway rays to instrument for the number of white households in a city. The IV
coefficient is slightly larger (in absolute value) than its OLS counterpart, but the two estimates
cannot be statistically distinguished from each other. According to the IV estimate, every 1,000
white household departures from the central city generates 108 new black homeowners. The
typical city lost 25,700 white households from 1940 to 1980 and gained 10,400 black

23

Because construction of the interstate highways began in 1954, we set the number of highway rays in every city at
zero in 1940.

16

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

homeowners. By our IV estimate, white departures would have generated 2,700 new black
homeowners (= -108 · -25.7), which can explain 26 percent of the growth in black homeowners
(= 2,700/10,400); if instead we use the OLS estimate, white departures can explain 21 percent of
the growth in black homeownership (= 2,200/10,400).24
The identifying assumption for the instrumental variables procedure is that highway
construction is only related to black homeownership through its effect on white departures. Some
scholars argue that interstate highways tended to be built through black neighborhoods, thereby
reducing the stock of housing available to black households (Sevilla, 1971; Frieden and Sagalyn,
1989; Lewis, 1997). The evidence cited in these earlier studies, however, is largely anecdotal. In
a recent paper, Collins and Shester (2013) show that urban renewal projects, similarly accused of
clearing black neighborhoods, had no effect on a city’s black population share or its degree of
racial residential segregation. In addition, if highways did reduce opportunities for black
homeownership, we would expect the estimated effect of white departures in the IV specification
to be smaller in absolute value than its OLS counterpart, yet we find the opposite.

D. Household-level data on black homeownership, 1940 and 1980
The individual characteristics of black households that settle in cities that are losing white
population may be systematically different from those of black households in growing areas. We
address this concern in Table 5 by using the 1940 and 1980 micro data to control for householdlevel characteristics. In particular, we estimate the relationship between the probability of black
24

Over this period, around 50 percent of white households in central cities were homeowners, suggesting that the
typical city lost roughly 13,000 white owner-occupiers (= 25,700 * 0.50). If every new black homeowner moved
into a housing unit recently vacated by a white owner, then 80 percent of vacated units would be filled by new black
homeowners (=10,400/13,000), leaving only 20 percent vacant or converted into a rental unit. If, instead, some
portion of new black homeowners moved into newly constructed units in growing central cities, then perhaps up to
40 percent of the units vacated by whites remained vacant or were converted to rental occupancy. These patterns are
consistent with the high transaction cost of converting a unit conducive to owner-occupancy into a rental unit, due
both to structure type and to the reinforcing factors of lot size and zoning regulations.

17

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

homeownership (equivalent to the black homeownership rate at the aggregate level) and the
number of white households living in the central city from equation 3, controlling for other
aspects of the city and metropolitan population.
The first column of Table 5 estimates the main relationship in the micro data without
adding household-level controls. In this case, we find that 1,000 white departures increase the
black homeownership rate by 0.05 percentage points. For comparison with the aggregate data,
column 2 presents a weighted regression, ensuring that each city, rather than each individual, is
counted equally. The strength of the estimated relationship increases to 0.08 percentage points.
Column 3 then includes our extensive set of household characteristics. Including these controls
reduces the estimate by around 15 percent to 0.07 percentage points but we still find a large and
statistically significant relationship between white departures and the black homeownership
rate.25 The coefficients in the individual-level regressions are nearly identical to those derived
from a regression of the aggregate black homeownership rate on the number of white households
living in the central city (coeff. = -0.00079, s.e. = 0.00033).26 Finally, in column 4, we add the
city-wide ratio of median home values to median rents. Adding this measure of housing price
pressure cuts the responsiveness of the black homeownership rate to white departures in half,
suggesting that a portion of the effect of suburbanization on black homeownership can be
explained by the price mechanism outlined in the conceptual framework.27

25

Results are qualitatively similar if we instead use probit estimation (coeff. = -0.00086, s.e. = 0.00026).
The implied response to white departures is smaller in regressions that use the homeownership rate as a dependent
variable than in the main specification, which uses homeownership counts. The typical city in our sample had
42,000 black households in 1980. According to coefficients from the homeownership rate regressions, the loss of
1,000 white households from the central city would have increased the black homeownership rate by only 34
households (= 42,000 * 0.0008), which is only half as large as the point estimates in Table 4. This discrepancy can
be explained by the fact that white departures had a greater effect on black homeownership in cities with a large
black population (see Table 6),a pattern that generates larger point estimates in the ownership count specification.
The two estimates would be reconciled in a city with around 100,000 black households (87 = 109,000 * 0.0008).
27
Prospective black homeowners may be more responsive to the value of below-median homes. Information on the
distribution of housing values for each of our cities can be computed from the 1940 and 1980 IPUMS; in particular,
26

18

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

E. Heterogeneous effects of white departures by city type
We find a sizeable relationship between black central city homeownership and white
suburbanization nationwide over the period 1940 to 1980. This section explores variation in the
strength of this relationship across metropolitan areas.
Table 6 examines how the core relationship between the number of white households and
the number of black homeowners in a city varies across different subsamples. In the first column,
we interact the change in the number of white households with two features of the housing
market: the share of units that are owner-occupied and the black share of all households (as a
proxy for the black share of prospective homebuyers). We measure these characteristics in 1940,
before the rise of either white suburbanization or black homeownership, to capture initial
differences in housing markets across cities.
We expect the relationship between white departures and black homeownership to be
stronger in cities with a large initial stock of units conducive to owner-occupancy. If the housing
stock is instead primarily made up of rental units, the effect of white departures will be
attenuated. We find that cities with a larger initial stock of owner-occupied housing experience a
sharper increase in black homeownership for every white departure. In 1940, the urban owneroccupied share ranged between 15 and 55 percent. This 40 percentage point difference in initial
owner-occupancy is associated with an additional 147 black owners for every 1,000 white
departures (= -367 · 0.4).
The relationship between white departures and black homeownership may also depend on
the racial composition of the pool of prospective homebuyers. If whites constitute the majority of
we calculated the ratio of home values at the 25th percentile to median rents across cities in the 1940 and 1980. We
find a very similar effect of each ratio on black homeownership in these years. In particular, the coefficient on the
median-median ratio is -0.012 (s.e. = 0.005) and the coefficient on the 25th percentile-median ratio is -0.014 (s.e. =
0.006). These figures imply that a one standard deviation increase in the price-rent ratio would reduce black
homeownership by 7.2 percentage points.

19

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

prospective homebuyers, white sellers can easily find white buyers without needing to
compromise on price. However, if many prospective homebuyers are black, sellers who chose to
limit their market to white buyers would incur a large price penalty for doing so and, thus, sellers
would more likely opt to sell to black buyers. Indeed, we find that white departures have a
stronger effect on black homeownership in cities with a large initial black household share. In
1940, the black urban household share ranged between zero and 50 percent. This 50 percentage
point difference in initial racial composition is associated with an additional 144 black owners
for every 1,000 white departures (= -289 · 0.5).
The final heterogeneous effect that we explore concerns the role of overall white
population growth or decline.28 The arguments outlined in section 2 identify white
suburbanization with literal departures of whites from the central city. This is an accurate
description for many of the industrial cities of the Northeast and Midwest that attracted black inmigrants during the first (World War One) and second (World War Two) waves of the “Great
Migration” from the rural South. However, in growing metropolitan areas in the South and the
West, the white population – both city and suburban -- expanded through in-migration. The
treatment effect we are interested in would arguably be strongest in cities that were losing white
residents, rather than in cities that were otherwise expanding and adding new housing units.
The third and fourth columns of Table 6 examine this hypothesis explicitly by splitting
the sample into metropolitan areas that experienced net gains or losses in the white central city
population from 1940 to 1980. Consistent with a simple model of housing supply with durable
28

Following up on footnote 14, we also explored the impact of variation across cities in the proportion of black
households with income higher than the level at the 25th percentile among white owner-occupiers. In particular, we
included an interaction term between this variable and the number of white households leaving the central city using
the specification reported in Table 6. The coefficient on the interaction term is positive, meaning that white
departures have a smaller impact on black home purchases in areas where black income is high; this finding is
consistent with the idea that blacks in some areas faced credit constraints. However, the standard error is quite large
and so we hesitate to interpret this finding (coeff. -= 44.16; st. err. = 148.56).

20

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

housing, we find essentially no relationship between the number of white households in a city
and black homeownership in areas that were gaining white population. For the typical growing
city, the estimates suggest that 1,000 white departures were associated with 6 fewer black
homeowners, a tiny and statistically insignificant relationship.29 In other words, white arrivals do
not compete with existing or new black residents for owner-occupied housing, presumably
because, in these growing cities, new units are being constructed to house the expanding
population.
In contrast, there is strong relationship between the number of white households and
black homeownership in cities that were losing white population over our period. For the typical
city with net white population loss, 1,000 white departures were associated with 222 additional
black homeowners.30 As we have argued, as white households left these cities and the housing
stock remained, a portion of the vacated units were sold to prospective black buyers. It is
important to recognize that a sizeable majority of urban black households over our period – 75
percent in 1980 – lived in such cities and, thus, potentially, was “at risk” of experiencing the
particular pathway into homeownership emphasized in this paper. .
Among the 53 cities that lost white population from 1940 to 1980, the strength of the
relationship between white departures and black homeownership varied according to initial
housing market characteristics. Figure 1 uses the coefficients from the third column of Table 6 to
predict the number of new black homeowners for every 1,000 white departures by city. 1,000
white departures would lead to only 50 new black homeowners in New York City, in which 15

29

The typical growing city had an initial housing stock that was 37 percent owner-occupied and was 10 percent
black in 1940.
30
Similarly, the typical declining city had an initial housing stock that was 34 percent owner-occupied share was 10
percent black in 1940.

21

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

percent of the housing stock was made up of owner-occupied units in 1940.31 On the other
extreme, 1,000 white departures generated 450 new black homeowners in Birmingham, AL, a
city with a high black population share (41 percent) and a larger share of owner-occupied units
(29 percent) in 1940.
Figure 2 combines the predicted strength of white suburbanization by city from the prior
figure with the actual number of white departures over the 1960s. According to our estimates,
3,000 black households in the typical city became homeowners due to white departures during
the 1960s. However, in a few cities over 10,000 new black homeowners were created by white
suburbanization over this decade. One such city happens to be Chicago, the subject of Berry’s
(1976) original study; Detroit and Oakland (CA) are other examples. These three cities were
characterized by sizeable central city black populations during the period, a large number of
white departures from the urban core, and a city housing stock initially conducive to owneroccupancy – prime examples of the effect documented in this paper.

IV. Concluding Remarks
The share of metropolitan white households living in the suburbs increased from
approximately one-third in 1940 to two-thirds in 1980. Over the same period, the rate of
homeownership among black households living in central cities more than doubled from 15
percent to 42 percent. This paper argues that there was a causal link between white
suburbanization and rising black homeownership. As white households left central cities, the
price of housing units conducive to owner-occupancy fell and many black households on the

31

Central cities exhibited tremendous variation in the share of housing units that were owner-occupied in 1940. The
mean owner-occupied share in that year was 36 percent with a standard deviation of 8 percent. At the low end were
old cities in the Northeast, including New York City, Boston and Hartford, CT. At the high end were small cities in
the Midwest (Fort Wayne and South Bend, IN) and the West (Tacoma, WA).

22

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

margin of renting and ownership chose to become homeowners. Although city neighborhoods
were residentially segregated by race, black and white neighborhoods were interconnected
through the urban housing market. We estimate that, on average, around 100 black households
became homeowners for every 1,000 white households leaving the central city between 1940 and
1980.
The effect of white suburbanization on black owner-occupancy in central cities was
largely confined to the mid-twentieth century for three historical reasons. First, the “Great
Migration” of African-Americans from the rural South to industrial cities in the North and West
began during World War One and peaked in the decade of World War Two (Gregory, 2005). By
mid-century, metropolitan areas like Detroit, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, and Chicago had substantial
black populations living in their central cores. Secondly, the particular timing of changes in
transportation technology and infrastructure facilitated mass white suburbanization only after
World War Two. Had technical advances in the internal combustion engine and the development
of America’s highway system occurred a half century earlier, the prospective home buyers
interested in these centrally-located homes would likely have been immigrants from Europe.
Thirdly, black households eventually gained access to the suburbs. Beginning in the 1970s,
increasing numbers of middle-class urban black families in search of owner-occupied housing
could (and did) access the suburbs directly, as Table 1 shows. To such families, a home in the
suburbs was arguably a more desirable as a place to live and as an investment than remaining in
the central city, particularly in cities that had experienced net outflows of whites between 1940
and 1980, where our estimates show that “treatment effect” of white suburbanization on black
homeownership were largest historically.

23

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

This paper has stressed the direct effects of white suburbanization on black
homeownership. However, at the neighborhood level, higher rates of homeownership can have
positive effects on social capital and may forestall urban decay (Dietz and Haurin, 2003;
Rosenthal 2008). A useful extension therefore would be to investigate if the formation of socalled “bad ghettos” after World War Two (see Collins and Margo, 2000) was slower in central
cities in which relatively larger numbers of black households became homeowners due to white
suburbanization.

24

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

References
Ananat, Elizabeth O. 2011. “The Wrong Side(s) of the Tracks: The Causal Effect of Racial
Segregation on Urban Poverty and Inequality,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 3:2, 34-66.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122:2, 775-805.
Berry, Brian J. L. 1976. “Ghetto Expansion and Single-family Housing Prices, 1968-1972,”
Journal of Urban Economics 3:4, 397-423.
Blau, Francine D. and John W. Graham. 1990. “Black-White Differences in Wealth and Asset
Composition,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105:2, 321-339.
Boustan, Leah P. 2010. “Was Postwar Suburbanization ‘White Flight’? Evidence from the
Black Migration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125:1, 417-443.
Card, David, Alexandre Mas and Jesse Rothstein. 2008. “Tipping and the Dynamics of
Segregation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123:1, 177-218.
Charles, Kerwin and Erik Hurst. 2002. “The Transition to Home Ownership and the Black-White
Wealth Gap,” Review of Economics and Statistics 84:2, 281-297.
Collins, William J. 2004. “The Housing Market Impact of State-Level Anti-Discrimination
Laws, 1960-1970,” Journal of Urban Economics 55:3, 534-564.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. 2000. “Residential Segregation and Socioeconomic
Outcomes: When Did Ghettos Go Bad?” Economics Lettters 69:2, 239-243.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. 2003. “Race and the Value of Owner-Occupied
Housing,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 33: 2, 255-286.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. 2011. “Race and Homeownership from the Civil War
to the Present,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 101:3, 355-359.
Collins, William J. and Katharine Shester. 2013. “The Economic Effects of Slum Clearance and
Urban Renewal in the United States,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
5:1, 239-273.
Cutler, David and Edward Glaeser. 1997. “Are Ghettos Good or Bad?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112:3, 827-872.
Cutler, David, Edward Glaeser, and Jacob Vigdor. 1999. “The Rise and Decline of the American
Ghetto,” Journal of Political Economy 107:3, 455-506.

25

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Deng, Yongheng, Stephen L. Ross, and Susan M. Wachter. 2003. “Racial Differences in
Homeownership: The Effect of Residential Location,” Regional Science and Urban
Economics 33, 517-556.
Dietz, Robert D. and Donald R. Haurin. 2003. “The Social and Private Micro-level
Consequences of Homeownership,” Journal of Urban Economics 54:3, 401-450.
Fetter, Daniel. 2013. “How Do Mortgage Subsidies Affect Home Ownership? Evidence from the
Mid-Century GI Bills,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5:2, 114-147.
Frieden, Bernard and Lynne Sagalyn. 1989. Downtown, Inc. How America Rebuilds Cities.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gabriel, Stuart A. and Stuart S. Rosenthal. 2005. “Homeownership in the 1980s and 1990s:
Aggregate Trends and Racial Gaps,” Journal of Urban Economics 57:1, 101-127.
Glaeser, Edward and Joseph Gyourko. 2005. “Urban Decline and Durable Housing,” Journal of
Political Economy 113(2), 345-375.
Glaeser, Edward and Jesse Shapiro. 2003. “The Benefits of the Home Mortgage Interest
Deduction,” in James Poterba, ed. Tax Policy and the Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Goldin, Claudia. 1994. “The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction: The United States,
1890-1921,” in C. Goldin and G. Libecap, eds. The Regulated Economy: An Historical
Analysis of Government and the Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goodman, Allen C. 1988. “An Econometric Model of Housing Price, Permanent Income, Tenure
Choice and Housing Demand,” Journal of Urban Economics 23, 327-353.
Green, Richard and Michelle White. 1997. “Measuring the Benefits of Homeowning: Effects on
Children,” Journal of Urban Economics 41:3, 441-461.
Gregory, James N. 2005. The Southern Diaspora: How the Great Migrations of Black and White
Southerners Transformed America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Gyourko, Joseph, Peter Linneman and Susan Wachter. 1999. “Analyzing the Relationships
among Race, Wealth, and Home Ownership in America,” Journal of Housing Economics
8:2, 63–89
Haurin, Donald R., Christopher E. Herbert and Stuart S. Rosenthal. 2007. “Homeownership
Gaps Among Low-Income and Minority Households,” Cityscape 9:2, 5-51.
Henderson, J. Vernon and Yannis M. Ioannides. 1983. “A Model of Housing Tenure Choice,”
American Economic Review 73:1, 98-113.

26

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Hirsch, Arnold R. 1998. Making the Second Ghetto: Race and Housing in Chicago, 1940-1960.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kain, John F. and John M. Quigley. 1972. “Housing Market Discrimination, Home-ownership,
and Savings Behavior,” American Economic Review 62:3, 263-277
King, A. Thomas and Peter Mieszkowski. 1973. “Racial Discrimination, Segregation, and the
Price of Housing,” Journal of Political Economy 81:3, 590-606
Lasner, Matthew. 2012. High Life: Condo Living in the Suburban Century. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Lewis, Tom. 1997. Divided Highways: Building the Interstate Highways, Transforming
American Life. New York: Viking Press.
Margo, Robert A. 1992. “Explaining the Postwar Suburbanization of Population in the
United States: The Role of Income,” Journal of Urban Economics 31, 301-310.
Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton. 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and the
Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McAllister, David. 2009. “Realtors and Racism in Working-Class Philadelphia, 1945-1970.” In
Kenneth L. Kusmer and Joe W. Trotter, eds. African-American Urban History Since
World War II. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ruggles, Steven J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
Matthew Sobek. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machinereadable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Rosen, Harvey S. 1979. “Housing Decisions and the U.S. Income Tax,” Journal of Public
Economics 11:1, 1-23.
Rosenthal, Stuart. 2008. “Old Homes, Externalities, and Poor Neighborhoods: A Model of
Urban Decline and Renewal,” Journal of Urban Economics 63:3, 816-840.
Sevilla, Charles M. 1971. “Asphalt Through the Model City: A Study of Highways and the
Urban Poor,” Journal of Urban Law 49, 297-322.
Sugrue, Thomas. 1996. The Origins of the Urban Crisis: Race and Inequality in Postwar Detroit.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Turner, Tracy M. and Heather Luea. 2009. “Homeownership, Wealth Accumulation and Income
Status,” Journal of Housing Economics 18:2, 104-114.
Wiese, Andrew. 2004. Places of Their Own: African-American Suburbanization in the Twentieth
Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
27

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Table 1: Race, Residential Location, and Owner-Occupancy, 1940-1980

1940

Metro population,
Share in suburbs
White
Black
0.355
0.194

Black,
Share owner-occupier
Total
City
Suburbs
0.192
0.150
0.349

White,
Share owner-occupier
Total
City
Suburbs
0.414
0.347
0.522

1960

0.515

0.190

0.374

0.330

0.468

0.661

0.543

0.767

1980

0.682

0.276

0.462

0.421

0.572

0.702

0.561

0.770

2000

0.738

0.382

0.479

0.423

0.570

0.742

0.589

0.796

2010
0.742
0.466
0.457
0.384
0.541
0.720
0.563
0.774
Notes: Authors’ computations from IPUMS. Samples include all metropolitan households whose
place of residence (city or suburb) was reported.

28

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Table 2: Structure type and homeownership, Central cities in 1960
Housing Type
Detached Single Family

White,
Percentage in
43.6%

White,
Owner rate
82.9%

Black,
Percentage in
31.5%

Black,
Owner rate
63.6%

Attached Single Family

8.6

55.1

15.1

35.4

Two Family

13.5

37.3

13.5

25.3

3+ housing units per building

34.3

8.0

39.9

5.6

Total

48.9%

31.1%

Number HH in sample
110,236
19,417
Notes: Authors’ computations from 1960 IPUMS (www.ipums.umn.edu). Samples include all
metropolitan households whose place of residence (city or suburb) was reported. Households in
mobile homes, trailers, boats, etc. are excluded.

29

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Table 3: White departures and the relative price of owner-occupied housing, 1940-1980
White departures from city = Change in # of white households < 0
Dependent variables:
Value, owner-occupied
Value/rent ratio
1. # white HH in city (1000s)
74.007*
0.025*
(28.351)
(0.006)
2. # white own in city (1000s)

118.439*
(55.802)

0.089*
(0.012)

# white rent in city (1000s)

40.431
(46.077)

-0.024*
(0.009)

Mean of dependent variable
68,188
13.939
488
488
N
Notes: Regressions follow the format of equation 2 in text. “Value” and “Rent” are median
values for the central city. All regressions contain vector of population controls (the number of
black households in the central city, the number of black households in the metropolitan area,
and the number of white households in the metropolitan area), metropolitan area fixed effects,
and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by metropolitan area and reported in
parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by metropolitan area and reported in parentheses. * =
significant at the 5 percent level or better. Median value and rent are measured using the actual
city boundaries rather than the constant 1950 city boundaries (see footnote 21).

30

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Table 4: White departures and black homeownership in the central city, 1940-80
Dependent variable = Number of black owner-occupier households in city
White departures from city = Change in # of white households < 0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Method
OLS
OLS
OLS
IV
# white HH in city (1000s)
-86.658*
-74.939*
-107.595*
(7.351)
(9.199)
(36.005)
# white own in city (1000s)

-137.56*
(15.41)

# white rent in city (1000s)

-51.15*
(11.93)

Share whites in city

Median family income

-0.096
(0.061)

Median value/rent ratio

-154.552
(93.295)

First stage: Highway rays

-7.795*
(1.893)

488
390
488
488
N
Notes: Cells contain the coefficient of interest from equation 2 in text; all regressions contain
vector of population controls (the number of black households in the central city, the number of
black households in the metropolitan area, and the number of white households in the
metropolitan area), metropolitan area fixed effects, and state-by-year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered by metropolitan area and reported in parentheses. * = significant at the 5
percent level or better. The control variables in column 2 (median family income and price/rent
ratio) are measured using the actual city boundaries, rather than the consistent 1950 boundaries
(see footnote 21). The first stage coefficient in column 4 reports the coefficient on predicted
highway rays from equation 4, the dependent variable of which is the number of white
households in the central city (in 1,000s).

31

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Table 5: White departures and the probability of homeownership in a sample of black
central city residents, 1940 and 1980
Dependent variable = Indicator equal to one if household is owner-occupier
White departures from city = Change in # of white households < 0
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
# white HH in city (1000s)
-0.00055*
-0.00078*
-0.00073*
-0.00039+
(0.00015)
(0.00021)
(0.00021)
(0.00022)
Weighted
N
Y
Y
Y
Individual controls
N
N
Y
Y
Price/rent ratio
N
N
N
Y
45,137
45,137
45,118
45,788
N
Notes: The sample of black households living in central cities is drawn from the 1940 and 1980
IPUMS. Cells contain the coefficient of interest from equation 3 in text; regressions contain a
vector of population controls (the number of black households in the metropolitan area and the
number of white households in the metropolitan area), metropolitan area fixed effects, and year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by metropolitan area and reported in parentheses. * =
significant at the 5 percent level or better. + = significant at the 10 percent level or better.
Column 1 weights each individual equally, while columns 2-4 weight each city equally.
Individual controls in column 3 include a quadratic in the age of the household head, dummy
variables for the head’s gender, marital status, and educational attainment, and the logarithm of
household income. The price/rent ratio in column 4 divides the median housing value in the
central city by the median annual contract rent.

32

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Table 6: Heterogeneity in the relationship between white suburbanization and black
homeownership by city type
Dependent variable = Number of black owner-occupier households in city
White departures from city = Change in # of white households < 0
(1)
(2)
(3)
Full sample of
45 cities that gained
53 cities that lost
cities
population, 1940-80
population, 1940-80
# white HH in city
25.440*
-31.471
103.503*
(18.075)
(31.039)
(14.553)
# white HH * Share
owner occ, 1940

-366.947*
(60.006)

65.329
(82.329)

-710.148*
(97.895)

# white HH * Share
black, 1940

-289.105*
(132.409)

128.970*
(44.876)

-836.531*
(233.251)

488
224
264
N
Notes: See notes for Table 4 for details on specification. Standard errors are clustered by
metropolitan area and reported in parentheses. * = significant at the 5 percent level or better. The
number of white households in the city is entered in 1,000s. The number of white households is
interacted with the share of housing units in the central city that were owner-occupied in 1940
(mean = 0.357) and the share of the city population that was black in 1940 (mean = 0.105).
Columns 2 and 3 subdivide the sample into cities that experienced a net gain/loss in white
population between 1940 and 1980.

33

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Figure 1: Variation in the estimated number of new black homeowners for every 1,000
white departures by city
500
Birmingham, AL
450
400
Baltimore, MD
350
300
Detroit, MI
250
200
New York City, NY
150
100
50
0

Notes: Predicted number of new black homeowners per 1,000 white departures for 53
cities with net white population loss based on coefficients in Table 6, column 3.

34

Boustan/Margo

August 2013

Figure 2: Variation in the estimated number of new black homeowners generated by white
departures from the city, 1960-70
20000
Detroit, MI
Oakland, CA
15000

Chicago, IL
10000

5000
New York City, NY

0
Canton, OH
-5000

Notes: Number of new black homeowners generated from 1960 to 1970 in response to
white departures. Predictions for 53 cities with net white population loss based on
coefficients in Table 6, column 3.

35

