NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THE ENDOWMENT EFFECT A REFERENCE EFFECT?
Ori Heffetz
John A. List
Working Paper 16715
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16715

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

Corresponding author: Ori Heffetz. We thank Daniel Benjamin, Daniel Kahneman, Botond Koszegi,
Ted O'Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin for helpful discussions; seminar participants at Cornell, the
ESA North American Meetings, Hebrew University, UCSD, and University of Pittsburgh for useful
comments; and Sean Garborg for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Ori Heffetz and John A. List. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Is the Endowment Effect a Reference Effect?
Ori Heffetz and John A. List
NBER Working Paper No. 16715
January 2011
JEL No. C9,D11,Q26
ABSTRACT
This paper is aimed to assess, with two lab experiments, to what extent KĘszegi and Rabin's (2006)
model of expectations-based reference-dependent preferences can explain Knetsch's (1989) endowment
effect. Departing from past work, we design an experiment that treats the two goods (a mug and a
pen) symmetrically in all but in the probabilities with which they are expected to be owned. Thus,RXU
"endowmentless" endowment effect experiment shuts down all alternative mechanisms while leaving
expectations the only difference between treatments. We find no evidence that expectations alone
can reproduce any of the original effect.

Ori Heffetz
324 Sage Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
oh33@cornell.edu
John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

A substantial body of experimental evidence has accumulated since Knetsch’s (1989) first
‘endowment effect’ demonstration, where most subjects chose to keep a randomly-assigned
owned object rather than trade it for another.1 While numerous subsequent studies replicate the original result, recent findings show that the effect may shrink or disappear among
market-experienced subjects (List, 2004), among lab subjects who are trained to trade (Engelmann and Hollard, 2010), or under specific experimental procedures (Plott and Zeiler,
2007).
This large and growing body of experimental evidence is interpreted differently by different observers. In one common interpretation, the effect is seen as evidence of loss aversion, and experiments where it is found are seen as supporting Kahneman and Tversky’s
prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Tversky and Kahneman, 1991). According
to prospect theory, an individual evaluates economic outcomes by comparing them with a reference point (for example, comparing potential consumption bundles with a currently owned
one), and by weighing losses (relative to said reference point) more heavily than gains.2 Under this view, experiments where the effect is not found are seen either as instances that
lie outside the domain where prospect theory is expected to hold, or as instances where
ownership is not sufficiently emphasized to subjects—or is not expected by subjects (e.g.
experienced traders) to last—and hence where a reference point is not properly established.
On the other hand, according to a competing interpretation, all findings to date are
largely consistent with neoclassical (reference-independent) preferences. Holders of this view
interpret the many replications of the effect as resulting from incomplete information, uncertainty, or ambiguity regarding the objects, context, and other factors that may affect costs
1

The term ‘endowment effect’ was coined by Thaler (1980), who predicted that a good’s value to an
individual would increase once it became part of her endowment.
2
These are not the only components of prospect theory. The theory also assumes, e.g., that utility
is concave in gains and convex in losses, and that individuals weight probabilities. However, these other
components of the theory are not necessary for predicting the endowment effect, and have typically not been
discussed in its context.

2

and benefits as perceived by subjects. Finally, a third alternative views some findings as
consistent with prospect theory and others as consistent with standard theory. According
to this view, each theory predicts behavior under a different set of circumstances.
That the same body of evidence coexists with different interpretations is far from surprising. But a disagreement regarding interpretation is less likely to last when virtually all
the relevant evidence comes from experiments that are relatively straightforward to replicate, tweak, and refine, and when the main competing theories make predictions that are so
different. According to prospect theory, economic behavior depends on a reference point; according to neoclassical theory, it does not. What could have prevented experimentalists from
designing variations of the original experiment to convincingly test between the theories?
One answer is that for a long time, a clean test was impossible to devise because, as suggested above, prospect theory is practically unfalsifiable unless it specifies how the reference
point is determined. Without an explicit theory that would state which components in past
experiments are crucial for establishing the reference point and which components can—and,
to prevent neoclassical theory from explaining the effect, should—be left out, both theories
can accommodate a wide range of findings.
Fortunately, this situation has been changing recently, with new theoretical developments
that open the door for such tests. One example is Kőszegi and Rabin’s (2006) (henceforth
KR) model of reference-dependent preferences, which seems to be increasingly recognized as
the gold standard in the literature. KR propose a formal theory of reference-point determination: it is determined by expectations—“a person’s reference point is the probabilistic
beliefs she held in the recent past about outcomes.” Furthermore, by combining their model
with a specific theory of expectations formation—requiring expectations to be rational, and
requiring individuals to select those (rational) expectations that maximize expected utility—
KR put enough structure to render the theory substantially more falsifiable. And although,
as they repeatedly note, what is meant by “recent past” is still open for interpretation, their
combined model makes specific (and hence, testable) predictions.

3

The goal of our paper is to assess, with two lab experiments, to what extent KR’s model
of reference-dependent preferences can explain Knetsch’s (1989) findings. For this purpose,
we design a version of the original experiment where instead of endowing individuals with a
good and then surprising them with an offer to trade it for another, we replace endowment
with expectations—in the form of clear and reliable probabilistic information regarding the
possibilities and choices subjects will face during the entire experiment—and we replace
surprise with a realization of one of these expected possibilities. Furthermore, our design is
such that it is not subject to any of the confounds suggested in the literature in the past,
such as various transaction costs, informational confounds, and demand effects (Plott and
Zeiler, 2007); or “trade uncertainty” (Engelmann and Hollard, 2010).
In our first experiment, we present 102 subjects with two goods (a mug and a pen) and
ask them to toss a coin which, as the subjects consequently learn, determines which of the
two goods is “assigned” to them. What “assigned” means differs by treatment. In our Weak
Reference treatment, subjects will get the assigned item as a gift with 1% probability, and
with 99% probability they will be able to choose which of the two items will be their gift.
In our Strong Reference treatment, these probabilities are reversed: subjects will get the
assigned object with 99% probability, and with 1% probability they will be able to choose
their gift. We use a quiz to verify that subjects fully understand these probabilities and,
hence, that they form expectations as intended by our treatments. Importantly, endowment
is entirely absent from our experiment, and is fully replaced by these expectations.
In our second experiment (with 434 subjects) we add a dimension to our first experiment whereby we also examine to what extent the very experimental procedures we use for
establishing subjects’ expectations regarding their outcomes may act differently on subjects
whose own outcomes are, by design, not affected by these procedures. Specifically, a subset
of our subjects go through the coin-toss, instructions, and quiz while knowing all along that
these procedures affect others, but not them. Hence our second experiment takes a further
step in disentangling expectations not only from endowment, but also from the procedures

4

we use for controlling expectations in the lab.
To the extent that endowment affects outcomes through establishing expectations (regarding outcomes), by removing endowment and instead directly establishing expectations
one should be able to replicate the effect, at least partially. This has indeed been suggested
by recent experimental work (Knetsch and Wong, 2009; Ericson and Fuster, 2010).3 By
shutting off all previously-offered alternative explanations and potential mechanisms other
than the expectations channel, we thus ask: How much of the endowment effect can be explained as an expectations-based reference effect à la KR, and how much of it requires other
explanations like endowment, experimental procedures, etc.? 4
The answer that emerges from our two experiments is that we find virtually no evidence
that expectations alone—without actual endowment—can reproduce any part of the original
effect. Specifically, in our first experiment we find that while subjects are more likely to
choose the good assigned to them by the coin-flip, they are not more likely to do so in
the Strong Reference treatment than in the Weak Reference treatment, and hence their
behavior cannot be explained by expectations. In our second experiment, despite having a
large subject pool, the only differences in choices we find across coin-flips and experimental
treatments are small, often far from statistically significant, and often with the opposite sign
of KR’s predictions. These findings are especially important given the size of the original
effect. In Knetsch’s (1989) experiment, once subjects are endowed with a good (either a mug
or a chocolate bar), they are at least eight times more likely to keep it than to trade it for
the alternative good. This result has been replicated many times, often with similarly large
difference in proportions (see, e.g., List, 2004).
Our findings should hold import for academics as well as for policymakers. For economists,
3

We discuss this work in the next section.
As suggested above, KR’s model consists of three components: (a) prospect theory’s value function; (b)
a reference point that is determined by expectations; and (c) a theory of rational expectations. KR note
that the last component—the assumption that the expectations that determine the reference point are “fully
rational” (in a sense spelled out in their model)—could be replaced by “any theory of how these expectations
are formed. But as a disciplined and largely realistic first pass,” KR “assume that expectations are fully
rational.” Notice that the present paper is not aimed at asking to what extent the different components of
KR’s theory explain the endowment effect, but rather to what extent the combined theory explains it.
4

5

determining why preferences are so often found to depend on initial endowments merits serious effort. If part of the explanation is that preferences are defined not only over absolute
outcomes but also over the differences between outcomes and an expectations-based reference point, then a re-evaluation of our modeling assumptions is necessary, e.g. regarding
how expectations relate to the basic independence assumption. At the same time, if expectations alone cannot explain the endowment effect, then one would want a general theory to
specify what it is about actual ownership—or, at least, about actual ownership as it is often
implemented in lab experiments—that seems to change preferences so dramatically. For
policymakers, resolving this issue is invaluable for cost-benefit analysis and, more generally,
for any computation involving welfare analysis.
The remainder of our study proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses recent relevant
work and provides the general theoretical framework that motivates the design of our first
experiment. Section 3 presents the results from our first experiment. Section 4 describes the
design and results of our second experiment. Section 5 concludes.

2

Testing for a Reference Effect

In this section we briefly outline a simple version of KR’s model, describe our first experiment, and solve the model in the context of our experiment. Before doing so, we place our
experiment (and its findings as described above) in the context of two recent related studies.

2.1

Endowment, Reference, and Expectations

Of the related literature, the paper that is closest to ours is Ericson and Fuster (2010).
In independent work, they demonstrate the potential of KR to explain at least some of
Knetsch’s (1989) original effect. In contrast to our work, however, they do not attempt to
ask how much of the (very large) original effect can in fact be attributed to KR. And while
they find that expectations could explain some of the effect, we find no evidence that they

6

do.
Ericson and Fuster endow 45 subjects with a mug, and flip a coin to determine the
probability with which subjects will be allowed to trade it later for a pen; the probability
can be either 10% (a strong reference treatment) or 90% (a weak reference treatment). They
find that 77% and 44% of mug owners, respectively, choose to keep the mug in the two
treatments. On the other hand, they find the opposite result—38% and 71%, respectively,
choose to keep the mug—when instead of flipping a coin in the presence of subjects they
randomly assign 63 subjects to one of the two treatments in a manner not transparent to the
subjects. As they observe, while the latter design is confounded along the lines suggested by
Plott and Zeiler (2007)—the probability with which a subject is allowed to trade the mug
may itself be perceived by subjects as conveying information regarding the mug’s value—the
latter result is also informative regarding the relative strength of the expectations channel as
a potential driver of the effect. Overall, their findings above may suggest that once a good
is endowed, information (or value signals) and expectations interact in a way that gives
expectations an important role in setups where value signals are absent but a lesser role
where they are present; while our findings—which are not subject to the above confound—
may suggest that when endowment itself is entirely absent, the role of expectations alone is
reduced even when value signals are absent as well.
To the best of our knowledge, our paper and the concurrent work of Ericson and Fuster
are the first direct tests of predictions of a fully-specified version of prospect theory in
the context of Knetsch’s (1989) original experiment.5 However, we are not the first to
run endowment effect experiments that are motivated by KR’s theory. Knetsch and Wong
(2009) demonstrate that ownership and endowment may not be the only—or even the main—
drivers of the effect, and propose that the effect should hence be renamed a ‘reference effect.’
They hypothesize that the effect is triggered by endowment and ownership only in contexts
5

Recent work tests KR’s model in contexts other than Knetsch’s (1989) original experiment. For example,
Abeler et al. (forthcoming) test the model’s predictions for effort provision. See also Smith (2008), who tests
for a WTP-WTA gap, and Ericson and Fuster’s (2010) WTA experiment.

7

where—and only to the extent that—endowment and ownership happen to influence subjects’
expectations, and they present evidence that is consistent with this interpretation. However,
since they do not explicitly control (or verify) expectations, interpreting their experiments in
light of KR requires speculation similar to the speculation that is required when interpreting
the original experiment and many of its variants. In contrast, our experiments directly
control expectations by fully informing subjects, right from the outset, regarding both exact
experimental procedures and complete probability distributions over the choice sets they
might face. By systematically varying these probability distributions and hence—according
to KR—the reference point, we can directly test to what extent the endowment effect is a
reference effect.

2.2

The General KR Framework

In KR’s model, a consumer’s utility depends not only on her K-dimensional consumption
vector c but also on a reference vector r. Her overall utility,

u (c|r) =

X
k

mk (ck ) +

X

µ(mk (ck ) − mk (rk )) ,

k

consists of two components, both separable across dimensions. The first, “consumption utility,” corresponds to standard, ‘classic,’ utility. The second, “gain-loss utility,” corresponds
to prospect theory’s reference-dependent utility. The value function µ satisfies µ (x) = ηx for
x > 0, and µ (x) = ηλx for x ≤ 0. The parameter η > 0 is the weight an individual attaches
to gain-loss utility, and λ > 1 is her “coefficient of loss-aversion.” Hence λ is a measure of
prospect theory’s famous “kink”: the pain from a(n arbitrarily small) loss is greater than
the pleasure from a gain of equal size. The model allows for both c and r to be stochastic,
and assumes that individuals maximize expected utility.
As noted above, in KR’s version of prospect theory, the reference vector r results from
expectations. “Specifically, a person’s reference point is her probabilistic beliefs about the

8

relevant consumption outcome held between the time she first focused on the decision determining the outcome and shortly before consumption occurs” (Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006).
The reference r is determined endogenously, as what KR term a preferred personal equilibrium (PPE). A PPE is a probability distribution over consumption outcomes that satisfies
the following two conditions. First, it is a personal equilibrium (PE), which is a rational expectations equilibrium in the following sense. Given a consumer’s expectations regarding the
state of the world—represented by a probability distribution over choice sets—she forms expectations regarding choice outcomes—a probability distribution over consumption vectors.
These expectations over outcomes are rational in that they are consistent: a consumer who
holds them as her reference will indeed find that following through (by making the ex ante
expected choices) maximizes her utility.
Second, a PPE is a preferred PE: when more than one PE exists, a PPE is the one
that maximizes ex ante expected utility. In other words, when the consumer can form more
than one set of expectations regarding outcomes which, once her reference, is consistent with
optimal choices ex post—she will choose as her reference point the ex ante preferred one.
For a formal exposition and a detailed discussion see Kőszegi and Rabin (2006).

2.3

Application: The Reference Effect

We now apply KR’s model to our first experiment. The main contribution of our experiment
is that it directly manipulates a subject’s expectations regarding the choice sets she will face.
We do this by directly and explicitly informing her about the relevant probabilities. With
no ambiguity regarding her expectations—which we verify with a quiz (see below)—we can
solve the model and derive testable predictions.

2.3.1

Experiment 1: Design

Our first experiment involves two consumption goods, a mug and a pen, which we denote
below ci and cj . It is conducted at a large university in the Midwest. Each experimental

9

subject is seated at a table, on which the two goods are located, along with a set of printed
instructions, a printed survey, a coin, an envelope, and something to write with (for a photo of
the experimental setup and for an example of the experimental instructions see Appendix A).
On the first page of the instructions subjects are asked to flip a coin and to choose a
number between 1 and 100. The experimental procedure is explained on the second page,
which subjects are allowed to see only after they marked down on the first page both their
coin-flip outcome and their choice of a number. In our Strong Reference treatment, the
second page opens with the text:
In front of you are two items. You will get one of them as a gift to take home. Whether
or not you can choose your gift is determined at random, as explained below in detail.
In brief, there is a 1% probability that you will be able to choose which item you take
home. However, there is a 99% probability that you will NOT be able to choose, and
that your gift will automatically be the pen if you flipped “heads” and automatically
be the mug if you flipped “tails.”
Feel free to inspect the items but please return them both to their places before we
continue.

The text in our complementary Weak Reference treatment is identical, but “1%” above is
replaced with “99%,” and “99%” above is replaced with “1%.” The rest of the second page
of the instructions explains the experimental protocol in detail, including explaining how
the 1% vs. 99% randomization will be carried out (the sealed envelope next to the subject
contains a number between 1 and 100, which has a 1% probability of matching the number the
subject wrote on the first instructions page). In addition, the explanation above regarding
probabilities is repeated, using alternative—and perhaps more intuitive—descriptions. For
example, in the Strong Reference treatment:
Notice that you have a 1% chance (or 1/100) to be able to choose your gift at the end
of the survey. In other words, there is a very high probability that you will take home
the gift determined by the coin-flip, regardless of which gift you choose.

10

Subjects are then asked if they have questions. After any questions are answered by the
experimenter, they proceed to the third page, which includes two quiz questions to verify
that they indeed understood the instructions and formed correct expectations regarding the
probabilities of future consumption of either good given their expected choice. The quiz is
identical across treatments, and is constructed in a way that leaves little chance for answering
it correctly without full understanding of the exact probabilities with which each potential
outcome can occur.
Once subjects finish the quiz, the experimenter checks their answers, and they then
proceed to fill out a survey (to pass time).6 Having completed the survey, they are asked
to make their choice of an item. Their choice is our outcome of interest.7 (After having
made this choice, on the last page of the instructions subjects are asked hypothetical WTP
questions; the 1% vs. 99% uncertainty is resolved; and subjects’ comments are solicited.)
This experimental design has a few important features. First, the goods are treated
symmetrically, and the instructions contain no biased language like “keep” or “trade” that
might affect subjects’ choices. Second, the coin-flip guarantees that subjects are aware that
their default gift resulted from a random 50-50 draw. It rules out the concern that a good’s
assignment as a default gift may be interpreted by subjects as informative, e.g. regarding
the goods’ values (a quality signal) or regarding the “right” choice behavior expected by the
experimenter (demand effects). These concerns, which are raised by Plott and Zeiler (2007),
6

Subjects who did not answer both quiz questions correctly are informed that they have incorrect answers
and are asked to re-read the instructions and try again. If they again have mistakes, the experimenter goes
over the instructions and quiz with them for a third time, and then asks them to proceed regardless of their
answers. Importantly, we record the number of attempts it took each subject to answer the quiz correctly,
and use it as a measure of how confident we are that a subject formed expectations as intended.
7
Notice that we record gift choices before the 1% vs. 99% uncertainty is resolved, hence before subjects
find out whether they will get their choice or the gift assigned by the coin-flip. This allows us to elicit realstake choices from all subjects (rather than from only the fraction of them who happens to end up in the
choice condition). On the other hand, with this design we cannot test whether subjects’ choices once they
know which condition they face are consistent with their ex ante choice-expectations. It would be interesting
to test this aspect of the model in the future, for example by modifying the design to record choice only
after the (choice vs. assigned gift) uncertainty is resolved. Notice however that this will require 1/q times
more subjects, where q = 0.01 in one treatment, and q = 0.99 in the other. Finally, notice that while our
current method of eliciting choice could be interpreted as the ‘strategy method,’ it could alternatively be
interpreted as a standard fully-incentivized elicitation of choice between a certain outcome and a lottery.

11

cannot arise in our experiment.
Third, our procedure is explained to subjects at the outset, and so they are never surprised
by facing a choice they did not previously realize they might have to make. This feature
is absent in past variations of Knetsch’s (1989) original experiment, where subjects are
first endowed with a good, and only later learn that in fact they can trade it. In other
words, subjects in our experiment explicitly learn at the outset the complete probability
distributions regarding outcomes, and we have no need to speculate—as, e.g., Knetsch and
Wong (2009) do—regarding subjects’ expectations. Relatedly, and importantly, we have
direct evidence on expectations in subjects’ responses to the quiz.
To summarize, our first experiment is, to the best of our knowledge, the first one designed
to answer the question: In the original setup, what is the largest effect that could result from
expectations alone? Hence, rather than demonstrating that KR could potentially explain
some of the effect (as, e.g., Ericson and Fuster (2010) do), we ask how much of the original
effect KR in fact explains.

2.3.2

Solving the Model

We now solve the consumer problem faced by subjects. Assume w.l.g. that a subject’s
default gift, as determined by the coin-flip, is c1 ; the alternative gift is c2 . Depending on
experimental treatment, the subject can choose her gift with probability q ∈ {0.01, 0.99}.
Also assume w.l.g. that m1 (0) = m2 (0) = 0. If the subject expects to keep c1 , she can do
so regardless of the envelope draw. Her reference consumption is then c1 regardless of q. If
she indeed chooses to keep c1 when asked for her choice later, her reference coincides with
her actual consumption, and her utility—expected as well as realized—is just m1 (c1 ), with
no gain-loss terms. On the other hand, if she deviates from her reference consumption and
chooses c2 , her utility will be m1 (c1 ) with probability 1−q and m2 (c2 )+ηm2 (c2 )−ηλm1 (c1 )
with probability q. It is thus straightforward to show that given her expectation to keep c1
(e.g. when answering the quiz), she will indeed choose to keep c1 (when choice is elicited) as

12

long as
m1 (c1 )
1+η
≥
.
m2 (c2 )
1 + ηλ

(1)

In other words, choosing c1 is consistent with a PE as long as (1) holds.
Alternatively, the subject may expect (when answering the quiz) to choose c2 when choice
is elicited later. In that case, she expects to consume c1 with probability 1 − q and c2 with
probability q. Given such expectations and following a line of reasoning similar to the one
above, it can be shown that she will indeed choose c2 later as long as
1 + (1 − q + qλ) η
m1 (c1 )
≤
.
m2 (c2 )
1 + ((1 − q) λ + q) η

(2)

Thus, when (2) holds, choosing c2 is consistent with a PE.
The model’s predictions can now be analyzed for any 0 ≤ q ≤ 1. However, for our
purposes it is sufficient to point out the following approximate results.8 For q close to 0,
there is a unique choice consistent with a PE for

m1 (c1 )
m2 (c2 )

on either side of

1+η
:
1+ηλ

if the former

ratio is greater than the latter, a subject will choose c1 ; if it is smaller, she will choose c2 .
As q grows, there is a growing region for

m1 (c1 )
m2 (c2 )

to the right of

1+η
1+ηλ

where choosing either c1

or c2 can be consistent with a PE, and for q close to 1 this region stretches all the way to
1+ηλ
.
1+η

It can then be shown—by comparing the expected utility associated with one PE with

that associated with the other—that for q ≈ 1 a PPE is only consistent with the subject
choosing c1 if
2.3.3

m1 (c1 )
m2 (c2 )

≥ 1 and c2 otherwise.

Experiment 1: Predictions

We now summarize the above analysis and compare the predictions of KR with those of the
standard neoclassical model. In the q = 0.01 (Strong Reference) treatment, subjects expect
to consume the default c1 with very high probability. According to KR, choosing c2 would
8

The results we state here are only approximately true in the following sense: they are exactly true for
q = 0 and for q = 1, but become only approximations for q in the vicinity of these extreme values. Replacing
these approximations with exact mathematical expressions unnecessarily complicates the presentation while
having negligible effect on the relevant empirical predictions.

13

hence involve a relatively large loss term. For example, if η = 1 and λ = 3, subjects are
predicted to choose c1 as long as m1 (c1 ) ≥ 21 m2 (c2 ). This is a rather weak condition as long
as subjects perceive the two goods to be of roughly comparable value for them.9 Under these
assumptions, according to KR, the coin-flip should affect choice. On the other hand, for the
q = 0.99 (Weak Reference) treatment, half the subjects are expected according to KR to
choose c2 —the good that was not assigned to them by the coin-flip. Finally, the standard
model predicts half the subjects to choose c2 regardless of treatment.
To summarize: (i ) finding no effect of the coin-flip on choice under either treatment is
consistent with the standard model. Naturally, it is also consistent with KR if m1 (c1 ) and
m2 (c2 ) are of very different values, if λ is close to 1, or if η is sufficiently small.10 (ii ) Finding
the effect for q = 0.01 but not for q = 0.99 is consistent with KR but cannot be explained
by the standard model. (iii ) Finding the effect under both treatments would require an
explanation—a theory of attachment or a psychology of coin-assignment—that neither KR
nor the standard model currently provides. It is of course possible that such an explanation
could be combined with either model. In that case, one could refer to the smaller of the
two effects as a baseline, subtract it from both effects, and compare the residuals across
treatments. A comparison in the spirit of (i ) and (ii ) above could be informative as to
which of the two models seems useful as part of such a combined explanation. For example,
if the effect is larger for q = 0.01 than for q = 0.99, KR might explain some—though not
all—of the effect. (iv ) Finally, we are aware of no theory that could explain finding an effect
for q = 0.99 but not for q = 0.01 (or, more generally, finding a larger effect for the former
treatment than for the latter).
9

Remember that on average, for half the subjects c1 is the mug and for the other half it is the pen. They
cost roughly the same and, crucially, were chosen to be similar to those used in other endowment effect
experiments (where the endowment of one of them had a large effect on choices). Also remember that for
KR to apply, the goods have to be for final consumption.
10
Notice that since KR is more general than the standard model, and reduces to it e.g. with η = 0, any
“test between the two models” is, effectively, a test regarding the sizes of KR’s η and λ.

14

3

Experiment 1: Results

102 subjects participated in our first experiment, which was conducted during September
and October 2009. We first describe their replies to the quiz questions, and then we analyze
their replies to the choice question.

3.1

Expectations

# page on the experimental instructions includes two questions. Question 1 is reproThe quiz
%&'()'#(*)+',#-.'#/0&&0+1*2#-+0#34')-10*)5##

duced #below.

#
#
"5 61-.#"7#8,09(91&1-:;#-.'#*4<9',#=#+,0-'#>0+*#+1&&#-4,*#04-#-.'#)(<'#()#-.'#*4<9',#1*#
-.'#'*?'&08'5#=*#-.(-#@()'A#
#
B%&'()'#@.'@C#0*'#90D5#=/#:04#@.'@C#-.'#90--0<#90D;#8&'()'#(&)0#/1&&#04-#-.'#9&(*C#)8(@'5E#
#
#

‫܆‬###H:#21/-#+1&&#9'#-.'#0*'#=#@.00)';#,'2(,>&'))#0/#-.'#@01*I/&185#
#
‫܆‬H:#21/-#+1&&#9'#JJJJJJJJJJ;#()#>'-',<1*'>#9:#-.'#@01*I/&18;#,'2(,>&'))#0/#<:#@.01@'5#
#
#
#
Question 2 is identical
to question 1 in all but the first two lines, which in question 2 read:
F5 61-.#GG7#8,09(91&1-:;#-.'#*4<9',#=#+,0-'#>0+*#+1&&#*0-#-4,*#04-#-.'#)(<'#()#-.'#
With*4<9',#1*#-.'#'*?'&08'5#=*#-.(-#@()'A#
99% probability, the number I wrote down will not turn out the same as the
#
number in the envelope. In that case:
B%&'()'#@.'@C#0*'#90D5#=/#:04#@.'@C#-.'#90--0<#90D;#8&'()'#(&)0#/1&&#04-#-.'#9&(*C#)8(@'5E#
#
#

Of our 102 subjects, 94 subjects (92%) answered question 1 correctly in their first attempt.
‫܆‬###H:#21/-#+1&&#9'#-.'#0*'#=#@.00)';#,'2(,>&'))#0/#-.'#@01*I/&185#
The eight subjects who did not were asked to re-read the instructions and try again. Seven of

#
‫܆‬H:#21/-#+1&&#9'#JJJJJJJJJJ;#()#>'-',<1*'>#9:#-.'#@01*I/&18;#,'2(,>&'))#0/#<:#@.01@'5#
them answered
the question correctly in their second attempt. The experimenter explained

the instructions# and the quiz questions to the one subject who did not, but we have no
#

evidence
# that that subject indeed understood the instructions and hence we have no evidence
%&'()'#,(1)'#:04,#.(*>#+.'*#:04#/1*1).5#

regarding that subject’s expectations. In question 2, 100 subjects (98%) answered correctly
in their first attempt, and the two subjects who did not also did not answer it correctly in
their second attempt. The experimenter then explained to them the instructions and the
15

quiz. Overall, 94 subjects (92%) answered both questions correctly on their first attempt.
It seems reasonable to assume with confidence that these subjects fully understood the
instructions, and formed expectations as intended by the experimental design.11 We present
choice results below both for the entire population and for these 94 subjects separately.

3.2

Choice

Table 1 reports results for our entire population of 102 subjects. Its rows follow the structure
of Table 1 in Plott and Zeiler (2007). Its leftmost column, titled “All,” shows that overall,
across the two treatments, subjects’ coin-flip affects their choices. The first row shows that
60 subjects’ coin-flips assigned them with a mug and 42 subjects’ coin-flips assigned them
with a pen, and the second row shows that of the former, 48 subjects chose a mug as their
gift, while 28 of the latter did so. The respective proportions—80% and 67%—are presented
in the third row. Finally, the bottom row reports the result of a two-sample one-sided test
of equality of proportions. It shows that the difference (13%) between the proportion of mug
choosers among ‘coin-mug’ vs. ‘coin-pen’ subjects is statistically significant at the 6% level.
[Table 1 about here.]
The next two columns of Table 1 report results by treatment. They show that the effect of
coin-flip on choice cannot be explained by expectations: the difference in proportions in the
Strong Reference treatment (8%) is in fact roughly half that in the Weak Reference treatment
(17%). Indeed, the rightmost column shows that while in the Strong Reference treatment
3% less coin-pen subjects chose mug than in the Weak Reference treatment, the difference
among coin-mug subjects—which according to KR should be negative—is (positive) 12%.
As the bottom row shows, none of these latter differences is statistically significant.
Table 2 reports results for the sub-sample of 94 subjects who understood the instructions
on first reading, formed expectations as intended, and correctly answered the quiz—our
11

Notice that psychologically, fully understanding the relevant probabilities may not be equivalent to
forming expectations. However, as is standard in economics, KR define the latter as the former.

16

manipulation check—on first attempt. Among these subjects the coin-flip seems to have
affected choice more strongly than among the entire population: as seen in the leftmost
column, the difference in proportions between coin-mug subjects who chose a mug and coinpen subjects who chose a mug is 20%, and it is statistically significant at the 1% level.
However, the next two columns show that, as in Table 1, the difference in proportions is
not larger in the Strong Reference treatment (17%) than in the Weak Reference treatment
(19%) and hence cannot be explained by expectations. The rightmost column again shows
that while the proportion of mug choosers among coin-pen subjects is larger (8% difference)
in the Weak Reference treatment than in the Strong Reference treatment—i.e. it is in the
direction predicted by KR—it is also larger (9%) among coin-mug subjects—opposite to
KR’s prediction.
[Table 2 about here.]

3.3

Interpretation

Our overall reading of Tables 1 and 2 is that while coin-flip seems to affect subjects’ choices,
assignment to treatment does not. While the former cannot be explained by the standard
neoclassical model, combined with the latter it cannot be explained by KR either.12 Our
interpretation of the results from our first experiment is hence that there might be “psychological” effects of the coin-flip on choice, or of the coin-flip combined with our experimental
procedures on choice, but we find no evidence that the effects are driven by the coin-flip’s
effect on expectations.13
12

KR could explain our findings if subjects exhibit a level of probability weighting so extreme that they
regard a 1% chance and a 99% chance as roughly equally probable. Naturally, such interpretation would
empty KR from much of its empirical content.
13
One technical concern regarding Tables 1 and 2 is related to the fact that, as seen in the Weak Reference
column in either table, twice as many subjects in that treatment were assigned by their coin-flip to the
mug as those assigned to the pen. However, we believe that this unbalance reflects natural variation rather
than reflecting e.g. that subjects somehow found a way to affect (or to cheat about) their coin-flip. Our
conclusion is based on the following observations. First, the experimenter was always present in the vicinity
of subjects (although, admittedly, not always directly looking). Second, more importantly, when subjects
flip the coin (on the first page of the instructions), they do not know yet which coin-flip outcome would

17

4

Experiment 2

4.1

Design and Predictions

Our second experiment is designed as an attempt to disentangle our experimental procedures (including the coin-flip) from expectations. Specifically, it is designed to disentangle
procedures from expectations regarding a subject’s own outcomes.14
Our second experiment hence essentially replicates our first experiment, but it expands
the experimental design to a 2 × 2 design, and in addition to having Strong Reference vs.
Weak Reference treatments, it also turns off (“Group A”) and on (“Group B”) the link from
these treatments (and from coin-flips) to expectations regarding own outcomes. This is done
by assigning half the subjects (in both the Strong and Weak Reference treatments) into
Group A and the other half into Group B, and by explicitly informing all subjects that while
everybody is asked to read and understand the complete set of instructions (and answer all
quiz questions), much of the instructions will not apply to Group A subjects who, regardless
of their coin-flip, will get to choose their gift with certainty.
Specifically, on the second page of the instructions, subjects are told:
Each participant in the room is either in Group A or in Group B. Your group is
indicated at the top left of page 1 of the instructions. . . .
assign them to which item. Third, and most importantly, unbalanced coin-flips are only found in the Weak
Reference treatment, where the coin-flip has virtually no effect on subjects’ choice set (it could limit their
choice set with only 1% probability) and, according to both the neoclassical model and KR, should have
virtually no effect on outcomes. Reassuringly, in the Strong Reference treatment, where the coin-flip strongly
affects subjects’ outcomes (by simply eliminating choice and determining their gift with 99% probability),
the coin-flips came out perfectly balanced.
14
In doing so, our second experiment also addresses the following conceptual point. Consider any experiment that compares subjects assigned to an “expectations x regarding own outcomes” treatment with
those assigned to an “expectations y regarding own outcomes” treatment (in our case, Strong Reference vs.
Weak Reference). Such an experiment effectively keeps constant across treatments the very fact of linking
treatments with “expectations regarding own outcomes” (as opposed to linking them with something else).
As a result, rather than testing it, such an experiment effectively assumes that it is this specific form of
expectations—indeed, that it is some form expectations in the first place—that is crucial in determining the
results.
While being a subtle point, potentially of only limited empirical importance, this point applies more
generally to many other past experiments and is independent of our specific findings in our first experiment
above.

18

The instructions include sections that are common to all participants, and sections
that apply only to Group A participants or only to Group B participants. . . .
We ask that regardless of your group, you carefully read and understand all sections
of the instructions . . . without skipping any parts of the text. . . . In other words, we
ask you to read and understand the complete set of instructions, but remember that
sections that apply to the other group will not affect you in any way. (It is important
for the study that both groups read the same set of instructions.)

For an example of the full instructions (as well as a photo of the experimental setup) see
Appendix B.15 While the instructions are longer than in our first experiment, and are more
complicated for subjects to understand, we show below that three quarters of subjects fully
understood them on first reading and answered all quiz questions correctly on their first
attempt.
In this 2 {Strong Reference vs. Weak Reference} × 2 {Group A vs. Group B} design experiment, the standard neoclassical model still predicts no effect on choice of either the coinflip or assignment into one of the four experimental cells. On the other hand, KR (with η sufficiently greater than 0, λ sufficiently greater than 1, and m1 (c1 ) sufficiently close to m2 (c2 ))
predicts that coin-flips should matter in Strong Reference cells more than in Weak Reference cells, and—crucially for the “expectations regarding own outcomes” interpretation—in
Group B more than in Group A.

4.2

Expectations

Our second experiment was conducted between November 2009 and April 2010 at a large
university in the Northeast. 434 subjects participated. The quiz, which is identical across
15

As is clear from reading the instructions and viewing the setup photo, our second experiment differs
from our first experiment in technical implementation details that are orthogonal to the theories tested.
Such details include location, the exact design of the mug and the pen, the time-filler survey (in the second
experiment it is a one-page “Big Five” personality traits questionnaire (John and Srivastava, 1999) embedded
in the instructions), and that in the second experiment the experimenter flips the coin (in the presence of
the subject; see footnote 13).

19

subjects and which all subjects have to fully answer regardless of assignment, consists of four
questions (see Appendix B). In addition to the two quiz questions from Experiment 1, which
in Experiment 2 are questions about Group B subjects, the quiz in Experiment 2 also adds
a question about Group A subjects, and another question to verify that each subject fully
understands which group she is in and hence forms expectations regarding her own outcomes
as intended by the experiment.
Subjects responded to the four questions as follows. 424 subjects (98%) answered the
Group A question correctly on first attempt, and the other ten answered it correctly on
second attempt. Subjects found the two Group B questions harder to answer, with 345 and
378 of them (79% and 87%), respectively, answering on first attempt the “1% probability”
and the “99% probability” questions. On second attempt, 63 and 36 additional subjects
answered these two questions correctly, while the reminder 26 and 20 subjects did not.
Finally, 409 subjects (94%) answered correctly on first attempt the fourth question—which
verifies that subjects formed expectations about their own consumption as intended; and of
the reminder 25, eleven answered it correctly on second attempt.
Overall, 326 subjects (75%) answered all four questions correctly on first attempt. One
can be rather confident that in spite of the complexity of the design, these subjects fully
understood the instructions on first reading and formed expectations as intended by the
experiment.

4.3

Choice

Tables 3 and 4 present choice results in Experiment 2, by coin-flip and by experimental condition. Each of the top two panels in each table—titled “Group A” and “Group
B”—has identical structure to Tables 1 and 2. An additional panel at the bottom—titled
“Difference”—compares results in Group A with those in Group B. In contrast with Tables 1
and 2, which present results from one-sided equality-of-proportions tests, all “Result” rows
in Tables 3 and 4 present results from two-sample two-sided tests, effectively treating results

20

in either direction symmetrically.16
[Table 3 about here.]
[Table 4 about here.]
Our overall summary of Tables 3 and 4 is that in Experiment 2 we find no strong evidence
that either coin-flip or expectations matter much, among either the entire set of 434 subjects
or among the 326 subjects who fully understood the instructions on first reading and formed
expectations as intended by the different experimental conditions. Moreover, the sign of the
(statistically weak) differences between conditions often go in a direction opposite to KR’s
predictions. While this general conclusion is reflected in many of the outcomes reported in
the tables, we highlight below three specific points.
We first look at the leftmost column in either table. In neither the Group A nor Group B
panels can we reject equality of the proportion of mug choosers among coin-mug vs. coin-pen
subjects. Indeed, in Group B more coin-pen subjects chose mug than coin-mug subjects (the
difference in proportions is −2% in Table 3 and −7% in Table 4, compared with 2% and 4%,
respectively, in Group A), opposite to KR’s prediction.17
Second, focusing on the Strong Reference column, in neither of the panels and in neither
of the tables do more coin-mug subjects choose mug than coin-pen subjects (results vary
more in the Weak Reference column). This result again cannot be explained by a lack of
statistical power; indeed, in each of the two Strong Reference cells in each of the two tables,
16

For one-sided tests (in the direction of the results) the reader should divide the reported p-values by
two. Importantly, in interpreting the results one should bear in mind that together, Tables 3 and 4 report
32 p-values. While these p-values are not independent of each other, the probability of getting by chance a
low p-value in any of the tests is substantially higher than that suggested by any individual p-value.
17
As seen in the Difference panel, a two-sided test can almost reject equality of the proportion of mug
choosers among coin-pen subjects between Group A and Group B (62% and 74% in the leftmost column of
Table 4; see also the Strong Reference column). Rejecting the null here would suggest that coin-pen subjects
in Group B—where coin-flip affects expectations regarding own outcomes—are less likely to choose in line
with their coin-flip than Group A subjects—where coin-flip affects expectations regarding the outcomes of
others in the room but not of the subject herself. Such a finding would go in the opposite direction of KR’s
prediction (and, naturally, would not be explainable by the standard neoclassical model). Investigating
whether yet-to-be-modeled social comparison effects might be at work here is left for future work. Notice
however that among coin-mug subjects we find no such result (and remember that among coin-pen subjects
the result is statistically weak).

21

the small (and never statistically significant) difference in proportions is negative. In Group
B—where the coin-flip affects expectations regarding own outcomes—this negative difference
in proportions is −7% and −8% (in Tables 3 and 4, respectively), compared with −1% and
−2% in Group A. This, again, is opposite to the direction of KR’s prediction.
Finally, the rightmost column in either table shows that the difference among Group
B subjects between the proportion of mug choosers in the Strong Reference vs. the Weak
Reference treatments is in the direction predicted by KR among coin-mug subjects, but
in the opposite direction among coin-pen subjects. None of these differences is more than
marginally statistically significant.

5

Discussion and Conclusion

The two experiments reported in this paper replace endowment with expectations and fail
to replicate anything close to Knetsch’s (1989) original endowment effect. While our experiments are not the first to find a dramatically diminished effect once controlling for potential
confounds in the original experiment, they are the first to do so while carefully establishing,
and verifying with a quiz, subjects’ expectations regarding outcomes. Specifically, most of
our subjects show that they know the exact probabilities with which they are likely to leave
the lab owning a mug or a pen. And yet, we find no evidence that the difference between
expecting to own an item with 99% probability and expecting to own it with 1% probability
(or even with 0% in Experiment 2) matters.
In other words, our experiments fail to find a KR-esque link from expectations regarding consumption to choices. One potential explanation why Ericson and Fuster (2010) do
find evidence for such a link relates to the psychological mechanism that may underlie the
link. Ericson and Fuster mention the possibility of a mechanism running from a subject’s
expectations to own an item with high probability to the subject spending time thinking
about the item, which in turn affects the subject’s reference point. Consistent with such

22

interpretation, they report that compared with subjects who were endowed with a mug and
expected with high probability to be able to trade it later for a pen, subjects who expected
a later trade option with low probability “more strongly agree” that they spent more time
thinking about the mug than about the pen. In the same vein, and consistent with our
findings, it is certainly possible that in our Experiment 1 subjects spent more time thinking
about the item assigned to them by the coin-flip, regardless of the probability with which the
assignment would affect their choice set. It is also possible that in our Experiment 2 subjects
in both Group A and Group B spent much time thinking about “what could have happened”
or “what happens to others” or “what the universe of possibilities is” or “what should have
happened to me if the experiment were fair” etc. In short, if expectations affect outcomes
due to the time spent thinking about the outcomes, then the implementation details of how
expectations are controlled in each specific experiment might be what drives both our and
others’ findings. In that case, experiments that are viewed as tests of KR could in reality be
testing special cases of “time spent thinking” theories.
A potential concern regarding our design is that a 1%-probability event may be perceived
by subjects as so unlikely to occur that they do not choose carefully or, conversely, may be
perceived as looming much larger than its true probability. While concerns of this nature
indeed serve as motivation for further exploration and replication, we note that none of them
can easily explain our findings.
While we intuitively believe that expectations regarding outcomes matter for consumer
choices in many contexts, we fail to find supporting evidence in the context of the endowment
effect. We close the paper by suggesting directions for future research. One such direction
would be to explore the timing of the establishment of expectations. As KR repeatedly
note, their model is silent on what the “recent past” in which expectations were formed or
held is. Another direction would be to gain better understanding of what are the objects
that go into one’s vector of consumption utility components (m(c) in either KR or the neoclassical model, and therefore also m(r) in KR). In the process of disentangling instructions

23

about probabilities from expectations regarding own outcomes, our second experiment might
have unintentionally also added a social component, by drawing subjects’ attention to the
potential outcomes of others in the room. Future KR-motivated experimental work could
incorporate a social component into the models it tests.
Finally, we believe that future work—both theoretical and experimental—should think
carefully about the source and nature of expectations. While in economists’ models expectations are often equivalent to beliefs about probability distributions, one might wonder
whether expectations exogenously dictated in the lab affect choices in the same way that
naturally occurring expectations do; whether expectations have different effects when they
are perceived as, e.g., unfair; or whether (and how) aspirations and expectations interact.

References
Abeler, Johannes, Armin Falk, Lorenz Götte, and David Huffman. Forthcoming. “Reference
points and effort provision.” American Economic Review.
Engelmann, Dirk and Guillaume Hollard. 2010. “Reconsidering the Effect of Market Experience on the “Endowment Effect.”” Econometrica 78(6), 2005–2019.
Ericson, Keith M. Marzilli and Andreas Fuster. 2010. “Expectations as Endowments: Evidence on Reference-Dependent Preferences from Exchange and Valuation Experiments.”
Harvard University manuscript.
John, Oliver P., and Sanjay Srivastava. 1999. “The Big Five trait taxonomy: History,
measurement, and theoretical perspectives.” In Lawrence A. Pervin and Oliver P. John
(Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 102-138). New York:
Guilford.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
under Risk.” Econometrica 48, 263–291.
Knetsch, Jack L. 1989. “The Endowment Effect and Evidence of Nonreversible Indifference

24

Curves.” American Economic Review 79(5), 1277–1284.
Knetsch, Jack L. and Wei-Kang Wong. 2009. “The endowment effect and the reference
state: Evidence and manipulations.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 71,
407–413.
Kőszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin. 2006. “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4), 1133–1165.
List, John A. 2004. “Neoclassical Theory versus Prospect Theory: Evidence from the Marketplace.” Econometrica 72(2), 615–625.
Plott, Charles R. and Kathryn Zeiler. 2007. “Exchange Asymmetries Incorrectly Interpreted
as Evidence of Endowment Effect Theory and Prospect Theory.” American Economic
Review 97(4), 1449–1466.
Smith, Alec. 2008. “Lagged Beliefs and Reference-Dependent Utility.” University of Arizona
working paper #08-03.
Thaler, Richard. 1980. “Toward a positive theory of consumer choice.” Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization 1(1), 39–60.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman.

1991.

“Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A

Reference-Dependent Model.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 1039–1061.

25

Appendix A: Experiment 1 Instruments Example

[Instructions start on the next page.]

26

Subject ID: _____
Instructions
Welcome and thank you for participating in this study. The study will last around 30
minutes, during which we ask you to fill out a survey. Your answers will remain completely
anonymous. Please do not skip ahead in the instructions, and do not turn a page before you
have completed it. Once you have written something down, please do not go back to change
it. If you have a question, please raise your hand and one of the monitors will come to you
to answer your question. Please refrain from communicating with the other people in the
room.
We will start by flipping a coin. Please flip the coin next to you and check one box below,
according to the coin‐flip outcome.

Coin Flip:

☐
☐

Heads
Tails

Please record your answer by checking one box above before continuing with the instructions.
Next, please pick a number between 1 and 100 and write it down below. (The number will
be part of a random process, as we will explain shortly.)

Number (1‐100):

̲̲̲̲̲̲

Please record your answer by filling in the blank space above before continuing with the
instructions.

Y1

1

27

In front of you are two items. You will get one of them as a gift to take home. Whether or
not you can choose your gift is determined at random, as explained below in detail.
In brief, there is a 1% probability that you will be able to choose which item you take home.
However, there is a 99% probability that you will NOT be able to choose, and that your gift
will automatically be the pen if you flipped “heads” and automatically be the mug if you
flipped “tails.”
Feel free to inspect the items but please return them both to their places before we
continue.
Please inspect the items but set them back before continuing with the instructions.
You will begin a survey shortly, but first you will learn how it will be decided which gift you
take home. When you are finished with the survey, before you go home with your gift, the
outcome of a random process will determine if you can choose it. This process will be as
follows:
1) We will ask you which of the two items you want as your gift.
2) We will ask you to open the sealed envelope next to you. The envelope contains
a randomly‐selected number between 1 and 100 inside.
If the number you wrote down in the previous page is the same as the number in the
envelope, your gift will be the item you have just chosen, regardless of your previous coin‐
flip.
If the number you wrote down in the previous page is NOT the same as the number in the
envelope, your gift will be determined from the coin flip: your gift will automatically be the
pen if you flipped “heads” and automatically be the mug if you flipped “tails.”
Notice that you have a 1% chance (or 1/100) to be able to choose your gift at the end of the
survey. In other words, there is a very high probability that you will take home the gift
determined by the coin‐flip, regardless of which gift you choose. If you have any questions,
please raise your hand.
You will now answer two comprehension questions to make sure that you understand
exactly how the gift you receive at the end of the study will be determined. After answering
the questions you will begin the survey. Please turn to the next page to answer these
questions.

Y1

2

28

Please answer the following two questions.

1. With 1% probability, the number I wrote down will turn out the same as the number in
the envelope. In that case:
(Please check one box. If you check the bottom box, please also fill out the blank space.)

☐ My gift will be the one I choose, regardless of the coin‐flip.
☐ My gift will be __________, as determined by the coin‐flip, regardless of my choice.

2. With 99% probability, the number I wrote down will not turn out the same as the
number in the envelope. In that case:
(Please check one box. If you check the bottom box, please also fill out the blank space.)

☐ My gift will be the one I choose, regardless of the coin‐flip.
☐ My gift will be __________, as determined by the coin‐flip, regardless of my choice.

Please raise your hand when you finish.

Y1

3

29

You are now going to take a survey. The questions on the survey are hypothetical and you
are asked to imagine yourself in different situations. Please try to answer the questions as
accurately as you can.
Before continuing, please complete the Anonymous Survey found on your desk.

After completing the Anonymous Survey, please proceed to the next page of instructions.

Y1

4

30

You will shortly find out the outcome of the random process that determines whether or
not you choose your gift.
Please indicate which gift, the pen or the mug, you would like to receive regardless of the
item that would be assigned to you by the coin flip. In other words, choose the item you
want, which may or may not be the same as the item you would get based on the coin flip in
the beginning.

My choice: _______________

Please wait until everyone has filled in the blank space with a choice (pen or mug) and the
monitor has instructed you to continue.

Y1

5

31

Before opening your envelope, please answer the next two questions. The questions are
hypothetical so you are not required to purchase anything and your answers will not affect
you in any way. But please answer truthfully, as if you were going to fulfill the purchase
decisions. When answering, please ignore the fact that you will soon own one of the two
items in front of you.
1.

Pen: What would be the maximum price that you would be willing to pay to
purchase a pen like the one in front of you?
I would be willing to pay up to $________ to purchase a similar pen.

2.

Mug: What would be the maximum price that you would be willing to pay to
purchase a mug like the one in front of you?
I would be willing to pay up to $________ to purchase a similar mug.

After you have answered the two questions above, please open your envelope.
If the number you wrote down is the same as the number in the envelope, your gift will be
the item you have just chosen, regardless of the coin flip in the beginning.
If the number you wrote down is NOT the same as the number in the envelope, your gift
will be the one determined by the coin flip in the beginning.
Are there any questions?
The monitors will now come by and distribute your gifts. You are free to leave once you
have received your gift.
Thank you for participating. If you have any comments or thoughts you would like to share
with us, please write them on the lines below. We are also curious to know: how did you
decide which gift to choose?
_

Y1

6

32

Appendix B: Experiment 2 Instruments Example

[Instructions start on the next page.]

33

Your Group: _____
Subject ID: _____
Instructions
Welcome and thank you for participating in this study. The study will last around 45
minutes, during which we ask you to fill out a survey. Your answers will remain completely
anonymous. Please do not skip ahead in the instructions, and do not turn a page before you
have completed it. Once you have written something down, please do not go back to change
it. If you have a question, please raise your hand and one of the monitors will come to you
to answer your question. Please refrain from communicating with the other people in the
room, and please do not discuss the procedures of the study with people outside this room.
We will start by flipping a coin. Please wait for the monitor to come and flip a coin for you.
Then, please check one box below, according to the coin flip outcome.

Coin Flip:

☐
☐

Heads
Tails

Please wait for the monitor. After the coin flip, please record your answer by checking one box
above before continuing with the instructions.
Next, please pick a number between 1 and 100 and write it down below. (The number will
be part of a random process, as we will explain shortly.)

Number (1‐100):

̲̲̲̲̲̲

Please record your answer by filling in the blank space above before continuing with the
instructions.

X1

1

34

Your Group: _____

(Please copy your group (A or B) from the top of page 1.)

Each participant in the room is either in Group A or in Group B. Your group is indicated at
the top left of page 1 of the instructions. Each time you start reading a new page of the
instructions, we ask that you first copy your group letter (A or B) from page 1 into the
blank space (“Your Group: _____”) at the top of the page you are reading.
The instructions include sections that are common to all participants, and sections that
apply only to Group A participants or only to Group B participants. The sections that apply
to all participants, like the section you are reading now, appear in normal type. The
sections that apply only to Group A participants appear in red type. The sections that apply
only to Group B participants appear in blue type.
We ask that regardless of your group, you carefully read and understand all sections of the
instructions (including all red and blue sections), without skipping any parts of the text.
However, the sections that do not apply to your group will not apply to you. In other words,
we ask you to read and understand the complete set of instructions, but remember that
sections that apply to the other group will not affect you in any way. (It is important for the
study that both groups read the same set of instructions.)
To make sure you understand all sections of the instructions, including the sections that
will not apply to you, you will be asked to answer comprehension questions about both the
red and the blue sections as we go along.
Please raise your hand and wait until the monitor instructs you to continue.

Please do not proceed until the monitor has asked you to continue.

X1

2

35

Your Group: _____

(Please copy your group (A or B) from the top of page 1.)

In front of you are two items. They were purchased from the bookstore, and cost roughly
the same. At the end of the study today, you will get one of them as a gift to take home.
Group A only: you will get to choose your gift.
Group B only: whether or not you will get to choose your gift is determined at random, as
explained below in detail.
In brief, there is a 1% probability that you will be able to choose which item you take home.
However, there is a 99% probability that you will NOT be able to choose, and that your gift
will automatically be the pen if you got “heads” and automatically be the mug if you got
“tails” by the coin flip.
Feel free to inspect the items but please return them both to their places before we
continue.
Please inspect the items but set them back before continuing with the instructions.
Group A only: you will answer a list of questions shortly, and when you finish you can
choose your gift.
Group B only: you will answer a list of questions shortly, but first you will learn how it will
be decided which gift you take home. When you are finished with the questions, the
outcome of a random process will determine if you can choose your gift. This process will
be as follows:
1) We will ask you which of the two items you want as your gift.
2) We will ask you to open the sealed envelope next to you. The envelope contains
a randomly‐selected number between 1 and 100 inside.
If the number you wrote down on page 1 is the same as the number in the envelope, your
gift will be the item you have just chosen, regardless of the previous coin flip.
If the number you wrote down on page 1 is NOT the same as the number in the envelope,
your gift will be determined from the coin flip: your gift will automatically be the pen if you
got “heads” and automatically be the mug if you got “tails.”
Notice that you have a 1% chance (or 1/100) to be able to choose your gift after answering
the list of questions. In other words, there is a very high probability that you will take home
the gift determined by the coin flip, regardless of which gift you choose. If you have any
questions, please raise your hand.

X1

3

36

Your Group: _____

(Please copy your group (A or B) from the top of page 1.)

To make sure that you understand how the gift participants receive at the end of the study
will be determined, please answer the following questions. Please answer both red and
blue questions, but remember that only questions about your group will apply to you.
Group A only: neither the number I wrote down nor the number in the envelope will affect
me in any way. In any case:
(Please check one box. If you check the bottom box, please also fill out the blank space.)

☐ My gift will be the one I choose, regardless of the coin flip.
☐ My gift will be __________, as determined by the coin flip, regardless of my choice.

Group B only: with 1% probability, the number I wrote down will turn out the same as the
number in the envelope. In that case:
(Please check one box. If you check the bottom box, please also fill out the blank space.)

☐ My gift will be the one I choose, regardless of the coin flip.
☐ My gift will be __________, as determined by the coin flip, regardless of my choice.

With 99% probability, the number I wrote down will not turn out the same as the number
in the envelope. In that case:
(Please check one box. If you check the bottom box, please also fill out the blank space.)

☐ My gift will be the one I choose, regardless of the coin flip.
☐ My gift will be __________, as determined by the coin flip, regardless of my choice.

X1

4

37

Your Group: _____

(Please copy your group (A or B) from the top of page 1.)

Next, please answer the following question. Notice that this question asks you about how
your gift will actually be determined, given your actual group as indicated at the top of the
page.
Given my group, the gift I receive at the end of the study will be determined as follows:
(Please check one box. If you check the bottom box, please also fill out the blank spaces.)

☐ My gift will be the one I choose, regardless of the coin flip.
☐ My gift will be the one I choose with a ___% chance. However, it will be __________,
as determined by the coin flip, with a ___% chance.

Please raise your hand when you finish.

Please do not proceed until the monitor has verified your answers to the questions above.

Once the monitor asks you to proceed, please proceed to the next page, where we ask you
questions about characteristics that may or may not apply to you. When you finish these
questions, you will proceed to choose your gift.

X1

5

38

Here are a number of characteristics that may or may not apply to you. For example, do you
agree that you are someone who likes to spend time with others? Please write a number
next to each statement to indicate the extent to which you agree or disagree with that
statement.
Disagree
strongly
1

Disagree
a little
2

Neither agree nor
disagree
3

Agree
a little
4

Agree
strongly
5

I see Myself as Someone Who…
___1. Is talkative

___23. Tends to be lazy

___2. Tends to find fault with others

___24. Is emotionally stable, not easily upset

___3. Does a thorough job

___25. Is inventive

___4. Is depressed, blue

___26. Has an assertive personality

___5. Is original, comes up with new ideas

___27. Can be cold and aloof

___6. Is reserved

___28. Perseveres until the task is finished

___7. Is helpful and unselfish with others

___29. Can be moody

___8. Can be somewhat careless

___30. Values artistic, aesthetic experiences

___9. Is relaxed, handles stress well

___31. Is sometimes shy, inhibited

___10. Is curious about many different things

___32. Is considerate and kind to almost everyone

___11. Is full of energy

___33. Does things efficiently

___12. Starts quarrels with others

___34. Remains calm in tense situations

___13. Is a reliable worker

___35. Prefers work that is routine

___14. Can be tense

___36. Is outgoing, sociable

___15. Is ingenious, a deep thinker

___37. Is sometimes rude to others

___16. Generates a lot of enthusiasm

___38. Makes plans and follows through with them

___17. Has a forgiving nature

___39. Gets nervous easily

___18. Tends to be disorganized

___40. Likes to reflect, play with ideas

___19. Worries a lot

___41. Has few artistic interests

___20. Has an active imagination

___42. Likes to cooperate with others

___21. Tends to be quiet

___43. Is easily distracted

___22. Is generally trusting

___44. Is sophisticated in art, music, or literature

Please check: Did you write a number in front of each statement?

X1

6

39

Your Group: _____

(Please copy your group (A or B) from the top of page 1.)

Group A only: please choose which gift, the pen or the mug, you would like to receive.
Group B only: you will shortly find out the outcome of the random process that determines
whether or not you choose your gift.
Please choose which gift, the pen or the mug, you would like to receive regardless of the
item that would be assigned to you by the coin flip. In other words, choose the item you
want, which may or may not be the same as the item you would get based on the coin flip in
the beginning.
Notice: please think carefully about your choice before indicating it. You will not be able to
change your mind later.

My choice: _______________

Please wait until everyone has filled in the blank space with a choice (pen or mug) and the
monitor has instructed you to continue.

X1

7

40

Your Group: _____

(Please copy your group (A or B) from the top of page 1.)

Before continuing, please answer the next two questions. The questions are hypothetical
so you are not required to purchase anything and your answers will not affect you in any
way. But please answer truthfully, as if you were going to fulfill the purchase decisions.
When answering, please ignore the fact that you will soon own one of the two items in front
of you.
1.

Pen: What would be the maximum price that you would be willing to pay to
purchase a pen like the one in front of you?
I would be willing to pay up to $________ to purchase a similar pen.

2.

Mug: What would be the maximum price that you would be willing to pay to
purchase a mug like the one in front of you?
I would be willing to pay up to $________ to purchase a similar mug.

Group A only: you do not have to open your envelope. Your gift will be the item you chose.
Group B only: after you have answered the two questions above, please open your
envelope.
If the number you wrote down is the same as the number in the envelope, your gift will be
the item you chose. If the number you wrote down is NOT the same as the number in the
envelope, your gift will be the one determined by the coin flip in the beginning.
The monitor will now come by and distribute your gifts. In the meantime, you are going to
take a survey. The questions on the survey are hypothetical and you are asked to imagine
yourself in different situations. Please try to answer the questions as accurately as you can.
Please complete the Anonymous Survey found on your desk.

After completing the Anonymous Survey, please proceed to the next page of instructions.

X1

8

41

You are free to leave once you have received your gift and everyone completed the survey.
Thank you for participating! If you have any comments or thoughts you would like to share
with us, please write them on the lines below. We are especially curious to know: how did
you decide which gift to choose?
_

X1

9

42

Table 1: Choice by Coin-flip in Experiment 1 (All 102 Subjects)

All

Weak Reference

Strong Reference

Difference

(q = 99%)

(q = 1%)

Weak − Strong

(# coin-mug,
# coin-pen)

(60, 42)

(34, 16)

(26, 26)

(# coin-mug who chose mug,
# coin-pen who chose mug)

(48, 28)

(29, 11)

(19, 17)

(% coin-mug who chose mug,
% coin-pen who chose mug)

(80%, 67%)
diff = 13%

(85%, 69%)
diff = 17%

(73%, 65%)
diff = 8%

p = 0.06

p = 0.09

p = 0.27

Result

Notes: All p-values are from two-sample one-sided tests of equality of proportions.

43

(12%, 3%)
p = 0.88,
p = 0.41

Table 2: Choice by Coin-flip in Experiment 1 (Only 94 Subjects Correct on First Attempt)

All Correct

Weak Reference

Strong Reference

Difference

(q = 99%)

(q = 1%)

Weak − Strong

(# coin-mug,
# coin-pen)

(55, 39)

(32, 16)

(23, 23)

(# coin-mug who chose mug,
# coin-pen who chose mug)

(46, 25)

(28, 11)

(18, 14)

(% coin-mug who chose mug,
% coin-pen who chose mug)

(84%, 64%)
diff = 20%

(87%, 69%)
diff = 19%

(78%, 61%)
diff = 17%

p = 0.01

p = 0.06

p = 0.10

Result

Notes: All p-values are from two-sample one-sided tests of equality of proportions.

44

(9%, 8%)
p = 0.82,
p = 0.31

Table 3: Choice by Coin-flip in Experiment 2 (All 434 Subjects)

All

Weak Reference

Strong Reference

Difference

(q = 99%)

(q = 1%)

(Weak − Strong)

Group A: Reference applies to some people in the room, but NOT to self

(# coin-mug,
# coin-pen)

(111, 106)

(57, 50)

(54, 56)

(# coin-mug who chose mug,
# coin-pen who chose mug)

(71, 66)

(36, 29)

(35, 37)

(% coin-mug who chose mug,
% coin-pen who chose mug)

(64%, 62%)
diff = 2%

(63%, 58%)
diff = 5%

(65%, 66%)
diff = −1%

p = 0.80

p = 0.59

p = 0.89

Result

(−2%, −8%)
p = 0.86,
p = 0.39

Group B: Reference applies to some people in the room, INCLUDING self

(# coin-mug,
# coin-pen)

(115, 102)

(54, 54)

(61, 48)

(# coin-mug who chose mug,
# coin-pen who chose mug)

(79, 72)

(35, 34)

(44, 38)

(% coin-mug who chose mug,
% coin-pen who chose mug)

(69%, 71%)
diff = −2%

(65%, 63%)
diff = 2%

(72%, 79%)
diff = −7%

p = 0.76

p = 0.84

p = 0.40

Result

Difference (Group A − Group B)

Result

(−5%, −8%)

(−2%, −5%)

p = 0.45,
p = 0.20

p = 0.86,
p = 0.60

(−7%, −13%)
p = 0.40,
p = 0.14

Notes: All p-values are from two-sample two-sided tests of equality of proportions.

45

(−7%, −16%)
p = 0.40,
p = 0.07

Table 4: Choice by Coin-flip in Experiment 2 (Only 326 Subjects Correct on First Attempt)

All Correct

Weak Reference

Strong Reference

Difference

(q = 99%)

(q = 1%)

(Weak − Strong)

Group A: Reference applies to some people in the room, but NOT to self

(# coin-mug,
# coin-pen)

(78, 76)

(38, 37)

(40, 39)

(# coin-mug who chose mug,
# coin-pen who chose mug)

(51, 47)

(25, 21)

(26, 26)

(% coin-mug who chose mug,
% coin-pen who chose mug)

(65%, 62%)
diff = 4%

(66%, 57%)
diff = 9%

(65%, 67%)
diff = −2%

p = 0.65

p = 0.42

p = 0.88

Result

(1%, −10%)
p = 0.94,
p = 0.37

Group B: Reference applies to some people in the room, INCLUDING self

(# coin-mug,
# coin-pen)

(92, 80)

(42, 45)

(50, 35)

(# coin-mug who chose mug,
# coin-pen who chose mug)

(61, 59)

(25, 31)

(36, 28)

(% coin-mug who chose mug,
% coin-pen who chose mug)

(66%, 74%)
diff = −7%

(60%, 69%)
diff = −9%

(72%, 80%)
diff = −8%

p = 0.29

p = 0.36

p = 0.40

Result

Difference (Group A − Group B)

(−1%, −12%)
Result

(6%, −12%)

p = 0.90,
p = 0.11

p = 0.56,
p = 0.26

(−7%, −13%)
p = 0.48,
p = 0.20

Notes: All p-values are from two-sample two-sided tests of equality of proportions.

46

(−12%, −11%)
p = 0.21,
p = 0.26

