NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BARGAINING UNIT, UNION, INDUSTRY,
AND LOCATIONAL CORRELATES OF UNION
SUPPORT IN CERTIFICATION AND
DECERTIFICATION ELECTIONS

William 1. Dickens
Douglas R. Wholey
James C. Robinson

Working Paper No. 1671

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1985

We would like to thank Daniel Dorrow for research assistance and
the Institute of Industrial Realtions and the Graduate School of
Business Administration at Berkeley for generous research support.
We are grateful for the corwnents and assistance of John Freeman.
The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1671
July 1985

Bargaining Unit, Union, Industry,
and Locational Correlates of Union
Support in Certification and
Decertification Elections

ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the correlates of union success in NLRB certification and decertification elections. The analysis includes a wide variety
of bargaining unit, union, industry, and geographic attributes, many of which
have not been considered in previous studies.
Variables having a statistically significant relation with voting in
certification elections are the size of the unit, employer consent to the
definition of the bargaining unit, the length of campaigns, union organizing

effort, union dues, union wages, non—union wage variance, the industry
unemployment rate and percentage of black workers and the concentration of
jobs among a few employers in a geographic area.

The same specification was estimated for decertification elections.
Variables having a statistically significant association with voting are unit
size, length of campaign, and the non—union wage variance.
Examination of the magnitude of the estimated coefficients

suggests that,
only unit size and union organizing effort might affect outcomes in more than

a small percent of all certification elections. Estimated correlations for

voting in dercertification elections are not accurate enough to allow such a
judgment.

Finally, comparison of the regression results for certifications and

de—certifications shows that the process determining how workers vote is very
different in the two types of elections.

William T. Dickens

Douglas R. Wholey

James

C. Robinson

School of Business
University of Arizona

University of California

Berkeley, CA 94720

Tucson, AZ 85721

Berkeley, CA 94720

(415) 642—5452

(602) 621—1678

(415) 642—5452

Department

University

of Economics
of California

School of Public Health

1

I. INTRODUCTION

Certification and decertification elections are a mechanism of union
growth and decline.

Between 1956 and 1976, the number of certification

elections held doubled while the number of decertjfication elections
quintupled. In the same time span, membership loss due to decertification has

quadrupled while the membership gained through certification elections has

been halved)
The research reported here presents information on two new aspects of the

correlates of union success. First, past research has considered the correlation of union success with geographic. location,2 union characteristics,3 and

industry4 primarily by using dummy variables. While

this

is a useful tech-

nique to see whether or not a correlation exists or simply to control for
these factors, the interpretation of these dummy variables is difficult. To

ascertain what specific aspects of location, unions and industries are
associated with election outcomes, we have included a number of attributes of
each of these categories in the analysis.

For example, several authors have studied the relation of a southern
location with the outcome of representation elections.5

The South differs

from other areas in many ways: lower levels of unionization, higher incidence

of right—to—work laws, lower industrial concentration, etc. In an attempt to
determine which, if any, of these factors can account for observed differences

in election outcomes between the south and other areas, these and other
geographic characteristics are included in this analysis.

Second, past research has considered the correlates of either certifica-

tion or decertification elections. But there has been no examination of the
similarities and differences between the two processes. Differences found by

comparing the two types of studies could be due to differences in the

2

processes or differences in the specifications estimated. By using the same
regression specification for both types of elections the work presented here
allows a direct comparison of the importance of several factors in determining

the outcome of certification elections to their importance in decertifica—
tions.

Our presentation proceeds in four parts. The next section develops the

regression specification. The third section describes the data. The fourth
presents our results, and the last is a conclusion summarizing the results and
considering their implications.

II. THE SPECIFICATION
The dependent variable is a Haldane—Logit transformation of union support
in certification and decertification elections measured at the bargaining unit

level. Aspects of bargaining units, union affiliation, industry, and communi-

ty, which are likely to be related to union support, are identified from the
literature on certification and decertification elections, and the literature
on union organizing.

1. Bargaining Unit
There are two bargaining unit characteristics identifiable in this data
set which are probably related to union support in certification and decerti—
fication elections. The first, unit size, has repeatedly been demonstrated to

be important. The second, factor, management resistance, has received less
attention.

The common finding relating size to decertification outcomes is increas-

ing size reduces the probability of a union being decertified.6 The usual
argument given to explain this finding is that large units are more economical

3

to service and more attractive to a union. As a consequence, service for
union members is good, making them satisfied with and supportive of the union.

Further, since the unit is large the union expends substantial tesources to
keep the unit.

If this argument is folled for certification elections, a similar
positive relationship between unit size and union support would be expected.
However, the most couon finding in studies of certification elections is that

unit size is negatively related to the union support.7 Cooke8 provides an
explanation. He argues pro—union groups are able to exert more pressure in
small groups because they are better able to communicate, maintain cohesive-

ness, and apply pressure to force social conformity. This explanation is
consistent with the decertification findings because the mobilized group in a
decertification is attempting to oust the union.
A third possibility is that differences in technology or management style

between small and large firms (reflected here in unit size) affect election
outcomes.

Since there are potentially many different factors at work, we have

chosen a polynomial specification which allows the marginal effects of
increasing size to differ between different size firms.

The second factor associated with bargaining units is management resistance. Two variables which may signal the intensity of management resistance

in certification campaigns are whether or not the election is a consent
election, and the amount of time between when the petition for an election is
filed and when the election is held.

There are three ways consent elections may reflect less management
resistance in a certification election. First, when the management consents
to the union definition of the bargaining unit they signal employees that they

4

may not intend to fight union efforts. Second, in a consent election the
bargaining unit requested by the union is not modified.

If a union has

defined a unit to its ow-n advantage and the company successfully contests it
the union may loose supporters who are removed by the redefinition or find its

strength diluted by additionaliorkers.9 Third, the absence of management
consent may serve as a proxy for the use of other management campaign tactics

such as meetings, letters, hand bills, and intimidation of union supporters
which have been shown to affect voting)0

Consent elections are probably not a sign of management resistance in
decertification elections.

First, failure to consent does not signal an

attempt to change the bargaining unit. In addition, while it is almost always

management that fails to consent to certifications, either the union or
management may not consent to decertification elections. Therefore, we have

no expectations concerning the relationship between consent elections and
union support in decertification elections.
-

Management

resistance may also be reflected in the amount of time,

between the date when the petition for an election is filed and the date the

election is held. Union support is usually at its peak when the petition is

filed. The greater the delay, the more opportunity employers will have to
counter union efforts and hire workers screened for pro—union sympathies.

This again should lead to less union support. Delays may also signal the
use of other anti—union tactics.

These arguments do not generalize to decertifications. Therefore we have
no expectations concerning the sign of the effect of delays in decertification
elections.

It should be noted that management resistance in these circumstances may
be

endogenous.

If firms respond to stronger pro—union sentiments by

5

increasing the intensity of anti—union efforts, the measured effects of
management resistance would probably be biased downward. If firms respond by

dropping anti—union efforts the measured effects of management resistance
would probably be biased upward. 12

2. Union
Empirical results linking particular unions to the outcome of certifica-

tion and decertification elections are mixed. In separate studies: Sandver
found Teamsters win fewer elections than other unions,'3 Cooke found union

support to be lower in certification elections where Teamsters where
involved,14 Anderson et al. found no difference between Teamsters and other

unions in union support in decertification elections,15 and Dickens finds
substantial differences between several unions.'6 One potential reason for
these ambiguous results is the presence of a number of different, and conflicting, factors associated with unions which may affect voting.

The size of a union may be related to its success in certification and

decertification elections for many reasons. A larger union may have more
resources available for fighting representation campaigns and is more attrac-

tive to workers if they feel that a large union has more leverage in negotiations.'7 On the other hand, large unions may be more bureaucratic and less

responsive to membership. Thus, the sign of the union size effect may be
either positive or negative in certification and decertifications.

In discussing unions' organizing activity, it is useful to distinguish
between its extent and its intensity. Roughly speaking, the extent would be
measured by the number of elections a union engaged in and the intensity by
the amount of effort put into each campaign. All other things held equal, one

would expect that the more intense a union's organizing effort, the more

6

successful it would be in each certification campaign. On the other hand, as

a union increases the extent of its organizing efforts by attempting to
organize more units, it is forced to try more marginal units with a lower
probability of success. However, we cannot expect that all other things are
held equal.

Even if we had good measures of the extent and intensity of union
organizing efforts, we would still face the problem that more intense efforts

may be a response by a union to a more difficult territory. More extensive
organizing may be a response to a larger number of opportunities.

In addition, while we can measure the extent of organizing activity ——

the number of elections in which a union participates ——

we

can get at

intensity only by a much less direct route.'8 We have used the average size
of the unit a union organizes and the total number of workers involved in all

elections as proxies for intensity.

To interpret these as proxies for

in'éensity one must assume that unions organizing larger units will put more

ffort into each campaign. This would be a reasonable assumption if there are

economies of scale in servicing larger units, but income from a unit is
proportional to its size. This effect will be picked up by unit size, which

is already controlled for, but it may also be reflected in the organizing
strategy of a union. Thus, unions which organize larger units on average may
tend to put more effort into each campaign even when organizing smaller units.

How the extent and intensity of union organizing efforts will affect

success in decertifications is even less clear.

Organizing skills and

resources may be useful in fighting decertifications. On the other hand, more
extensive and intensive effort may lead to the certification of marginal units

with a greater tendency to decertify. It has also been suggested that unions

face a trade—off between organizing and servicing,'9

Unions devoting

7

considerable effort to organizing may not have the resources to adequately
service existing units and may loose more decertifications. Thus no attempt
is made to predict the effect of organizing effort on decertifications.

The final union attributes we will consider are membership costs and
benefits. Controlling for otheffactors, the greater the cost of participating in the union, the lower should be the union support in an election. The

greater the benefits from unionization the greater should be union support.
This study includes a measure of average union dues per member and the average

dollar value of union benefits2° (health care, pension contribution, recreational services, etc.) per member.

3. Industry
The use of dummy variables is again found in the analysis of industry

effects on election outcomes. Rose classified industries into four major
groups and found little difference in certification election outcome between

them.2' Sandver classified industries on the basis of capital intensity and
had inconclusive results studying certification elections.22 In a study of
decertification elections, Anderson, Busman, and O'Reilly found bargaining

units were more likely to vote for the union in the service industry and
against the union in the retail industry.23

This study considers eight industry attributes potentially affecting the

outcome of representation elections: the level of strike activity, potential

wage gains from unionization, wage levels, potential improvements in wage
equity from unionization, wage dispersion in non—union finns, the percent of
the workforce that is unionized, the percent of the workforce that is black,
and the industry unemployment rate.

8

Strikes are costly to workers so they may view them as something to be
avoided. Controlling for other factors, on might expect to find less support

for unions in both certification elections and

decertificatjon elections in

industries with more strike activity.

Industries differ consideràbly both in average wages and in average wage

differences between union and non—union workers. If

expected wage gains from

unionization are related to average industry union/non—union

differences, then

union support in both certifications and decertificatjons should be greater in
industries with larger union/non—union differences.

Pencavel argues that unionism is a normal good and that desire for
unionization increases with income!4 Thus, not only the difference between
union and non—union wages should matter, but also the overall wage level.

It has been argued that workers prefer more equitable compensation
systems and unions respond to these desires by lowering the variance of
wages.25 If workers do prefer lower wage variance, they should be more
likely
to vote union in industries where unions reduce the wage variance more.

Two arguments can be found concerning the likely effects of industry
unionization on vote.

The first argument is the saturationist argument.

Ashenfelter and Pencavel26 argue that as unionization increases, further gains

from organizing are more difficult to obtain.

The consequence is a dimin-

ishing return to organizing efforts as more marginal bargaining units are
organized.
decrease.

Therefore, as unionization increases, union

support should

On the other hand, when unionization is low within an industry,

employers strongly resist union organizing.

In fact, employers strive to

prevent the entry of unions anywhere within the industry.

Thus, if union

membership is not extensive within an industry, unions should be less likely
to win representation elections. Taking these two arguments together suggests

9

that unionization is related to union support in a U—shaped fashion, with
unions having the greatest probability of success in moderately unionized
industries. On the other hand, if unions organize in each industry up to the
point where marginal costs of obtaining a new member are equal to the marginal

benefits of that new member, no relation if marginal benefits are constant or
perceived as constant with respect to the level of unionization.

During periods of high unemployment, resistance of employers to unions
increases and the risk to a worker of joining a union increases. In the case

of decertification elections, increasing unemployment may increase employer
resistance to unions and cause dissatisfaction of union members with the union

because of loss of job security.27 Thus, industry unemployment is expected to

be negatively related to union support in certification and decertification
elections.

Black workers have been found to be more likely to vote union.28 Farber

and Saks suggest that this is because unions impose a formal mechanism for

resolving disputes providing blacks with some protection from discrimination.29 If this is true the percent of workers who are black in an industry
should be positively related to union support in certification and decerti—
fication elections.

6. Location
The primary geographic variable researchers have looked at in analyzing
certification and decertification elections is whether or not the bargaining
unit is located in a Southern or Right—to—Work state. Analyzing certification
elections, Rose found a slight tendency for unions to have a greater chance of

success in the South.3° Sandver argued this effect was due to differences in
unit size and election type between Southern and other states.31 In analysis

10

of decertjfjcatjon elections, Krislov found unions in Southern and Midwestern

states had a greater chance of success than unions elsewhere.32 On the other

hand, Anderson, Busman, and O'Reilly found location in the South to be an

unimportant factor in explaining election outcomes.33

Eliwood and Fine

consider the effects of right—to—work laws on union success in certification
drives and find that it drops slightly in the years immediately following the

passage of the law and then increases slightly in later years.34 Cooke finds

that unions are less successful in certification elections in Southern
Right—to—Work States.35 The only other geographic factor analyzed is the
effect of a metropolitan location. Rose finds that unions in non—metropolitan

areas tended to experience a greater degree of success in certification
elections.

36

This study considers nine attributes of the location of an election:
whether the firm is located in the South or a rural area, strike activity, the

percent of the population which is black, right—to—work laws, community
unionization, community unemployment, community urbanization, and the structure of local industry.

It is well known that states with right—to—work laws have a significantly

lower percentage of the work force organized. 37

However, as the evidence

presented above suggests, the relationship between right—to—work laws and

election outcomes is ambiguous. Three arguments can be proposed linking
right—to—work laws to union support in certification and decertification
elections.

First, while right—to—work laws make it possible for "free—riders" to
reap the benefits of union membership without paying the costs, thus reducing

the incentive to join unions, they might make workers more likely to vote
union.

Right—to—work laws lower the potential cost of voting pro—union

11

because, if the worker does not like the union, he does not have to join. It
is to the worker's advantage to give the union a chance. Second, the presence

of right—to—work laws could make unions less likely to expend resources

organizing marginal units, concentrating instead on units likely to be
organized successfully. Since right—to—work laws are associated with low
unionization, there should be many prime sites to organize. Both of these
factors imply a positive relationship between right—to—work laws and union
success. But, right—to—work laws are usually enacted in states where there is

little community support for unionization. Therefore, the sign of the corre—
lation of right—to—work laws with voting can't be predicted.

The arguments for the relevance of community unemployment, unionization,
strike activity, and the percent black are similar to the arguments presented
above for industry effects.

While union organizers have felt urban areas were easier to organize than

rural areas, Rose found unions have slightly more success in rural areas.38
In cities, alternative jobs are easier to find. This decreases the expected

cost of voting for a union in a certification election. On the other hand,
the greater cost of organizing and servicing units in rural areas may lead

unions to attempt to organize only in those firms where they have a high
probability of success. Therefore there is no reason to anticipate a positive
or negative relation.

Another factor affecting the availability of alternative jobs is local
industry concentration. If most jobs in an area are concentrated among a few

employers, one would expect workers to have fewer opportunities and view
certifying or decertifying a union as a potentially more costly experiment.
Alternatively, workers who don't like a company or a union are less likely to

quit and more likely to try

to

change conditions by voting for certification

12

or decertification. Once again there is no reason to anticipate a positive or
negative relationship.

III. DATA SOURCES AND ESTIMATION TECHNIQUE
The dependent variables arrare constructed for data on union support in

certification and decertification elections. Union is measured as the proportion of workers voting union in an election.

National Labor Relation Board election report data covering all cases

closed in the years 1977 to 1979 form the basis of the sample. This data
contains the outcome of the election, the type of election, the three digit

standard industrial classification codes, the location of the election, the
date of the petition for election, the date the election was held, and the
petitioning union. From all cases closed in these years we choose all those
involving only one union for which our dependent and all independent variables

could be constructed. This left a sample of 12,009 certification election and
1,320 decertification elections.

The bargaining unit characteristics, size of unit, the length of the
campaign, and whether or not the election was a consent election, are constructed from the National Labor Relations Board data. The size of the unit is
constructed as the number of eligible voters in the unit in thousands. The log

of the number of months between the petition for election and the date the
election was held is used as a measure of the length of the campaign, and a

variable

dummy

is constructed for whether or not the election was a consent

election.

Union size (in hundreds of thousands) is measured as the average reported

size in the 1977 and 1979 union directories. Union dues are computed as the
total amount of dues and per capita payments, in hundreds of dollars in the

13

years 1977 through 1979. to every local affiliated with the national union and

to the national, divided by union membership.39 Similarly, union benefits are
measured as the total value of benefits in hundreds of dollars provided by all

locals affiliated with a national and by the national to members of the union

divided by union membership.4° The extent of union organizing efforts was
measured by the number of elections the union took part in during the period.

Two variables which were included in an attempt to control for the intensity
of organizing efforts are the average size of units a union was organizing and

the total number of workers in all units a union attempted to organize.
Finally, a dummy variable for elections involving Teamsters was included to
see if the union attributes we have considered can explain the relation found
by past authors.
The industry data is coded at the two and three—digit standard industrial

classification level. Industry percent black, percent unemployed, and mandays

lost per 100 workers are coded at the two digit level.40 The fraction
unionized is coded at the three—digit level.4' A quadratic term for industry

unionization was included to allow for a curvilinear relationship between
industrial unionization and union support.

Wage levels, and union—non—union differences are accounted for by
including the average union wage and the average non—union wage at the
three—digit standard industrial classification level.

Similarly, union and

non—union wage dispersion is included using the standard deviation of the

union wage and the standard deviation of the non—union wage in each
42

industry.

A dummy variable coded 1 for elections in states having a right—to—work
law and 0 otherwise is included. Another dummy variable coded 1 for southern

states is also included.43 Finally, a third dummy, coded I for observations

14

outside an SMSA for which no SNSA or county data is available, is included.
SMSA and county variables are coded as zero for these observations.
SMSA data is the percent of all workers unionized within the SMSA and the

percent unemployed.

A quadratic term is included to allow a curvilinear

relationship between community unionization and union support. Unemployment

rates are matched on an annual basis with election data. Mandays lost per

employee was averaged over the three years to obtain a stable measure of
propensity to strike.

44

The remainder of the geographic variables are coded

at the county level. The variables included are job concentration, blacks as a
fraction of population, and urbanization.45

The means and standard deviations of the variables are reported in table
1.

The two equations were estimated using a modification of the Haldane

Minimum Chi—Squared Logit method proposed by Dickens.46 The method allows for

both individual and firm level error variance components. A description of
the method can be found in the Appendix.

IV. FINDINGS
The estimated coefficients and their standard errors are presented in
Table 2. The approximate impact of a one unit change in each variable on the

probability of voting union is also reported. There are two things worth

noting about the general nature of these results.

First, although many

variables have statistically significant relations with vote, point estimates

and standard errors tell another story. With the exception of unit size,
organizing effort, in both equations, and union size, and the Teamster dununy

in the de—certification equation, no other variables have large impacts.
Given point estimates, variation of other variables within the range of plus

or minus two standard deviations would be associated with less than a 10%

15

change in the percent of workers voting union.

While such changes could

affect a large number of elections, none would be decisive in even a majority
of elections.

Second, these results make it quite clear that the decertification
process Is very different from the certification process. Of the 31 pairs of
coefficients, only 17 have the sane sign. Although all variables which have a

statistically significant relation to decertificatjon

voting also have

statistically significant relations to certification voting, the signs are not
the same in 2 out of 3 cases.

We now proceed with consideration of the relations in each category.

1. Bargaining Unit
The

range of
relation.

larger

variable with the largest discernible relation within its
variation is unit size.

normal

Figures 1 and 2 depict the estimated

Our findings are largely the same

as

those of past authors ——

units are less likely to decertify or certify.

The results for

certification elections are qualitatively similar to Cook's in that the
functional form forces a flattering out of the size effect in larger units.
But, this flattering takes place at a much larger unit size. This may be due
to our use of a more flexible functional form.

The other two variables measured at the bargaining unit level are
interpreted for certifications as indications of management resistance. Both
are statistically significant with the anticipated sign. Workers taking part

in consent elections are about seven percent more likely to vote for the
union. Every doubling in the length of the campaign leads to about a 3% drop
in

percent voting union.

16

Interestingly, the measured effect of campaign length in decertifications

is nearly the same as in certifications.

While it is arguable that drawing

out certification drives is in management's interest, it is hard to see why
this would be the case for decertifications.

The one hypothesis which seems

consistent with these findings ii that, whatever the reason for the length of

the campaign, management's superior access to workers allows them to make
better use of the time.

As anticipated, the effects of consent elections in decertifications is
small and not statistically significant.

Since both the consent and length of elections variable are not predetermined (we might expect employers to vary their resistance in response to
charges in the significance of the union threat) both equations were estimated

leaving these variables out. All results with respect to other variables were
qualitatively unaffected.

2. Union
Two of the variables measured at the union level are statistically
significant in the certifications model.

None are in the decertification

model. In the certification model the relation of union size to voting is not
statistically or practically very significant. The coefficient in decertifi-.
cations is larger but is not measured with as much accuracy.

One of the three organizing variables

is statistically significant in

certification elections. For every one standard deviation (43,000) increase
in the number of workers eligible to vote in elections involving the union,
the predicted probability of a worker voting union increases by about 9.3%.

The probability of workers voting union drops by more than 12% with each
standard deviation (1130) increase in the number of elections a union engages

17

in. (Although this effect is not significant at the .05 level, it would be at

a .08 level.) Holding these two variables Constant, average unit size has
almost no relation to voting.

Interpreting these relations as causal, the net effect of increasing the

number of units organized for a union organizing average sized units is
positive. Taking both effects into account, a union which organizes 1,000
more average sized units can be expected to have about a % higher

probability

of workers voting union. A union which organized units with less than 50
workers (on average) would have a lower probability of success if it engaged
in more drives.

Although the signs on these coefficients are consistent with the "extensive—intensive" interpretation suggested above, there may be other interpre-

tations. For instance, there may be differences in the types of units which
are being organized by different unions. These differences might be reflected
in the size of the units a union organizes.

The coefficients of these organizing variables in the decertification
model are large., but are not measured accurately.

Of considerable interest are the results with respect to dues and
benefits. Both are related to voting with the expected signs in both models

and dues are statistically significant in the certifications model.

The

coefficients in decertifications are larger than in certifications, which is
what would be expected if workers gain information on these union attributes

over time. However, the coefficients are quite small. An increase of two
standard deviations in union dues ($124 per year) is related to only slightly
more than a 2% decline in the number of workers voting union in certification
elections and 4% in decertifications.

18

Once these other union effects are controlled for, the Teamster dummy is

no longer statistically significant.

Despite this, one can not say that

Teamster involvement in an election is unimportant.

Rather, one cannot

distinguish the effect of Teamster involvement from the effects of other
attributes of that union ——

3.

particularly

its extensive organizing efforts.

Industry

Several of the industry level variables have statistically significant

coefficients in the certifications specification.

One is statistically

significant in the decertifications specification.

With other variables controlled for, strike activity is clearly uncor—

related with voting in certifications and decertifications. A two standard

deviation increase in this variable is associated with less than a 1.5%
increase or decrease in the probability of a worker voting union. Further,
the 95% confidence bounds for these effects are in the range of plus or minus
1.8% for certifications and 4.3% for decertifjcations.

Two studies using micro data have already suggested the importance of the

union wage effect.47 The coefficients found here for certification elections

are statistically significant but considerably smaller.
possible explanations for this.

There are two

Since both previous studies confound the

effects of within plant relative wages with the expected union wage gain it is

possible that much of the previously measured effect is due to the relative

wage effect.

Alternatively, the average difference between union and

non—union wages in an industry could be much larger than the average expected

wage gain in a union representation election election. This would be true,

if, for example, the firms with the largest potential wage change were
unionized first. By 1979 the expected gain could be considerably less than

19

the average union—non—union difference. This would bias coefficient estimates
downward.

Pinally,

it

has bean suggested that unionism i a "nor•nial good" ——

that

people demand more unionism as their incomes increase. The point estimates

for

the certification model are uggestive of this hypothesis in that if both

union

and (non—union wages) are a dollar higher, the probability of workers

voting union is higher, but the effect is very small and far from
statistically significant.

The point estimates of the wage effects in decertifications are small and

imprecise. They also do not have the expected signs.

It has been argued that unions lower the dispersion of wages and that
they do this because workers want them to. The results of the certifications

model provides statistical support for the second part of this contention.
Workers in industries where non—union wages have a higher standard deviation
are slightly more likely to vote union. But, the relation in decertifications

is the opposite. Perhaps union attempts to compress wages in industries with
higher variance leads to more strife ——

increasing the probability of union

loss.

Turning to the coefficients of the level of unionization in the industry,

we find no evidence of any saturation effect. But, given the lack of precision of the estimates, we cannot rule out a substantial relation ——

particu-

larly in decertification elections.

As we anticipated, workers in industries with higher unemployment rates
are less likely to vote union in both certifications and decertifications. A
two standard deviation increase in the unemployment rate (2.9%) is associated
with a 1.57. decrease in the probability of a worker voting union in a certification election and a an almost 3% decrease in a decertification.

20

Finally, we find the expected relation between

percent black and

probability of voting union in certifications. A two standard deviation
increase in the percent of an industry's workforce which is black (5.98%) is

associated with more than a 2% increase in the probability of workers voting
union. No association can be ve'ttified for decertifications

4. Location
Only two location variables are statistically significant in the certifications equation. None are in the decertifications equation.

Workers are about 1.6% more likely to vote union in certification
elections held in right—to—work states. Workers in industries where a large

fraction of local jobs are concentrated among a few employers are slightly

less likely to vote union in certifications.

A two standard deviation

increase in the concentration measure (.076) is associated with about a 1.3%

decrease in the probability of a worker voting union in a certification.
Strangely, SMSA unemployment is positively related to union success. The only

explanation we can think of is that cities with anti—union atomospheres have

been more prosperous in recent years. The estimates of the coefficients of
other geographic variables are too imprecise for us to say much about them.

V. CONCLUSION
We have examined the influence of 26 variables on voting in certification

and decertification elections. Many are statistically significantly related

to how workers vote in both certification and decertification elections.
However, only unit size and organizing activity were found to have both a
large and statistically significant relation. The effects of other variables

21

were small or imprecisely measured. These results contrast sharply with the
large effects that have been found when more detailed information was avail-

able on each election and/or the attitudes of workers who took part in the

elections.49 Evidently the overwhelming majority of the variation in union
support is within industries, unions, and geographic locations rather than
between.

A second finding is that union support in certification elections and in

decertification elections are determined by very different processes. The
differences between the effects of variables in certification and decertjfjca—

tion elections noted in the literature survey are real and not the results of
past authors using different samples or specifications.
One of the unique aspects of this study is our examination of a number of

"economic variables" not used in previous studies. Most of these variables
are statistically significantly related in the expected manner to voting in

certifications, but the coefficients are small. One interesting finding is
that workers in industries with more non—union wage dispersion among produc-

tion workers are somewhat more likely to vote union than others.

This

provides some support for the view that union wage compression is a response
to worker desires.

Our two measures of management resistance have a larger measured relation

to voting than most of the other variables considered but still less than
other studies.

Although it could be that by controlling for a number of

previously unstudied variables we have reduced the impact of these variables,

it seems more likely that the variables we have chosen were poor proxies.

Voos,50 who also used length of campaign to measure management resistance
obtains similarly weak results. Seeber and Cooke51 find a very large effect
for consent elections, but they use aggregate data. Our results suggest that

22

either their consent election variable is acting as a measure of "climate"

rather

than reflecting the direct effects of fewer consent elections, or that

their time series measure is correlated with some left out variable.

23

Notes

1. Joseph Icrislov, "Decertjfjcatjon Elections Increase but Remain no Major
Burden to Unions," Monthly Labor Review, Vol.
102 (November, 1979), pp.
147—161.

2. For example, see John- Drotning, "NLRB Remedies for Election Misconduct:
An Analysis of Election OUtcomes and Their Determinants," Journal of

Business, Vol. 40 (April 1967), pp. 137—148; Joseph B. Rose. "What
Factors Influence Union Representation

Elections," Monthly Labor Review,
Vol. 95 (October 1972), pp. 49—51; Gary N. Chaison, "Unit Size and Unicn
Success in Representation Elections,"

Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 96
(February 1973), pp.51—52; Sandver, "South—Nonsouth Differentials in
National Labor Relations Board Certification
Elections;" William N.
Cooke, "Determinants of the Outcomes of Union Certification Elections,"
Industrial & Labor Relations Review, Vol. 36
(April 1983), pp. 402—414.

Two recent reviews of the literature on Union certification elections are

Jack Fiorito and Charles R. Greer
Past Research and Future Needs,"

"Determinants of the U.S. Unionism:

Industrial Relations, Vol. 21, #1
(Winter, 1982) pp. 1—32, and Herbert G. Heneman III and Marcus H.
Sandver, "Predicting the Outcome of Union Certification Elections: A
Review of the Literature," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol.
36, #4 (July 1983), pp. 537—575.

3. For example, see Joseph Krislov, "Union Decertifications," Industrial &
Labor Relations Review, Vol. 9 (July 1956), pp.589—594; William Fulmer,
"When Employees Want to Oust Their Unions," Harvard Business Review, Vol.
56 (March/April 1978), pp. 163—170; John C. Anderson, Gloria Busman, and
Charles O'Reilly, "That Factors Influence the Outcome of

Elections?"

Decertification

Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 102 (November 1979), pp. 32—36;
John C. Anderson, Gloria Busman, and Charles O'Reilly, "The Decertifica—
tion Process: Evidence from California,"
Industrial Relations, Vol. 19
(Winter 1982), pp. 178—195; Israel Chafetz and C.R.P. Fraser, "Union
Decertification: An Exploratory Analysis," Industrial Relations, Vol. 18
(Winter 1979), pp. 56—69; James Dworkin and Marian Extejt, "Recent Trends
in Union Decertification/ Deauthorization Proceedings of the
ond Annual Meeting of the Industrial Relations Research Association,
Madison, Wisconsin, pp.226—234.

4. For example, see Krislov, "Union Decertifications;" William T. Dickens,
"The Effect of Company Campaigns on Certification Elections: Law and
Reality Once Again," Industrial and Labor Relations Review
(July 1983);
Rose, "What Factors Influence Union Representation
Elections;" Anderson,
Busman, and O'Reilly, "What Factors Influence the Outcome of Decertjfica—
tion Elections;" Sandver, "South—Nonsouth Differentials in National Labor
Relations Board Certification Election Outcomes." Chafetz and Fraser,
"Union Decertification: An Exploratory
Analysis;" Anderson, Busman, and

O'Reilly, "What Factors Influence the Outcome of

Decertification

Elections;" Dworkin and Extejt, "Recent Trends in Union Decertifica—
tion/Deauthorization Elections;" Sandver, "South—Nonsouth Differentials
in National Labor Relations Board Certification Election

Outcomes;"
Cooke, "Determinants of the Outcomes of Union Certification Elections."

24

5. For example, see Rose, "What Factors Influence Union Representation

Elections;" Chafetz and Fraser, "Union Decertification: An
Exploratory
Analysis;" Anderson, Busman, and O'Reilly, "What Factors Influence the
Outcome of Decertification Elections;" Sandver, "South—Nonsouth Differentials in National Labor Relations Board Certification Election Outcomes."

6. Krislov, "Union Decertification;" Anderson, Busman, and O'Reilly, "What
Factors Influence the—Outcome of Decertification Elections?" Chafetz and
Fraser, "Union Decertification: An Exploratory Analysis;" Dworkin and
"Recent
Trends
in
Extejt,
Union Decertification/Deauthorization
Elections."

7. Rose, "What Factors Influence Union Representation Elections?" Chaison,
"Unit Size and Union Success in Representation
Elections;" Sandver,
"South—Nonsouth Differentials in National Labor Relations Board Election
Outcomes;" Cooke, "Determinants of the Outcomes of Union Certification,"
Dickens "The Effect of Company Campaigns..." is an exception finding
union support increasing with size.

8. Cooke, "Determinants of the Outcomes of Union Certification Elections,"
p. 404.

9. Cooke, "Determinants of the Outcomes of Union Certification Elections,"
p. 406.

10. Dickens, "The Effect of Company Campaigns..

11. Cooke, "Determinants of the Outcomes of Union Certification Elections,"
p. 407.

12. We say "probably" biased upward or downward because the direction of the
bias depends on the sign of the partial correlation as opposed to the
simple correlation of these factors. We think it is likely that they
would have the same sign.
-

13.

Sandver, "South—Nonsouth Differentials in National Labor Relations Board
Certification Election Outcomes."

14. Cooke, "Determinants of the Outcomes of Union Certification Elections."

15. Anderson, Busman, and O'Reilly, "What Factors Influence the Outcome of
Decertif icat ion Elections?"

16. Dickens, "The Effect of Company Campaigns..
17. Which they would if they could mobilize more support for a strike.

18. Attempts were made to obtain union expenditures on organizing, but they
could only be found for a few unions.
19. Berkowitz, "The Economic of Trade Union Organization and
Administration;"
Black, "Union Organizing and the Allocation of Union Resources."

25

20. Two other benefits of union membership —— expected wage gains and

improved pay equity are included in the study but are measured at the
industry level and are discussed in the section on industry effects. The
measure of benefits does not include changes in working conditions
associated with unionization.

21. Rose, "What

Factors

Influence Union Representation Elections."

22. Sandver, "South—Nonsouth Differentials in National Labor Relations Board
Certification Election Outcomes."

23. Anderson, Busman, and O'Reilly, "What Factors Influence the Outcome of
Decertification Elections?"

24. Pencavel, John Ii.
"The Demand for Union Services:
An Exercise,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXIV (January 1971), pp. 180—190.
25. Farber & Saks, "Why Workers Want Unions:..", p. 51.

26. Orley Ashenfej.ter and John H. Pencavel, "American Trade Union Growth:
1900—1960, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 83(1969), p.438.

27. Anderson, O'Reilly, and Busman, "Union Decertification in the U.S.:
194 7—1977."

28. Farber and Saks, "Why Workers Want Unions: The Role of Relative Wages and
Job Characteristics"; Dickens "The Effect of Company Campaigns...
29. Farber and Saks, "Why Workers Want Unions..."
30. Rose, "What Factors Influence Union Representation Elections."

31. Sandver, "South—Nonsouth Differentials in National Labor Relations Board
Certification Election Outcomes."
32. Krislov, "Union Decertifications."

33. Anderson, Busman, and O'Reilly, "What Factors Influence the Outcome of
Decertification Elections?"

36. David T. Ellwood and Glenn A. Fine, "The Impact of Right—to—Work Laws on
Union Organizing," NBER Working paper 1116 (May, 1983), p. 30.
35. Cooke, "Determinants of the Outcomes... ,"

p.

411.

36. Rose, "What Factors Influence Union Representation Elections."

37. For example see Keith Lumsden and Craig Petersen, "The Effects of
Right—to—work Laws on Unionization in the United States," Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 83 (December 1975), pp. 1237—1248.

38. Rose, "What Factors Influence Union Representation Elections."

26

39. The sources of the union size data are the Department of Labor, Directory
of National Unions and Employee Associations (Washington, D.C: Bureau of
Labor Statistics, Bulletin 2044, 1977; Bulletin 2079, 1979). Reported
union sizes for 1977 and 1979 were averaged to obtain the size used in

analysis. The sources of union financial data are the Department of
Labor, Labor Organization Annual Report: Forms LM—2 and LM—3. These are
obtainable in computer readable format for 1977 to 1979 from the Labor
Management Services Administration in Washington, D.C.
40. Percent Black and Percent Unemployed were obtained from the Department of
Labor, Handbook of Labor Statistics (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Bulletin 2070, 1980). Strike frequency was obtained from the
Dept. of Labor, Analysis of Work Stoppages (Washington D.C.: Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 1977; 1978 and 1979). Mandays lost per employee was
coded as the average mandays lost for 1977, 1978, 1979 divided by the
employment in the industry. Mandays lost in each industry was obtained
from Analysis of Work Stonpages (1977,1978, 1979). Industry Employment
came from BLS employment data for 1978.

11. The estimates for SMSA unionization and industry unionization were
obtained from Richard B. Freeman and James L. Medoff, "New Estimates of

Private Sector Unionism in the United States," Industrial & Labor
Relations Review, Vol. 32 (January 1979), pp. 143—174.

42. Union and non—union average wages and standard deviations were computed
using the May 1975 CPS tapes.

43. Right—To—Work states are Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia,
Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, North Dakota,
Nebraska, Nevada, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia, and
Wyoming. Southern states are Alabama, Arkansas, District of Columbia,
Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Lousiana, Maryland, Oklahoma, South
Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, Mississippi, North Carolina, and
West Virginia.

44. The unionization data was obtained from Freeman and Medoff, "New Estimates of Private Sector Unionism in the United States," and the unemployment data was obtained from Department of Labor, Geographic Profile of
Employment and Unemployment, 1978 (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 1979) and Department of Labor, Geographic Profile of Employment and Unemployment, 1979 (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Labor Statistics1 1980) and strike data was obtained from the Department of Labor,
Analysis of Work Stoppages (Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1977, 1978, 1979). Mandays lost per employee was coded as the
average mandays per year for the years 1977, 1978, and 1979 divided by
the average of employment in 1977 and 1978. Mandays lost was obtained
from Analysis of Work Stoppages (1977, 1978, 1979) and employment was
obtained from Bureau of the Census, County Business Patterns, U.S.
Summary and SMSA (1977; 1978).
Prepared by the Bureau of Census.
Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
45. Job concentration was coded using County Business Pattern (1978): File 2

[machine readable data file] prepared by the Bureau of the Census,
Washington: The Bureau [producer and distributor]. Job concentration was

27

measured for each industry in each county using the Herfindahl.uirschman
Index with the value of this index
increasing as concentration increases.

For construction of this index,

see F.M. Scherer, Industrial Market

Structure and Economic Performance, Second
Edition (Chicago: Rand McNally
College Publishing Company, 1980), p. 58. Percent black and urbanization
were obtained from the Bureau of Census,
County and City Data Book, 1977
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1978).

46. William T. Dickens, "Error Components in Grouped Data:

Why Its Never

Worth Weighting," NBER technical working paper #43, February 1985.

47. Farber and Saks, "Why Workers Want Unions... ," and Dickens, "The Effect
of Company Campaigns..

48. Such a large increase is
unimaginable. We are only interested in the
comparison of marginal charges but use the one dollar to figure for
illustrative purposes.

49. Getman, Goldberg and Herman
Workers Want Union... ,"

...

Law and Reality, Farber and Saks, "Why

Dickens, "The Effects of Company Campaigns..."

Beatrice Frieberg "Clerical Unionism: the Impact of the Runaway Office
on Union Representation Elections," mimeo, Berkeley (1983).
50. Paula B. Voos, "Union Organizing:

Costs and Benefits," Industrial and

Labor Relations Review vol. 36 //4, (July 1983), p. 58.

51. Ronald L. Seeber and William N. Cooke, "The Decline in Union Success in
NLRB Representation Elections,"
Industrial Relations Vol.
(Winter, 1983), p. 374—380.

22,

1/1,

28

Table 1
Means and Standard Deviations
of Variables Used in the Analysis

Variables

percent voting union
BARGAINING UNIT
eligible voters/1,000
consent elections
months of campaign (log)
UNION
membership/1,000
dues per member/100
benefits per member
workers in organizing drives
/100,000
number of organizing
attempts/1,000
average size of unit
(hundreds of workers)
Teamsters
INDUSTRY
mandays lost per worker
union wage
non—union wage
union wage dispersion
non—union wage dispersion
fraction union in industry
fraction union squared
percent black
percent unemployed
LOCATION
South
Right—to—work
Not in SMSA

Certification
Elections

mean

s.d.

.518

.269

.326

.260

.065
.062
.534

.152

.051
.108
.532

.121
.310

.620

1.058
1.776

.710

1.091
1.751

.715
.589

.306

.190

.241
.552

.306

.619
.186

.470

.430

.445

.430

.992

1.131

.957

1.119

.710
.326

.416
.469

.652
.312

.369
.463

.033

.464
1.00
1.03
.791
1.440
.169

.034

.494
1.06

5.02
4.06
1.676
2.360
.312
.126

5.00
3.94
1.709
2.4.65

.284
.109

1.01
.906
1.729
.169

10.889
5.882

.116
2.991
1.445

10.523
6.004

2.920
1.391

.219
.199
.547

.413
.400
.498

.160
.159
.481

.367
.365
.500

.231
.182
•Q79

.372
.215
.106

.389
.217
.107

2.766

3.183

.279
.209
.090
3.111

3.162

.071

.428

.113
.473

.014
.058

.038
.078

.074
.491
.013
.068

.111
.476
.036
.081

SMSA:

mandays lost per person
fraction workers unionized
fraction unionized squared
percent unemployed
COUNTRY:
fraction black
fraction urbanized
job concentration
fraction union in population

Decertjficatjon
Elections
mean
s.d.

.111

29

Variables

Table 2
Minimum Chi-squared Logit Model
of Voting in Union Representation Elections:
Percent Voting Union is Dependent Variable
Certification
Decertification
Elections
Elections
coef.
s.e. +dP/dX
coef.
s.e. +dP/dX

Constant

-.108

BARGAINING UNIT
eligible voters/l,000
eligible voters/l,000
squared
eligible voters/l,000

.232 -.027

-.639*** .120 -.160

—.326

2.589*** .489

.380** .080 .095

-

.267

cubed
-42.786*** 9.267 -10.683 43.139
consent elections
.288" .053 .072
.125
log of months of campaign -.
.022 -.032
UNION

129'

membership/boo
dues per member/100
benefits per member
workers in organizing

drives/100,000
number of organizing
attempts/l,000

average unit size
(hundreds of workers)

Teamsters
INDUSTRY
mandays lost per worker
union wage
non-union wage
union wage dispersion
non-union wage dispersion
fraction union
fraction union squared
percent black
percent unemployed

.715 -.072

.l82-*

.296

.569
-

.059

27.103 9.479

.119 .027
1.309 -.040

-.065
-.069*

.113 -.016
.040 -.017

-.351
—.151

.364 -.077
.112 -.033

.148

.139 .037

.260

.363 .057

.861**

.374 .215

.624

1.309 .137

-.450

.312 -.112

.688

.973 .151

-.074

.059 - .019

.249

.202 .054

.594 .065 —1.919

1.798 - .422

.260

-.024

.026 -.006

.048

.073 .011

.056** .019 .014
- .023
.020 - .006

-.041

.053 -.009

—.023

.019 -.006

.037'' .011 .009
.514
—.005

2.641 .128
.038 -.001

.0l6*** .004 .004

-

. 023**

.009 -.006

.077

.057 .017

.067

.047 .015

-

.844
-.906
.000
- .047

.024 -.013

.773 .185
1.154 -.199

.013 .000
.030 -

.010

30

LOCATION
South
Right-to—work
Not in SMSA

-.032

.042 -.008

.063

.038
.123

.044 .010
.183 .031

-.133
-.286

.017

.053 -.004

-.021

.157 - .005

.929 -.011 -2.031

2.947 -.446

.140 .014
.148 - .029
.575 -.063

StISA:

mandays lost per worker
fraction of workers
unionized
fraction of workers
unionized squared
percent unemployed

-

-.046

1.179 .102

2.941

.023** .014 .006

.003

.410

3.729 .646
.038 .001

COUNTY:

fraction black
job concentration

-.153

.157 -.038

-.688

.355 -.172 -1.484

N
Standard Error of
Unobserved Error
Component

-.071

.459 -.016
1.117 -.326

11,899

1,278

1.169

1.079

Significance levels for one-tailed
t test for null hypothesis that
coefficient equals zero
n
01
Y .025

'p .05

+dP/dX is the approximate effect of a one unit change in the dependent
variable on the probability of a worker voting union. It is calculated
as
(l—p)p where . is the logit coefficient and p
is the proportion voting union.

I

-

H

:

FIGURE 1.

__:_______________________
Estimated Effects of —- —.H
—4.___Probahi1i*yOt
Unit Size in
Certification E1ec4-irtc
—
and Confidence
______________
Interval
—__
H——---- H

—n

-

::

I

-

-

H

-

-.

p

—

.

!-

-

'

.

•

L

H

.1Lp1r±a11L- I1rtervai

•

CozxfHenee\—fltcc.n_
—___.\ \-——

:nrlenjft

TJflfl

———---—-—-—\-—---\———-\

--.-

flthert
U'JLKers

—

———

SIL Bfga1fl jnatlfllt
•

100

-.

-_

—

—— —

-

200

-

-

.
I

\: \:

•:

•

.

300

400

.

..

•

,.-

•1

-

500

600

• /L

FIGURE 2.
Estimated Effects of
Unit Size in
Decertification
Elections and
Confidence Interval

I.:

.•

ptEu:LiIJity
— — •ç'-i-4 4 ,,.-

_____

H::,-:
.-..

Tlnjhn

'H
I -i--..:;,.-,-,.
•.:
II,.

H

.._/

.

p

I.._ •.F.FI, 'I

1

//

''11:1/

-.

..

.
I

/F

J.

.

r
:/

—

flflfl: Conri.aenc,e Lv.

' T1nnr

,/i

'-I.
/
. I.
,
'I

•F:-.-

-.-

'JF

IJI

-:::-1:::.f———_;
'F!'

.

.

'.P

.

.

F

.0

I IF

I

''f: //. I/ //t.:• 'HpHp
-I

1

/:I:
jI
.1_i

I

11

-.

p

p

1

L

I

I

H.

II
fl

::

F-f'.

.

I'

:1—

I,

/

-p

I

.1.-.

'1

.

H

.

//

I

I:

// /

.

.

,

t_—#-CT.
.

''Fj'
-:

In

H:

'

,

•.

-p.

-

.

I

.

!'
p

.

zuu

,,:

1'i11

.7—1—--r100

-

I

—
rp.

.F

:

.

.

.

:

—.—t.

9-"

'I1iimber or •WOtkeLb

,.,,

H

.

F

300

400

.

:,I'FIIiIp:IFF.,,
F

p

p

UU

I

600

p. 1

Appendix 1

Estimation Technique

One standard approach to estimating models where the dependent variable
is a proportion is to assume that the expected value for the proportion for

observation p. is a logistic function of observed variables

each

(1)

or

1

pi=
1+e
Designating the size of each group i as N. and the actual proportion as
if we assume that NiPi is a binomially distributed random variable with

expected value p.N. then the S s of (1) can be consistently estimated by
regressing

on the X s

log

and

can be efficiently estimated if the variables are all weighted by an

appropriate approximation to the variance of the random variable

vi

log

—

log

This is the method oi Minimum Chi—Squared Logit.

p. 2

There are two problems with this as an approach to the data used here.

First some of the p. s are equal to one or zero so that the standard logit
transformation is undefined.

This problem is remedied by adopting the

alternative transformation proposed by Raldane,

L.log
p.
___
1
1
2N.

1

/

1

1

2N.

=X.S
1

1)

The second problem is that both logit transformations assume that all attri—
Lutes of an election unit which determine the probability of a worker voting
union are observed. This is certainly not the case. To solve this problem we
augment the Haldane model by assuming

L.

1

where y.

X.B +
1

1

is an unobserved i.i.d. error tern. Dickens [19851 shows that

this model can be efficiently estimated using a 2—step procedure.
first step consistent estimates of the

s and the variance of the

En the
are

obtained. Weighted estimation is done in the second step to obtain efficient
estimates.

