                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHAT DOES FUTURES MARKET INTEREST TELL US ABOUT THE MACROECONOMY
                        AND ASSET PRICES?

                                            Harrison Hong
                                            Motohiro Yogo

                                         Working Paper 16712
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16712


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2011


This paper subsumes our earlier work that focused on the commodity market. For comments and discussions,
we thank Erkko Etula, Hong Liu, Nikolai Roussanov, Allan Timmermann, Robert Vigfusson, and
seminar participants at Boston College, Carnegie Mellon University, Centre de Recherche en Economie
et Statistique, Columbia University, Dartmouth College, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Fordham
University, Imperial College London, International Monetary Fund, London School of Economics,
Northwestern University, Ohio State University, PanAgora Asset Management, SAC Capital Advisors,
Stockholm Institute for Financial Research, Stockholm School of Economics, University of California
at Los Angeles, University of California at San Diego, University of Minnesota, University of Pennsylvania,
University of Rochester, University of Southern California, University of Texas at Austin, University
of Tokyo, Washington University in St. Louis, the 2008 Economic Research Initiatives at Duke Conference
on Identification Issues in Economics, the 2010 Annual Meeting of the American Finance Association,
the 2010 National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute Working Group on Forecasting
and Empirical Methods in Macroeconomics and Finance, and the 2011 Commodity Futures Trading
Commission Conference on Commodity Markets. We thank Hyun Soo Choi, Hui Fang, Jennifer Kwok,
Yupeng Liu, James Luo, Thien Nguyen, and Elizabeth So for research assistance. Harrison Hong acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0850404). Motohiro Yogo acknowledges
support from the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research at the University of Pennsylvania.
The views expressed herein are ours and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Harrison Hong and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
What Does Futures Market Interest Tell Us about the Macroeconomy and Asset Prices?
Harrison Hong and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 16712
January 2011, Revised June 2012
JEL No. E31,E37,F31,G12,G13

                                              ABSTRACT

Economists have traditionally viewed futures prices as fully informative about future economic activity
and asset prices. We argue that open interest could be more informative than futures prices in the presence
of hedging demand and limited risk absorption capacity in futures markets. We find that movements
in open interest are highly pro-cyclical, correlated with both macroeconomic activity and movements
in asset prices. Movements in commodity market interest predict commodity returns, bond returns,
and movements in the short rate even after controlling for other known predictors. To a lesser degree,
movements in open interest predict returns in currency, bond, and stock markets.


Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
hhong@princeton.edu

Motohiro Yogo
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401-1804
yogo@minneapolisfed.org
1.      Introduction

Economists have traditionally viewed futures prices as fully informative about future eco-
nomic activity and asset prices and have remained silent on the role of open interest, or the
amount of futures contracts outstanding (Samuelson, 1965; Grossman, 1977). The theory of
backwardation implies that the risk premium depends only on the net supply-demand im-
balance among hedgers in the futures market, not on the gross amount of futures contracts

outstanding (Keynes, 1923; Hicks, 1939). The range of empirical work that uses futures
market data reﬂects these traditional theories. Macroeconomists use commodity futures and
spot prices to forecast inﬂation. International economists use the forward discount, or the
ratio of futures to spot price in the currency market, to forecast movements in exchange

rates. Financial economists use the yield spread to forecast bond and stock returns.
     In this paper, we show that open interest contains information about future economic
activity and asset prices that is not fully revealed by futures prices or net supply-demand
imbalances among hedgers in futures markets. Our point of departure from these tradi-

tional theories is the observation that gross (as opposed to net) hedging demand, by either
producers or consumers of commodities, tends to be pro-cyclical. For example, oil produc-
ers that anticipate higher demand could go short oil futures, while utilities that anticipate
higher demand from manufacturing ﬁrms could go long oil futures. Importers that anticipate
higher US demand could go short currency futures, while exporters that anticipate higher

US demand could go long currency futures. Financial ﬁrms and insurance companies that
anticipate expansion of their balance sheets could enter bond and stock market futures to
hedge interest rate and equity risk. In all of these examples, anticipation of higher economic
activity leads to higher hedging demand, which drives up open interest.

     In a simple model, we show that open interest is a more reliable signal of higher economic
activity and, consequently, future movements in asset prices than futures prices. The key
assumption is limited risk absorption capacity in the futures market. If there is excess
hedging demand from producers that want to be short futures, the futures price will fall

                                               2
due to limited arbitrage by speculators. Conversely, if there is excess hedging demand from
consumers that want to be long futures, the futures price will rise due to limited arbitrage
by speculators. Because the futures price can either fall or rise in response to anticipation of
higher economic activity, the futures price is a less reliable signal of future economic activity

and asset prices than open interest.
   We show a number of new facts that are consistent with this view of futures markets.
First, movements in open interest are highly correlated with movements in both futures and
spot prices in commodity, currency, bond, and stock markets. In each of these markets,
movements in open interest are positively correlated with the Chicago Fed National Activity

Index, which is a weighted average of 85 monthly indicators of US economic activity. Periods
of high US economic activity tend to coincide with high commodity returns, appreciation of
foreign currencies relative to the US dollar, low bond returns, and high stock returns. The
fact that movements in open interest are pro-cyclical is surprising because open interest does

not necessarily signal the direction of hedging demand.
   Second, movements in open interest predict returns. Our main evidence is from the com-
modity market, which is relatively ideal for testing our hypothesis because hedging demand
and limited risk absorption capacity tend to be more important in this market. Moreover,

our sample for the commodity market starts in 1966, which is much earlier than 1984 for
the other markets. We ﬁnd that a standard deviation increase in commodity market inter-
est increases expected commodity returns by 0.73% per month, which is both economically
large and statistically signiﬁcant. Commodity market interest remains a powerful predictor
even after controlling for a number of other predictors including the short rate, the yield

spread, the Chicago Fed National Activity Index, commodity basis (i.e., the ratio of futures
to spot price in the commodity market), commodity market imbalance (i.e., excess hedging
demand from hedgers), and past commodity returns. Interestingly, a high yield spread or
a high Chicago Fed National Activity Index predicts low commodity returns, implying that

expected commodity returns are pro-cyclical.


                                               3
   We ﬁnd qualitatively similar, but statistically weaker, evidence for predictability of re-
turns in currency, bond, and stock markets. We ﬁnd that rising currency market interest,
which signals higher US economic activity and rising inﬂation expectations, predicts appreci-
ation of a portfolio of foreign currencies relative to the US dollar. Notably, currency market

interest has more forecasting power than the forward discount, which is a leading predictor of
exchange rates in international ﬁnance. Similarly, rising bond market interest, which signals
higher economic activity and rising inﬂation expectations, predicts low bond returns. Finally,
rising stock market interest predicts high stock returns, although the statistical evidence is
the weakest for this market.

   Third, we ﬁnd that rising commodity market interest predicts low bond returns and a
rising short rate. A standard deviation increase in commodity market interest decreases
expected bond returns by 0.32% per month, which is highly statistically signiﬁcant. This
ﬁnding supports our hypothesis that commodity market interest reﬂects hedging in response

to news about higher economic activity. Anticipation of higher economic activity, which is
bad news for the bond market, predicts low bond returns and rising inﬂation expectations.
   Our preferred interpretation of the evidence is that open interest contains information
about future economic activity and inﬂation expectations that is not immediately impounded

in asset prices. An alternative interpretation, that open interest captures time-varying risk
premium, is less likely because the relation between movements in open interest and asset
prices implies momentum instead of mean reversion. That is, movements in open interest are
positively correlated with both contemporaneous and future returns, which imply momentum
generated by underreaction to news captured by open interest.

   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a model in which cycli-
cal variation in open interest predicts returns. Section 3 describes the futures market data
and the construction of the key variables for empirical analysis. Section 4 presents evidence
that movements in open interest are highly pro-cyclical, correlated with both macroeco-

nomic activity and movements in asset prices. Section 5 presents evidence that movements


                                              4
in open interest predict returns even after controlling for other known predictors. Section 6
concludes.



2.      A model in which open interest predicts returns

We develop a simple model of the futures market that explains why open interest can be
a better predictor of returns than futures prices or the direction of hedging demand. For

expositional purposes, the underlying asset in our model is a commodity. The economics of
the model would be the same if the underlying asset were a currency, a bond, or a stock as
long as gross hedging demand rises with economic activity.
     Our model is based on two plausible assumptions. First, information diﬀuses gradually in

ﬁnancial markets, which causes asset prices to initially underreact to news. This assumption
has been used successfully in a variety of contexts including macroeconomics (Mankiw and
Reis, 2002), international ﬁnance (Gourinchas and Tornell, 2004), and ﬁnancial economics
(Hong and Stein, 1999). Hong and Stein (2007) survey a large literature that presents
evidence for the underreaction of asset prices to news. Second, supply shocks move asset

prices due to ﬁnancial market frictions that limit arbitrage (De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and
Waldmann, 1990). Compelling evidence for downward-sloping demand exists in a variety of
ﬁnancial markets, even highly liquid ones such as bond and stock markets (see Shleifer, 1986,
for early evidence on stocks).


2.1.     Economic environment

There are three periods, indexed as t = 0, 1, 2. The riskless interest rate is constant and
normalized to zero. There is a spot market for a commodity in period 2, and there is a
futures contract on the same commodity that is traded in periods 0 and 1. Let S2 denote
the spot price for the commodity in period 2, which we assume is exogenous and stochastic.

In period 1, the economy can be in one of two states, “high” or “low”. In the high state,


                                              5
                                                            
the spot price in period 2 is distributed as S2 ∼ N S H , σ 2 . In the low state, the spot
                                                   
price in period 2 is distributed as S2 ∼ N S L , σ 2 . There is relatively high demand for
the commodity in the high state so that S H > S L .1 In period 0, the probability that the
economy is in the high state in period 1 is π = 0.5. Note that


                                   E0 [S2 ] = πS H + (1 − π)S L = S̄                                     (1)


and


                             Var0 (S2 ) = σ 2 + πS H2 + (1 − π)S L2 − S̄ 2 .                             (2)


       In period 1, there are producers that commit to production of the commodity for delivery
in period 2. Alternatively, there are producers that commit to use the commodity as an input
for production in period 2. The producers know the state of the economy in period 1 (i.e.,
whether it is high or low), but they still face uncertainty about the spot price (captured by

σ 2 ). Let Y H denote the quantity of the commodity that the producers commit to selling (or
buying) in the high state. Let Y L denote the quantity of the commodity that the producers
commit to selling (or buying) in the low state. In each state, Y > 0 if the commodity is
an output, and Y < 0 if the commodity is an input for the producers. We make a natural

assumption that there is relatively more demand for the commodity in the high state so that
 H   L
Y  > Y . We normalize Y L = 0 to simplify notation.

       The producers are inﬁnitely risk-averse and would like to hedge all uncertainty about the
spot price. They can do so by entering the futures market in period 1. Let Ft denote the

futures price in period t on a contract that matures in period 2. The producers choose the
optimal futures position D1P to minimize the variance of their total proﬁt from production
   1
    To tailor our model to bond markets, we must reverse this inequality because high economic activity is
bad news for bonds. All the derivations in this subsection then follow through, resulting in a key prediction
that a high growth rate of open interest signals a low expected bond return.




                                                     6
and hedging activity:

                                                          
                              min Var1 S2 Y + (S2 − F1 )D1P .                             (3)
                              D1P



The producers can perfectly hedge all uncertainty by choosing D1P = −Y . The producers
are short futures if the commodity is an output, and they are long futures if the commodity
is an input. The producers are active in the futures market only in the high state because

D1P = −Y L = 0 in the low state. Otherwise, the producers do not participate in the futures
market.
   In addition to the producers, two other groups of investors are in the futures market.
The ﬁrst group consists of informed one-period investors, who have mass λ ∈ (0, 1) in the
population of investors. They have the usual mean-variance objective function with risk-

aversion parameter γ. These investors are informed in the sense that they are fully aware
of the probability distribution for S2 in each period. In particular, they know the state of
the economy in period 1. The informed investors choose the optimal futures position DtI in
periods t = 0, 1 to maximize their objective function. The optimal futures position is given

by the usual mean-variance demand function:

                                             Et [Ft+1 − Ft ]
                                    DtI =                      .                          (4)
                                            γVart (Ft+1 − Ft )

   The second group consists of uninformed one-period investors, who have mass 1−λ in the
population of investors. They also have a mean-variance objective function with risk-aversion
parameter γ. The key modeling assumption is that these uninformed investors underreact

to news about the state of the economy. Speciﬁcally, they are unaware of the state of the
economy in period 1, so their subjective distribution of S2 in period 1 is the same as their
prior about S2 in period 0. The uninformed investors choose the optimal futures position
DtU in periods t = 0, 1 to maximize their objective function. The optimal futures position is




                                                 7
given by the mean-variance demand function:

                                                 S̄ − Ft
                                        DtU =               .                         (5)
                                                γVar0 (S2 )


2.2.    Equilibrium futures prices

We now solve for the equilibrium futures price in period 1. The market-clearing condition
in period 1 is


                                λD1I + (1 − λ)D1U + D1P = 0.                          (6)


Substituting the demand functions, the futures price in the high state is

                                                            ω1 γσ 2 Y H
                           F1H = ω1 S H + (1 − ω1 )S̄ −                 ,             (7)
                                                                λ

where

                                              λVar0 (S2 )
                                ω1 =                             .                    (8)
                                        λVar0 (S2 ) + (1 − λ)σ 2

The futures price in the low state is


                                  F1L = ω1 S L + (1 − ω1 )S̄.                         (9)


   We now work backward to solve for the equilibrium futures price in period 0. The
market-clearing condition in period 0 is


                                   λD0I + (1 − λ)D0U = 0.                            (10)




                                                 8
Substituting the demand functions, the futures price is

                                                  
                                      πω1 γσ 2 Y H
                         F0 = ω0 S̄ −                + (1 − ω0 )S̄,                     (11)
                                           λ

where

                                             λVar0 (S2 )
                            ω0 =                                   .                    (12)
                                   λVar0 (S2 ) + (1 − λ)Var0 (F1 )

Open interest, or the quantity of futures contracts outstanding, is

                                                                 
                     O0 = λ D0I  = (1 − λ) D0U  = πω0 (1 − ω1 ) Y H  .            (13)


   We now make two key observations about the model. The ﬁrst observation is that the

futures price in the high state is lower than that in the low state if hedging demand is
suﬃciently high. More formally, F1H < F1L if

                                                     
                                            λ SH − SL
                                     YH   >             .                               (14)
                                               γσ 2

The intuition for this result is straightforward. In the high state, good news about the
economy leads to a high futures price in the absence of hedging by the producers. In the
presence of hedging demand, however, the producers put downward pressure on the futures

price when Y H > 0. Because investors have limited risk-bearing capacity (captured by γσ 2 ),
hedging demand can more than oﬀset the impact of good news, leading to a low futures
price.
   The second observation is that open interest in the high state is always higher than

that in the low state because of hedging by the producers. In the high state, the informed
investors are the only ones to be long futures if Y H > 0, while both the informed investors




                                               9
and the producers are long futures if Y H < 0. Therefore, open interest in the high state is
                    ⎧
                    ⎪                  H
                    ⎨ λDI = λ(1−ω1 )(2S −S̄ ) + ω1 Y H
                        1         γσ
                                                                    if Y H > 0
              O1H =                                                            .            (15)
                    ⎪                         H
                    ⎩ λD1I + D1P = λ(1−ω1 )(2S −S̄ ) − (1 − ω1 )Y H if Y H < 0
                                          γσ



In the low state, the uninformed investors are the only ones to be long futures. Therefore,
open interest in the low state is

                                                                 L
                                                                    
                                             λ(1 − ω 1 )   S̄ − S
                          O1L = (1 − λ)D1U =                          .                     (16)
                                                     γσ 2

Note that O1H > O1L because S H − S̄ = S̄ − S L (implied by π = 0.5). Importantly, this is

true regardless of the direction of hedging demand (i.e., whether Y H > 0 or Y H < 0).
   Deﬁne the return on futures between periods 0 and 1 as R1 = F1 − F0 . Similarly, deﬁne
the return on futures between periods 1 and 2 as R2 = S2 − F1 . The expected return on
futures between periods 1 and 2 is
                          ⎧
                          ⎪                  
                          ⎨ (1 − ω1 ) S H − S̄ +       ω1 γσ2 Y H
                                                                    in the high state
                                                           λ
               E1 [R2 ] =                                                             .   (17)
                          ⎪
                          ⎩ −(1 − ω1 ) S̄ − S L                     in the low state


We assume that the parameters of the model satisfy the restriction

                                                               
                                    H     −λ(1 − ω1 ) S H − S L
                               Y        >                         ,                         (18)
                                                 ω1 γσ 2

which guarantees that the expected return in the high state is higher than that in the low
state. This restriction essentially rules out the extreme case in which hedging demand is so
negative and large as to completely undo the underreaction of the futures price to news in

period 1. We are now ready to state our main result.

                                  
Proposition 1. If Y H < λ S H − S L /(γσ 2 ), a high return R1 signals a high expected return
E1 [R2 ]. Otherwise, a high return signals a low expected return. A high growth rate of open


                                                  10
interest O1 /O0 always signals a high expected return E1 [R2 ], regardless of the direction of
hedging demand (i.e., whether Y H > 0 or Y H < 0).

       When hedging demand is suﬃciently low or negative, a high return signals good news
about the economy. Therefore, we would observe positive serial correlation in returns due

to underreaction by the uninformed investors. When hedging demand is suﬃciently high,
however, a high return does not signal good news about the economy. Consequently, past
returns are not a reliable predictor of future returns because the sign of the serial correlation
depends on the importance of hedging demand. In contrast, a high growth rate of open

interest unambiguously signals good news about the economy and, therefore, a high expected
return.
       The mechanism that generates predictability of returns in our model is distinct from
that in the theory of backwardation. In the theory of backwardation, predictability arises
from variation in the risk premium that speculators earn due to excess hedging demand

in the futures market. Hence, this theory implies that the direction of hedging demand
predicts returns. In our model, predictability arises from the underreaction of asset prices
to news. Our model implies that movements in open interest predict returns, regardless of
the direction of hedging demand.



3.        Futures market data and variable definitions

3.1.       Futures market data

Our data on futures and spot prices in commodity, currency, bond, and stock markets are

from the Commodity Research Bureau. This database conveniently contains a comprehensive
record of daily futures and spot prices for individual futures contracts since December 1964.2
   2
    This database contains only futures contracts that have survived until the present or that traded for an
extended period in the past. Various futures contracts fail to survive because of the lack of investor interest,
and they are subsequently not recorded in the database. Due to potential survivorship bias, one must be
careful in interpreting the unconditional average return, which is not the focus of this paper.



                                                      11
    We also use data on open interest, or the quantity of futures contracts outstanding, as
well as the long and short positions of commercial traders (i.e., hedgers) for each futures
contract. Since January 1986, the data are available electronically from the Commodity Fu-
tures Trading Commission. Prior to that date, we hand-collected data from various volumes

of the Commitments of Traders in Commodity Futures. Data for December 1964 through
June 1972 are from the Commodity Exchange Authority (1964–1972). Data for July 1972
through December 1985 are from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (1972–1985).
During an 11-month period from January through November 1982, the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission did not collect data due to budgetary reasons. Our analysis uses all

available data and excludes the part of the sample aﬀected by the 11-month gap.


3.1.1.    Commodity market

We work with the broadest set of commodities for which both futures and spot prices are
available. Table 1 lists the 30 commodities that are part of our analysis, together with
the exchange in which they are traded and the date of the ﬁrst recorded observation.3 We

categorize the universe of commodities into four broad sectors. Agriculture consists of 14
commodities and tends to contain the oldest futures contracts. Energy consists of ﬁve com-
modities, among which heating oil is the oldest, available since November 1978. Crude oil is
available only since March 1983. Livestock consists of ﬁve commodities, among which live

cattle and pork bellies are available since December 1964. Metals consists of six commodities,
among which copper and silver are available since December 1964.
    Figure 1 shows the share of total dollar open interest that each sector represents. The
ﬁgure shows that agriculture is the largest sector in the early part of the sample, while
energy becomes the largest sector later in the sample. The relative size of the four sec-

tors is much more balanced later in the sample. These stylized facts have two important
   3
     A potential concern with this broad set of commodities is that not all futures contracts are equally liquid.
In analysis that is not reported here, we conﬁrm our main ﬁndings on a subset of 17 relatively liquid futures
contracts that are in the Dow Jones-AIG Commodities Index.



                                                       12
implications for our empirical analysis. First, we construct the commodity portfolio as an
equally weighted portfolio of the four sectors, which ensures that the portfolio composition
is consistent throughout the sample. Second, we have conﬁrmed that our main ﬁndings are
robust to splitting the sample into two halves in Hong and Yogo (2011).


3.1.2.   Currency, bond, and stock markets

Our sample for currency, bond, and stock markets starts in December 1982 because the
Commitments of Traders in Commodity Futures were not available between January and
November 1982, and these futures markets were relatively small prior to that date. Table 2
lists the eight currency, 10 bond, and 14 stock futures that are part of our analysis, together
with the exchange in which they are traded and the date of the ﬁrst recorded observation.

   The core set of currency futures for which we have data since December 1982 are the
British pound, the Canadian dollar, the Deutsche mark, the Japanese yen, and the Swiss
franc. The Australian dollar is available since January 1987; the New Zealand dollar since
May 1997; and the euro since May 1998. Unlike the commodity market, trading in the

currency market takes place predominantly in over-the-counter forward and swap markets.
A potential concern arises in measuring currency market activity because open interest in the
futures market is a small share of overall activity that includes the over-the-counter market.
Unfortunately, data on open interest in the over-the-counter market are not available at the

frequency or sample length necessary for our analysis. Despite this problem, the growth rate
of open interest in the futures market should be a good proxy for the overall growth rate
of the currency market as long as the futures and forward markets move (more or less) in
proportion to one another. Insofar as open interest in the futures market is a noisy proxy for
hedging and speculative activity in the currency market, this measurement problem would

weaken the power of our statistical tests.
   The universe of bond futures contains various ﬁxed-income instruments that vary in
maturity from 30-day federal funds to the 30-year Treasury bond. The oldest bond futures,


                                              13
available since December 1982, are those for the three-month Eurodollar, the three-month
Treasury bill, the 10-year Treasury note, and the 30-year Treasury bond.
   The universe of stock futures contains all major indices including the Dow Jones Industrial
Index, the Major Market Index, the Nasdaq 100 Index, the NYSE Composite Index, the

Russell 2000 Index, the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 400 and 500 indices, and the Value-Line
Arithmetic Index. The oldest stock futures, available since December 1982, are those for the
NYSE Composite Index and the S&P 500 Index.


3.2.     Definition of returns

We use returns on commodity futures to measure movements in commodity prices and returns

on currency futures to measure movements in exchanges rates. We prefer commodity futures
prices over spot prices for two reasons. First, commodity futures data are arguably higher
quality with fewer missing observations because they are actual transaction prices. Second,
the rate of return on commodity futures has a straightforward economic interpretation as
an actual return on an investment strategy. That being said, we have conﬁrmed our main

ﬁndings using commodity and currency spot prices in Hong and Yogo (2011).


3.2.1.   Commodity market

To construct the return on a portfolio of commodity futures, we ﬁrst compute the return on
a fully collateralized position for each futures contract as follows. Let Fi,t,T be the futures
price for commodity i at the end of month t, for a futures contract that matures at the

end of month T . Let Rf,t be the monthly gross return on the one-month T-bill in month
t, which is assumed to be the interest earned on collateral. The monthly gross return on a
fully collateralized long position in futures contract i with maturity T − t is

                                                 Fi,t,T Rf,t
                                      Ri,t,T =               .                            (19)
                                                  Fi,t−1,T



                                                 14
That is, an investor can take a long position in month t − 1 by posting Fi,t−1,T /Rf,t dollars
of collateral, then close out the position at Fi,t,T in month t.
   For each commodity, we compute its monthly gross return as an equally weighted aver-
age of returns across commodity futures with greater than one and less than 13 months to

maturity. We exclude futures contracts with one month or less to maturity, which are typi-
cally illiquid because futures traders do not want to take physical delivery of the underlying.
Similarly, we exclude futures contracts with 13 months or greater to maturity because these
contracts are typically less liquid. For each sector, we construct an equally weighted portfolio
of all commodities in that sector. Finally, we construct an aggregate commodity portfolio

as an equally weighted portfolio of the four sectors. The advantage of equally weighting the
sectors is that no sector dominates even as the number of commodities within each sector
varies over time.


3.2.2.   Currency, bond, and stock markets

We deﬁne a long position on currency futures from the perspective of a US investor that

buys foreign currencies. Therefore, a high currency return refers to appreciation of foreign
currencies relative to the US dollar. Our construction of the return on a portfolio of currency
futures is analogous to our construction of the commodity-sector portfolios. We ﬁrst compute
the return on a fully collateralized position for each futures contract. For each currency, we

compute its monthly gross return as an equally weighted average of returns across currency
futures with greater than one and less than 13 months to maturity. Finally, we construct an
aggregate currency portfolio as an equally weighted portfolio of all currencies.
   For bond and stock markets, we simply use the usual benchmarks for returns, instead of
computing these returns based on futures contracts. Bond returns are based on the 10-year

US Treasury note. Stock returns are based on the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) value-weighted portfolio of NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq stocks.




                                               15
3.3.     Definition of the predictor variables

3.3.1.    Commodity market

Our new predictor of commodity returns is the growth rate of commodity market interest.
We examine the growth rate (instead of the level) of open interest because a stochastic trend
exists in the data, which we left out of the model in Section 2 for simplicity. To construct
this variable, we ﬁrst compute the dollar open interest for each commodity as the spot price

times the quantity of futures contracts outstanding. We then aggregate dollar open interest
within each of the four sectors and compute its monthly growth rate. Finally, we compute
the aggregate growth rate of open interest as an equally weighted average of the growth rate
for each of the four sectors.4 Because the monthly growth rate of open interest is noisy, we

smooth it by taking a 12-month geometric average in the time series. We also construct a
12-month geometric average of commodity returns, which we use to test for momentum in
the time series of commodity returns.5
    To test the incremental forecasting power of commodity market interest, we examine a

number of other variables that are known to predict commodity returns. These other pre-
dictor variables can be grouped into two categories. The ﬁrst category consists of aggregate
market predictors, which are motivated by theories such as the intertemporal capital asset
pricing model that view the commodity market as being fully integrated (Merton, 1973).
We focus on the short rate and the yield spread, which are known to predict the common

variation in commodity, bond, and stock returns (Fama and Schwert, 1977; Campbell, 1987;
Fama and French, 1989; Bessembinder and Chan, 1992).6 The short rate is the monthly
   4
     We have tried an alternative construction that does not involve the spot price. We ﬁrst compute the
growth rate of open interest (i.e., the quantity of futures contracts outstanding) for each commodity. We
then compute the median of the growth rate of open interest across all commodities within each sector.
Finally, we compute the aggregate growth rate of open interest as an equally weighted average of the growth
rate for each of the four sectors. This alternative construction leads to a time series that is very similar to
our preferred construction.
   5
     In Hong and Yogo (2011), we also examine the growth rate of trading volume, constructed in an analogous
way to the growth rate of open interest, and ﬁnd that it does not aﬀect the forecasting power of open interest
in the subsample since 2002.
   6
     In analysis that is not reported here, we also examine the default spread (i.e., the diﬀerence between
Moody’s Baa and Aaa corporate bond yields) and measures of aggregate stock market volatility (i.e., both


                                                      16
average yield on the one-month T-bill. The yield spread is the diﬀerence between Moody’s
Aaa corporate bond yield and the short rate. In addition to these ﬁnancial variables, we
examine the Chicago Fed National Activity Index as a measure of real economic activity,
which is known to predict inﬂation (Stock and Watson, 1999).

     The second category consists of commodity-speciﬁc predictors, which are motivated by
the view that the commodity market is segmented from other markets. In particular, we
examine two measures of supply-demand imbalances in the commodity futures market, mo-
tivated by the theory of backwardation. The ﬁrst measure is an aggregate version of basis,
which is known to predict returns on commodity futures (Fama and French, 1987). To con-

struct commodity basis, we ﬁrst compute basis for each commodity i with maturity T − t
as

                                                               1/(T −t)
                                                       Fi,t,T
                                    Basisi,t,T =                            − 1.7                          (20)
                                                        Si,t

We then compute the median of basis across contracts for each commodity and then the
median of basis across commodities for each sector. We use the median, instead of the

mean, because it is less sensitive to outliers in basis for individual futures contracts. Finally,
we compute commodity basis as an equally weighted average of basis across the four sectors.
     The second measure is an aggregate version of a more direct measure of supply-demand
imbalances in the commodity futures market that is found in the literature (Carter, Rausser,

and Schmitz, 1983; Chang, 1985; Bessembinder, 1992).8 We ﬁrst compute futures market
imbalance for each sector as the ratio of two variables. The numerator is the dollar value
of short minus long positions held by commercial traders in the Commitments of Traders
realized and implied volatility). Although these variables predict returns individually, they have weak incre-
mental forecasting power once we control for the short rate and the yield spread.
   7
     While the Commodity Research Bureau has a reliable record of spot prices, a spot price is not always
available on the same trading day as a recorded futures price. Whenever the spot price is missing, we ﬁrst
look for an expiring futures contract to impute the spot price. If an expiring futures contract is not available,
we then look for the last available spot price within 30 days.
   8
     More recently, Acharya, Lochstoer, and Ramadorai (2010) ﬁnd that the default risk of energy producers,
which is an alternative measure of hedging demand, predicts returns on energy futures.



                                                        17
in Commodity Futures, summed across all commodities in that sector. The denominator is
the dollar value of short plus long positions held by commercial traders, summed across all
commodities in that sector. We then compute commodity market imbalance as an equally
weighted average of futures market imbalance across the four sectors.


3.3.2.    Currency, bond, and stock markets

For aggregate market predictors of currency, bond, and stock returns, we examine the short
rate, the yield spread, and the Chicago Fed National Activity Index. For currency-speciﬁc
predictors, we examine currency market interest, currency returns, currency basis, and cur-
rency market imbalance. For bond-speciﬁc predictors, we examine bond market interest,
bond returns, and bond market imbalance. For stock-speciﬁc predictors, we examine stock

market interest, stock returns, stock market imbalance, and the dividend yield on the CRSP
value-weighted stock portfolio. The construction of these variables for currency, bond, and
stock markets are analogous to our construction of the same variables for the commodity
market.



4.       Summary statistics for returns and open interest

4.1.      Summary statistics for returns

In Panel A of Table 3, we report summary statistics for monthly excess returns over the

one-month T-bill rate in the 1965–2008 sample period. The set of assets for which we have
observations on returns in this sample period are the commodity portfolio, the 10-year US
Treasury note, and the CRSP value-weighted stock portfolio. The returns on the currency
portfolio are available only since 1983.

     Commodities have an average excess return of 0.64% and a standard deviation of 4.62%.
This corresponds to an annualized average excess return of 7.68% and an annualized stan-
dard deviation of 16.00%. For the same sample period, bonds have an annualized average


                                            18
excess return of 2.04% and an annualized standard deviation of 8.00%, and stocks have an
annualized average excess return of 4.32% and an annualized standard deviation of 15.66%.
Thus, commodities had a higher realized Sharpe ratio than bonds or stocks (Gorton and
Rouwenhorst, 2006). The ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of monthly excess commodity returns

is 0.07, which is virtually identical to that for bond and stock returns. The correlation
between commodity and bond returns is −0.11, which makes sense in light of the inverse
relation between bond prices and inﬂation. The correlation between commodity and stock
returns is 0.06.
   Panel B of Table 3 reports the same statistics in the 1983–2008 subsample, during which

we also have observations on currency returns. Commodities have an annualized average
excess return of 4.68% and an annualized standard deviation of 10.88%. For the same sample
period, currencies have an annualized average excess return of 1.68% and an annualized
standard deviation of 7.86%. Bonds have an annualized average excess return of 3.96% and an

annualized standard deviation of 7.62%, and stocks have an annualized average excess return
of 5.76% and an annualized standard deviation of 15.35%. The ﬁrst-order autocorrelation
for monthly excess returns is close to 0.1 for all four markets. All four returns are positively
correlated with each other, except for the correlation of −0.17 between commodity and bond

returns. The correlation of 0.29 between commodity and currency returns is the strongest
among the four markets.


4.2.     Summary statistics for the predictor variables

4.2.1.   Commodity market

Table 4 reports summary statistics for the predictors of commodity returns in the 1965–
2008 sample period. The 12-month growth rate of commodity market interest has a mean of
1.47% per month and a standard deviation of 2.06%. The 12-month commodity returns have
a mean of 1.08% per month and a standard deviation of 1.30%. All the predictor variables

are persistent with a monthly autocorrelation of at least 0.90, except for commodity basis,

                                              19
which has a relatively low autocorrelation of 0.79.
   The yield spread is negatively correlated with the Chicago Fed National Activity Index,
which conﬁrms the known fact that the yield spread is countercyclical. Commodity market
interest is positively correlated with commodity returns, and both variables are positively

correlated with the Chicago Fed National Activity Index. Commodity market interest is
essentially uncorrelated with commodity basis. However, commodity market interest has
a correlation of 0.31 with commodity market imbalance. This means that unusually high
commodity market interest tends to coincide with hedgers taking unusually strong short
positions in commodity futures.

   Figure 2 highlights the cyclicality of commodity market interest, by showing its time
series together with the Chicago Fed National Activity Index. During the recent commodity
boom, commodity market interest grew over a ﬁve-year period from $62 billion in June 2003
to $492 billion in June 2008. Only the energy crisis of the 1970s witnessed higher activity.

During these two historic periods and also more generally, a high degree of correlation exists
between movements in commodity market interest and the Chicago Fed National Activity
Index.


4.2.2.   Currency, bond, and stock markets

Panel A of Table 5 reports summary statistics for the predictors of currency returns in the

1983–2008 sample period. The correlations between the predictors of currency returns are
qualitatively similar to those between the predictors of commodity returns in Table 4. In
particular, currency market interest is positively correlated with currency returns, and both
variables are positively correlated with the Chicago Fed National Activity Index. In other
words, periods of high economic activity are associated with rising currency market interest

and high currency returns.
   Panel B of Table 5 reports summary statistics for the predictors of bond returns. Bond
market interest is positively correlated with the Chicago Fed National Activity Index, and


                                             20
bond returns are negatively correlated with the Chicago Fed National Activity Index. That
is, periods of high economic activity are associated with rising bond market interest and low
bond returns. This inverse relation between economic activity and bond returns makes sense
in light of the fact that high economic activity leads to rising inﬂation expectations, which

is bad news for the bond market.
     Panel C of Table 5 reports summary statistics for the predictors of stock returns. The
correlations between the predictors of stock returns are qualitatively similar to those between
the predictors of commodity returns. In particular, stock market interest is positively corre-
lated with stock returns, and both variables are positively correlated with the Chicago Fed

National Activity Index. In other words, periods of high economic activity are associated
with rising stock market interest and high stock returns.
     Figure 2 highlights the cyclicality of currency, bond, and stock market interest, by show-
ing their time series together with the Chicago Fed National Activity Index. In each of these

three markets, strong correlation exists between movements in open interest and the Chicago
Fed National Activity Index. Given that movements in open interest are highly pro-cyclical,
it is a prime candidate for a predictor of returns. In the next section, we examine whether
movements in open interest predict returns even after controlling for other cyclical variables.



5.      Predictability of returns by open interest

5.1.     Commodity market

Figure 3 shows the time series of the 12-month growth rate of commodity market interest

and 12-month commodity returns. This ﬁgure conﬁrms that these two time series are highly
correlated. More interesting, this ﬁgure reveals that commodity returns look like a version of
movements in commodity market interest that is shifted forward by a few months. That is,
movements in commodity market interest lead movements in commodity prices in the same
direction.


                                               21
   In Table 6, we formally test the hypothesis that movements in commodity market inter-
est predict commodity returns. In Column 1, we ﬁrst estimate a baseline speciﬁcation in
which the predictor variables are the short rate, the yield spread, and commodity basis. All
coeﬃcients are standardized so that they can be interpreted as the percentage point change

in monthly expected returns per 1 standard deviation change in the predictor variable. The
short rate enters with a coeﬃcient of −0.51 and a t-statistic of −2.42. More interesting,
the yield spread enters with a coeﬃcient of −0.51 and a t-statistic of −2.68. This nega-
tive coeﬃcient is in sharp contrast to the positive coeﬃcient found for bonds and stocks
(Campbell, 1987; Fama and French, 1989). Because expected commodity returns are low

(i.e., commodity prices are high) when the yield spread is high, commodities are a good
hedge for time-varying investment opportunities in bond and stock markets. Commodity
basis predicts commodity returns with a coeﬃcient of −0.57 and a t-statistic of −2.05. The
fact that low commodity basis (i.e., low futures relative to spot price) predicts high returns

on being long commodity futures is consistent with the theory of backwardation. Overall,
the R2 of the forecasting regression is 2.58%.
   In Column 2 of Table 6, we introduce commodity market interest to examine its incre-
mental forecasting power for commodity returns. Commodity market interest enters with a

coeﬃcient of 0.73 and a t-statistic of 2.50. This means that a standard deviation increase
in commodity market interest increases expected commodity returns by 0.73% per month.
The coeﬃcients for the other three predictor variables are virtually unchanged from Column
1 because commodity market interest is essentially uncorrelated with these other variables.
For this sample period, commodity market interest explains a larger share of the variation

in expected commodity returns than the other predictor variables. Moreover, the inclusion
of commodity market interest increases the R2 of the forecasting regression from 2.58% to
4.96%.
   In Column 3 of Table 6, we introduce past commodity returns to the baseline speciﬁcation

and ﬁnd that they enter with a coeﬃcient of 0.32 and a t-statistic of 1.39. In Column 4,


                                             22
we ﬁnd that commodity market interest drives out the forecasting power of past commodity
returns in a horse race between these two variables. Commodity market interest enters
with a coeﬃcient of 0.77 and a t-statistic of 1.85, while past commodity returns enter with a
statistically insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient of −0.08. This result shows that while commodity market

interest and commodity returns are highly correlated, they contain diﬀerent information
about future commodity returns. As shown in Figure 3, commodity market interest tends
to lead commodity returns and can, therefore, be more informative.
   In Column 5 of Table 6, we introduce commodity market imbalance to the baseline
speciﬁcation and ﬁnd that it enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.34 and a t-statistic of 1.50. This

positive coeﬃcient is consistent with the theory of backwardation, which implies that high
hedging demand predicts high returns on being long futures. In Column 6, we ﬁnd that
commodity market interest drives out the forecasting power of commodity market imbalance
in a horse race between these two variables. Commodity market interest enters with a

coeﬃcient of 0.69 and a t-statistic of 2.42, while commodity market imbalance enters with a
statistically insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient of 0.12. As shown in Table 4, commodity market interest
and commodity market imbalance are positively correlated. Hence, a potential interpretation
of these results is that commodity market imbalance is just a noisy proxy for commodity

market interest.
   In Column 7 of Table 6, we introduce the Chicago Fed National Activity Index to the
baseline speciﬁcation and ﬁnd that it enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.47 and a t-statistic of
2.09. This positive coeﬃcient is additional evidence that expected commodity returns are
pro-cyclical, which is the opposite of countercyclical expected returns found in bond and

stock markets. In Column 8, we ﬁnd that commodity market interest reduces the forecasting
power of the Chicago Fed National Activity Index in a horse race between these two variables.
Commodity market interest enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.68 and a t-statistic of 1.88, while
the Chicago Fed National Activity Index enters with a statistically insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient

of 0.30.


                                             23
   We summarize our main ﬁndings in Table 6 as follows. The fact that the short rate,
the yield spread, and the Chicago Fed National Activity Index predict commodity returns is
consistent with the integrated markets view. That is, the same aggregate factors that drive
other asset prices are partly responsible for movements in commodity prices. The fact that

commodity basis and commodity market imbalance predict movements in commodity prices
is consistent with the segmented markets view. That is, the theory of backwardation is partly
responsible for movements in commodity prices. More important, movements in commodity
market interest predict movements in commodity prices even after controlling for these other
predictors. This ﬁnding challenges us to develop a new view of the commodity market that is

unrelated to these traditional theories. Our preferred hypothesis is that commodity market
interest contains information about the future supply and demand for commodities, which
cannot be inferred by commodity prices alone.
   In Panel A of Table 7, we show that commodity market interest predicts excess returns

on the 10-year US Treasury note over the one-month T-bill rate. In a baseline speciﬁcation
in Column 1, the short rate enters with a statistically insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient of 0.20. The
yield spread enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.49 and a t-statistic of 3.41. In Column 2, we intro-
duce commodity market interest to the baseline speciﬁcation and ﬁnd that it enters with a

coeﬃcient of −0.32 and a t-statistic of −3.11. This means that a standard deviation increase
in commodity market interest decreases expected bond returns by 0.32% per month. The
forecasting power of commodity market interest is comparable to that of the yield spread,
which is known to be a reliable predictor of bond returns. Column 3 shows that commod-
ity returns predict bond returns, but Column 4 shows that they do not have forecasting

power beyond commodity market interest. Similarly, Column 5 shows that the Chicago Fed
National Activity Index predicts bond returns, but Column 6 shows that it does not have
forecasting power beyond commodity market interest.
   In Panel B of Table 7, we show that commodity market interest also predicts movements

in the one-month T-bill rate. In a baseline speciﬁcation in Column 1, the yield spread enters


                                             24
with a statistically insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient of 0.06. In Column 2, we introduce commodity
market interest to the baseline speciﬁcation and ﬁnd that it enters with a coeﬃcient of
0.12 and a t-statistic of 3.34. This means that a standard deviation increase in commodity
market interest increases the expected annualized short rate by 0.12%. Column 3 shows

that commodity returns predict movements in the short rate with a coeﬃcient of 0.12 and
a t-statistic of 3.47. In Column 4, commodity market interest and commodity returns enter
with similar coeﬃcients in a horse race between these two variables. Column 5 shows that
the Chicago Fed National Activity Index predicts movements in the short rate, which is
consistent with its ability to predict realized inﬂation (Stock and Watson, 1999). Column

6 shows that the Chicago Fed National Activity Index does not drive out the forecasting
power of commodity market interest.
   We summarize our main ﬁndings in Table 7 as follows. From Campbell and Ammer
(1993), we know that movements in expected excess bond returns are oﬀset by movements

in expected inﬂation. Therefore, the fact that commodity market interest predicts excess
bond returns implies that it also captures movements in expected inﬂation at low frequency.
Similarly, movements in the short rate can be interpreted as movements in expected monthly
inﬂation under the Fisher hypothesis. Therefore, the fact that commodity market interest

predicts movements in the short rate implies that it also predicts movements in expected
inﬂation at higher frequency. Taken together, this evidence suggests that commodity market
interest contains information about inﬂation expectations that is not captured by conven-
tional predictors of inﬂation such as commodity prices and the Chicago Fed National Activity
Index.


5.2.     Currency market

Subsection 5.1 shows that movements in commodity market interest predict movements in
commodity prices. This subsection shows an analogous relation between currency market in-
terest and exchange rates. The economic rationale for why currency market interest predicts


                                            25
movements in exchange rates is analogous to our hypothesis for the commodity market. A
strong US economy leads to inﬂation and consequently depreciation of the US dollar relative
to foreign currencies.9 Suppose importers expect higher future demand and, in response,
enter currency futures to hedge risk arising from higher anticipated imports. Insofar as this

good news about the US economy diﬀuses gradually in the currency market, rising currency
market interest predicts high returns on being long foreign currencies.
       Table 8 tests whether movements in currency market interest predict currency returns. In
Column 1, we ﬁrst estimate a baseline speciﬁcation in which the predictor variables are the
short rate, the yield spread, and currency basis (i.e., the forward discount). The short rate

and the yield spread have little forecasting power for currency returns. However, currency
basis predicts currency returns with a coeﬃcient of −0.25 and a t-statistic of −1.48. By the
covered interest rate parity, currency basis is the diﬀerence in interest rates between the US
and foreign countries. Therefore, the negative coeﬃcient means that when the US interest

rate is low relative to the rest of the world, foreign currencies are expected to appreciate
relative to the US dollar. This failure of the uncovered interest rate parity is known as the
forward-discount puzzle in international ﬁnance.
       In Column 2 of Table 8, we introduce currency market interest to examine its incremental

forecasting power for currency returns. Currency market interest enters with a coeﬃcient
of 0.37 and a t-statistic of 2.48. This means that a standard deviation increase in currency
market interest increases expected currency returns by 0.37% per month. Figure 3 is a
visual representation of this ﬁnding. Throughout the sample period, movements in currency
market interest tend to lead movements in currency returns, except perhaps for a period in

the 1990s. The coeﬃcient for currency market interest is larger in economic magnitude than
that for currency basis. Moreover, the inclusion of currency market interest increases the
   9
    More formally, a positive US productivity shock leads to depreciation of the US dollar relative to foreign
currencies in a standard Ricardian model of bilateral trade (Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland, 1994). The
intuition for this result is that a positive US productivity shock makes goods produced by the US relatively
abundant, so that the price of these goods must fall relative to the price of goods produced by foreign
countries.



                                                     26
R2 of the forecasting regression from 2.03% to 4.55%. These ﬁndings suggest that currency
market interest is a more important determinant of exchange rates than currency basis.
   In Column 3 of Table 8, we introduce past currency returns to the baseline speciﬁcation
and ﬁnd that they enter with a coeﬃcient of 0.26 and a t-statistic of 1.51. That is, some

evidence exists for momentum in the time series of currency returns, similar to one that
is found for commodity returns (Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen, 2010). In Column 4, we
ﬁnd that currency market interest weakens the forecasting power of currency returns in a
horse race between these two variables. Currency market interest enters with a coeﬃcient of
0.32 and a t-statistic of 2.18, while currency returns enter with a statistically insigniﬁcant

coeﬃcient of 0.12.
   In Column 5 of Table 8, we introduce currency market imbalance to the baseline speciﬁ-
cation and ﬁnd that it enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.25 and a t-statistic of 1.98. This positive
coeﬃcient is consistent with the theory of backwardation, which implies that high hedging

demand predicts high returns on being long futures. In Column 6, we ﬁnd that currency
market interest drives out the forecasting power of currency market imbalance in a horse race
between these two variables. Currency market interest enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.33 and
a t-statistic of 2.25, while currency market imbalance enters with a statistically insigniﬁcant

coeﬃcient of 0.15.
   In Column 7 of Table 8, we introduce the Chicago Fed National Activity Index to the
baseline speciﬁcation and ﬁnd that it enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.32 and a t-statistic of 1.41.
This positive coeﬃcient is consistent with the hypothesis that a strong US economy leads
to inﬂation and consequently depreciation of the US dollar relative to foreign currencies.

In Column 8, we ﬁnd that currency market interest drives out the forecasting power of the
Chicago Fed National Activity Index in a horse race between these two variables. Currency
market interest enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.32 and a t-statistic of 2.24, while the Chicago
Fed National Activity Index enters with a statistically insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient of 0.24.




                                              27
5.3.    Bond market

Table 9 tests whether movements in bond market interest predict bond returns. In Column
1, we ﬁrst estimate a baseline speciﬁcation in which the predictor variables are the short

rate and the yield spread. The short rate enters with a statistically insigniﬁcant coeﬃcient
of 0.20. However, the yield spread is a powerful predictor of bond returns with a coeﬃcient
of 0.34 and a t-statistic of 2.39.
   In Column 2 of Table 9, we introduce bond market interest and ﬁnd that it enters with

a coeﬃcient of −0.31 and a t-statistic of −1.91. This means that a standard deviation
increase in bond market interest decreases expected bond returns by 0.31% per month.
To interpret the sign of this coeﬃcient, recall from Table 5 that bond market interest is
positively correlated with the Chicago Fed National Activity Index. A high Chicago Fed

National Activity Index signals inﬂation, which is bad news for bonds.
   In Columns 3 and 4 of Table 9, we ﬁnd that past bond returns do not have forecasting
power for future bond returns. Similarly, Columns 5 and 6 show that bond market imbalance
does not have forecasting power for bond returns. In Column 7, we introduce the Chicago Fed
National Activity Index to the baseline speciﬁcation and ﬁnd that it enters with a coeﬃcient

of −0.31 and a t-statistic of −1.96. In Column 8, we ﬁnd that the Chicago Fed National
Activity Index slightly weakens the forecasting power of bond market interest in a horse race
between these two variables. Given that bond market interest and the Chicago Fed National
Activity Index both signal inﬂation, these ﬁndings are consistent with our hypothesis.


5.4.    Stock market

Table 10 tests whether movements in stock market interest predict stock returns. Column
1 is our baseline speciﬁcation in which the predictor variables are the short rate, the yield
spread, and the dividend yield. None of these variables, which are known to predict stock
returns, is statistically signiﬁcant in the 1984–2008 sample period. This is perhaps not

surprising given that stock returns are notoriously diﬃcult to predict, especially in a short

                                             28
sample period that includes the unusual stock market behavior of the late 1990s. Hence, the
results that follow for stock market interest should be interpreted with this caveat in mind.
     In Column 2 of Table 10, we introduce stock market interest to our baseline speciﬁcation
and ﬁnd that it enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.38 and a t-statistic of 1.38. This means that

a standard deviation increase in stock market interest increases expected stock returns by
0.38% per month. Although this coeﬃcient is not statistically signiﬁcant in this sample
period, the economic magnitude of the coeﬃcient is comparable to that for the short rate,
the yield spread, and the dividend yield.
     In Columns 3 and 4 of Table 10, we ﬁnd that past stock returns do not have forecasting

power for future stock returns. In Column 5, we introduce stock market imbalance to our
baseline speciﬁcation and ﬁnd that it enters with a coeﬃcient of −0.45 and a t-statistic of
−1.80. In Column 6, we ﬁnd that stock market interest enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.50 and
a t-statistic of 1.76 in a speciﬁcation that controls for stock market imbalance. In Column

7, we introduce the Chicago Fed National Activity Index to our baseline speciﬁcation and
ﬁnd that it enters with a coeﬃcient of 0.70 and a t-statistic of 1.97. In Column 8, we ﬁnd
that the Chicago Fed National Activity Index weakens the forecasting power of stock market
interest in a horse race between these two variables.



6.      Conclusion

Commodity market interest is a more powerful predictor of commodity returns, bond returns,
and movements in the short rate than past commodity prices or the Chicago Fed National
Activity Index. Our ﬁndings have broader implications for the large macro literature on
inﬂation forecasting. Macroeconomists have already known for some time that asset prices

can be useful for forecasting inﬂation and output (Stock and Watson, 2003). These forecast-
ing models generally assume that asset prices contain timely information about economic
activity and inﬂation expectations. However, our ﬁndings suggest that asset prices initially



                                              29
underreact to news about economic activity and inﬂation expectations, which are better
captured by open interest. Our work opens up a new approach to inﬂation forecasting, in
which commodity market interest could be used to improve the forecasting power of existing
models.

   Our work also opens up a new approach to modeling expected returns in ﬁnancial eco-
nomics. Most empirical models of expected returns are premised on the notion that past
prices contain all useful information for forecasting future returns, whether such predictabil-
ity arises from a time-varying risk premium or limits to arbitrage. Our work shows that
transaction quantities, in particular open interest in the futures market, contain information

that is not fully revealed by transaction prices alone. The idea that transaction quanti-
ties could be more informative than transaction prices is entirely new and oﬀers a richer
understanding of movements in asset prices.




                                              30
References

Acharya, V. V., Lochstoer, L. A., Ramadorai, T., 2010. Limits to arbitrage and hedging:
  Evidence from commodity markets. Unpublished working paper. New York University.

Backus, D. K., Kehoe, P. J., Kydland, F. E., 1994. Dynamics of the trade balance and the
  terms of trade: The J-curve? American Economic Review 84 (1), 84–103.

Bessembinder, H., 1992. Systematic risk, hedging pressure, and risk premiums in futures
  markets. Review of Financial Studies 5 (4), 637–667.

Bessembinder, H., Chan, K., 1992. Time-varying risk premia and forecastable returns in

  futures markets. Journal of Financial Economics 32 (2), 169–193.

Campbell, J. Y., 1987. Stock returns and the term structure. Journal of Financial Economics
  18 (2), 373–399.

Campbell, J. Y., Ammer, J., 1993. What moves the stock and bond markets? A variance
  decomposition for long-term asset returns. Journal of Finance 48 (1), 3–37.

Carter, C. A., Rausser, G. C., Schmitz, A., 1983. Eﬃcient asset portfolios and the theory of

  normal backwardation. Journal of Political Economy 91 (2), 319–331.

Chang, E. C., 1985. Returns to speculators and the theory of normal backwardation. Journal
  of Finance 40 (1), 193–208.

Commodity Exchange Authority, 1964–1972. Commodity Futures Statistics. US Government
  Printing Oﬃce, Washington, DC.

Commodity Futures Trading Commission, 1972–1985. Commitments of Traders in Commod-

  ity Futures. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, New York.

De Long, J. B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. H., Waldmann, R. J., 1990. Noise trader risk in
  ﬁnancial markets. Journal of Political Economy 98 (4), 703–738.

                                            31
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1987. Commodity futures prices: Some evidence on forecast
  power, premiums, and the theory of storage. Journal of Business 60 (1), 55–73.

Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1989. Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and
  bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 25 (1), 23–49.

Fama, E. F., Schwert, G. W., 1977. Asset returns and inﬂation. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 5 (2), 115–146.

Gorton, G., Rouwenhorst, K. G., 2006. Facts and fantasies about commodity futures. Fi-
  nancial Analysts Journal 62 (2), 47–68.

Gourinchas, P.-O., Tornell, A., 2004. Exchange rate puzzles and distorted beliefs. Journal of
  International Economics 64 (2), 303–333.

Grossman, S. J., 1977. The existence of futures markets, noisy rational expectations and
  informational externalities. Review of Economic Studies 44 (3), 431–449.

Hicks, J. R., 1939. Value and Capital: An Inquiry into Some Fundamental Principles of
  Economic Theory. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Hong, H., Stein, J. C., 1999. A uniﬁed theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and
  overreaction in asset markets. Journal of Finance 54 (6), 2143–2184.

Hong, H., Stein, J. C., 2007. Disagreement and the stock market. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 21 (2), 109–128.

Hong, H., Yogo, M., 2011. Appendix to “What does futures market interest tell us about
  the macroeconomy and asset prices?”. Unpublished working paper. Federal Reserve Bank
  of Minneapolis.

Keynes, J. M., 1923. Some aspects of commodity markets. Manchester Guardian Commercial
  13, 784–786.


                                             32
Mankiw, N. G., Reis, R., 2002. Sticky information versus sticky prices: A proposal to replace
  the New Keynesian Phillips curve. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4), 1295–1328.

Merton, R. C., 1973. An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41 (5),
  867–887.

Moskowitz, T. J., Ooi, Y. H., Pedersen, L. H., 2010. Time series momentum. Unpublished
  working paper. University of Chicago.

Samuelson, P. A., 1965. Proof that properly anticipated prices ﬂuctuate randomly. Industrial
  Management Review 6 (2), 41–49.

Shleifer, A., 1986. Do demand curves for stocks slope down? Journal of Finance 41 (3),
  579–590.

Stock, J. H., Watson, M. W., 1999. Forecasting inﬂation. Journal of Monetary Economics
  44 (2), 293–335.

Stock, J. H., Watson, M. W., 2003. Forecasting output and inﬂation: The role of asset prices.
  Journal of Economic Literature 41 (3), 788–829.




                                             33
                           Table 1: Commodity market futures
The 30 commodity futures used in our analysis, for which futures and spot prices are available
through the Commodity Research Bureau, are listed. The futures contracts are traded
on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), the
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE), and the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX). The
sample starts in December 1964, after which prices are available for many commodities.

                                                              First observation
                                                                    Commitments of Traders
  Sector        Commodity         Exchange        Futures price       in Commodity Futures
  Agriculture   Butter            CME          September     1996                May     1997
                Cocoa             ICE           December     1964                July    1978
                Coﬀee             ICE              August    1972                July    1978
                Corn              CBOT          December     1964            December    1964
                Cotton            ICE           December     1964            December    1964
                Lumber            CME             October    1969                July    1978
                Oats              CBOT          December     1964            December    1964
                Orange juice      ICE            February    1967             January    1969
                Rough rice        CBOT             August    1986             October    1986
                Soybean meal      CBOT          December     1964            December    1964
                Soybean oil       CBOT          December     1964            December    1964
                Soybeans          CBOT          December     1964            December    1964
                Sugar             ICE           December     1964                 July   1978
                Wheat             CBOT          December     1964            December    1964
  Energy        Crude oil         NYMEX            March     1983                April   1983
                Gasoline          NYMEX         December     1984            December    1984
                Heating oil       NYMEX        November      1978             October    1980
                Natural gas       NYMEX              April   1990                April   1990
                Propane           NYMEX            August    1987              August    1987
  Livestock     Broilers          CME            February    1991               March    1991
                Feeder cattle     CME          November      1971            December    1975
                Live/Lean hogs    CME            February    1966                July    1968
                Live cattle       CME           December     1964                July    1968
                Pork bellies      CME           December     1964                 July   1968
  Metals        Aluminum          NYMEX         December     1983             January    1984
                Copper            NYMEX         December     1964            December    1982
                Gold              NYMEX         December     1974            December    1982
                Palladium         NYMEX           January    1977                July    1978
                Platinum          NYMEX             March    1968                July    1978
                Silver            NYMEX         December     1964            December    1982




                                             34
                                          Table 2: Currency, bond, and stock market futures
     The eight currency, 10 bond, and 14 stock futures used in our analysis, for which futures and spot prices are available through
     the Commodity Research Bureau, are listed. The futures contracts are traded on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), the
     Index and Option Market (IOM), the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE), the International Monetary Market (IMM), and the
     Kansas City Board of Trade (KCBT). The sample starts in December 1982 because the Commitments of Traders in Commodity
     Futures were not available between January and November 1982, and these futures markets were relatively small prior to that
     date.

                                                                                                First observation
                                                                                                      Commitments of Traders
                  Market     Financial asset                             Exchange     Futures price     in Commodity Futures
                  Currency   Australian dollar                           IMM           January 1987              January   1987
                             British pound                               IMM         December 1982             December    1982
                             Canadian dollar                             IMM         December 1982             December    1982
                             Deutsche mark                               IMM         December 1982             December    1982
                             Euro                                        IMM              May 1998               January   1999
                             Japanese yen                                IMM         December 1982             December    1982
                             New Zealand dollar                          IMM              May 1997               January   1999
                             Swiss franc                                 IMM         December 1982             December    1982
                  Bond       30-day federal funds                        CBOT          October 1988              October   1988
35




                             One-month Eurodollar                        IMM              May 1990                  May    1990
                             Three-month Eurodollar                      IMM         December 1982             December    1982
                             Three-month US Treasury bill                IMM         December 1982             December    1982
                             Two-year US Treasury note                   CBOT             June 1990                 June   1990
                             Five-year US Treasury note                  CBOT             May 1988                  May    1988
                             Five-year US Treasury note swap             CBOT             June 2002             February   2003
                             10-year US Treasury note                    CBOT        December 1982             December    1982
                             10-year US Treasury note swap               CBOT          October 2001           November     2001
                             30-year US Treasury bond                    CBOT        December 1982             December    1982
                  Stock      Dow Jones Industrial Index                  CBOT          October 1997              October   1997
                             Major Market Index                          IOM            August 1985              October   1991
                             Nasdaq 100 Index                            IOM             April 1996                April   1996
                             Nasdaq 100 Index E-Mini                     IOM              June 1999                 June   1999
                             NYSE Composite Index                        ICE         December 1982             December    1982
                             Russell 2000 Index                          IOM          February 1993             February   1993
                             Russell 2000 Index E-Mini                   IOM        November 2001                 August   2002
                             Standard & Poor’s 400 MidCap Index          IOM          February 1992             February   1992
                             Standard & Poor’s 400 MidCap Index E-Mini   IOM           January 2002           November     2002
                             Standard & Poor’s 500 Barra Value Index     IOM        November 1995                  April   1996
                             Standard & Poor’s 500 Barra Growth Index    IOM        November 1995              December    1995
                             Standard & Poor’s 500 Index                 IOM             April 1982              October   1983
                             Standard & Poor’s 500 Index E-Mini          IOM        September 1997            September    1997
                             Value-Line Arithmetic Index                 KCBT       September 1983               October   1983
                              Table 3: Summary statistics for commodity, currency, bond, and stock returns
     The mean, the standard deviation, the autocorrelation, and the pairwise correlation of monthly excess returns over the one-month
     T-bill rate are reported. The portfolio of fully collateralized commodity futures is equally weighted across agriculture, energy,
     livestock, and metals. The portfolio of fully collateralized currency futures is equally weighted across the eight currencies listed
     in Table 2. The other assets are the 10-year US Treasury note and the Center for Research in Security Prices value-weighted
     stock portfolio.

                                                      Standard                                Correlation with
                                              Mean    deviation                    Commodity        Currency     10-year
36




                      Variable                 (%)         (%)     Autocorrelation   portfolio      portfolio      bond
                      Panel A: 1965:1–2008:12
                      Commodity portfolio    0.64           4.62              0.07
                      10-year bond           0.17           2.31              0.08          -0.11
                      Stock portfolio        0.36           4.52              0.09           0.06                   0.18
                      Panel B: 1983:1–2008:12
                      Commodity portfolio    0.39           3.14              0.14
                      Currency portfolio     0.14           2.27              0.11           0.29
                      10-year bond           0.33           2.20              0.07          -0.17        0.16
                      Stock portfolio        0.48           4.43              0.10           0.16        0.07       0.06
                                   Table 4: Summary statistics for predictors of commodity returns
     The mean, the standard deviation, the autocorrelation, and the pairwise correlation for predictors of commodity returns are
     reported. The short rate is the monthly average yield on the one-month T-bill. The yield spread is the diﬀerence between
     Moody’s Aaa corporate bond yield and the short rate. The Chicago Fed National Activity Index is a weighted average of 85
     monthly indicators of US economic activity. The next predictor variables are the 12-month geometrically averaged growth rate
     of commodity market interest and the 12-month geometrically averaged commodity returns. Commodity market imbalance is
     the ratio of short minus long positions relative to short plus long positions held by commercial traders in the Commitments
     of Traders in Commodity Futures. Commodity basis is equally weighted across agriculture, energy, livestock, and metals. The
     sample period is 1965:12–2008:12.
37




                                                     Standard                                                       Correlation with
                                             Mean    deviation                     Short    Yield   Chicago Fed National     Commodity         Commodity    Commodity
       Variable                               (%)         (%)    Autocorrelation    rate   spread         Activity Index   market interest        returns       basis
       Short rate                             5.52       2.71               0.97
       Yield spread                           2.64       1.60               0.92   -0.54
       Chicago Fed National Activity Index    0.01       0.86               0.93   -0.02    -0.12
       Commodity market interest              1.47       2.06               0.90    0.01    -0.10                   0.36
       Commodity returns                      1.08       1.30               0.93    0.05    -0.35                   0.29                0.51
       Commodity basis                        0.14       0.62               0.79    0.24    -0.24                  -0.11               -0.07         0.03
       Commodity market imbalance            17.84      13.80               0.90    0.27    -0.31                   0.17                0.31         0.44        0.15
                            Table 5: Summary statistics for predictors of currency, bond, and stock returns
     Panel A reports the mean, the standard deviation, the autocorrelation, and the pairwise correlation for predictors of currency
     returns. The short rate is the monthly average yield on the one-month T-bill. The yield spread is the diﬀerence between
     Moody’s Aaa corporate bond yield and the short rate. The Chicago Fed National Activity Index is a weighted average of 85
     monthly indicators of US economic activity. The next predictor variables are the 12-month geometrically averaged growth rate
     of currency market interest and the 12-month geometrically averaged currency returns. Currency market imbalance is the ratio
     of short minus long positions relative to short plus long positions held by commercial traders in the Commitments of Traders
     in Commodity Futures. Currency basis is equally weighted across the eight currencies listed in Table 2. Panels B and C report
     summary statistics for analogous predictor variables in bond and stock markets. The sample period is 1983:12–2008:12.


                                                    Standard                                              Correlation with
                                            Mean    deviation                     Short    Yield   Chicago Fed National   Market
      Variable                               (%)         (%)    Autocorrelation    rate   spread         Activity Index   interest   Returns   Basis
38




      Panel A: Currency market
      Short rate                             4.58       2.14               0.98
      Yield spread                           3.16       1.35               0.94   -0.48
      Chicago Fed National Activity Index   -0.04       0.61               0.94    0.27    -0.08
      Currency market interest               0.92       1.94               0.75   -0.08    -0.01                   0.18
      Currency returns                       0.57       0.78               0.94   -0.11     0.21                   0.02       0.41
      Currency basis                         0.01       0.14               0.97    0.54    -0.32                   0.50      -0.06     -0.24
      Currency market imbalance              6.81      26.61               0.66    0.00     0.24                   0.10       0.25      0.43    0.09
      Panel B: Bond market
      Bond market interest                   1.66        1.59              0.93    0.21     0.28                   0.26
      Bond returns                           0.69        0.67              0.92    0.05     0.08                  -0.31       0.01
      Bond market imbalance                  0.87        6.95              0.91   -0.28     0.24                  -0.54      -0.08      0.29
      Panel C: Stock market
      Stock market interest                  1.72        1.88              0.88    0.35    -0.09                   0.32
      Stock returns                          0.66        1.29              0.91    0.25    -0.38                   0.46      0.61
      Stock market imbalance                -1.06        8.50              0.72   -0.08     0.09                  -0.05      0.18      -0.11
                                 Table 6: Predictability of commodity returns by commodity market interest
     The predictability of monthly excess returns on a portfolio of fully collateralized commodity futures over the one-month T-bill
     rate is tested. All predictor variables are lagged one month. The table reports standardized coeﬃcients with heteroskedasticity-
     consistent t-statistics in parentheses. The sample period is 1966:1–2008:12.

              Predictor variable                         (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
              Short rate                               -0.51   -0.48   -0.44   -0.50   -0.55   -0.50   -0.52   -0.55
                                                     (-2.42) (-1.85) (-2.10) (-1.98) (-2.39) (-1.99) (-2.50) (-2.12)
              Yield spread                             -0.51   -0.44   -0.37   -0.48   -0.45   -0.42   -0.58   -0.57
                                                     (-2.68) (-2.03) (-2.03) (-2.41) (-2.17) (-1.90) (-2.78) (-2.54)
39




              Commodity basis                          -0.57   -0.52   -0.56   -0.52   -0.59   -0.53   -0.66   -0.62
                                                     (-2.05) (-1.91) (-2.01) (-1.91) (-2.04) (-1.92) (-2.02) (-1.88)
              Commodity market interest                         0.73            0.77            0.69            0.68
                                                              (2.50)          (1.85)          (2.42)          (1.88)
              Commodity returns                                         0.32   -0.08
                                                                      (1.39) (-0.22)
              Commodity market imbalance                                                0.34    0.12
                                                                                      (1.50) (0.60)
              Chicago Fed National Activity Index                                                       0.47    0.30
                                                                                                      (2.09) (0.93)
              R2 (%)                                    2.58    4.96    2.98    4.98    3.01    5.02    4.26    6.20
Table 7: Predictability of bond returns and movements in the short rate by commodity
market interest
Panel A tests the predictability of monthly excess returns on the 10-year US Treasury note
over the one-month T-bill rate. Panel B tests the predictability of movements in the one-
month T-bill rate. All predictor variables are lagged one month. The table reports standard-
ized coeﬃcients with heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses. The sample
period is 1966:1–2008:12.


 Predictor variable                        (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)     (5)       (6)
 Panel A: Bond returns
 Short rate                               0.20      0.14     0.15     0.13     0.19      0.15
                                        (1.26)    (0.79)   (0.95)   (0.72)   (1.19)    (0.78)
 Yield spread                             0.49      0.38     0.38     0.35     0.48      0.38
                                        (3.41)    (2.65)   (2.62)   (2.39)   (3.15)    (2.45)
 Commodity market interest                         -0.32             -0.28              -0.33
                                                 (-3.11)           (-2.35)            (-3.07)
 Commodity returns                                           -0.24   -0.09
                                                           (-1.99) (-0.62)
 Chicago Fed National Activity Index                                         -0.20   -0.04
                                                                           (-1.68) (-0.35)
 R2 (%)                                   3.15     4.26      4.03     4.35    3.96    4.63
 Panel B: Movements in the short rate
 Yield spread                             0.06     0.07      0.10     0.09     0.07     0.08
                                        (1.22)   (1.42)    (2.09)   (1.89)   (1.43)   (1.48)
 Commodity market interest                         0.12               0.08              0.09
                                                 (3.34)             (1.77)            (2.66)
 Commodity returns                                           0.12     0.07
                                                           (3.47)   (1.46)
 Chicago Fed National Activity Index                                           0.12     0.09
                                                                             (3.07)   (2.19)
 R2 (%)                                   0.74     4.02      3.74     4.81     3.94     5.68




                                            40
                                   Table 8: Predictability of currency returns by currency market interest
     The predictability of monthly excess returns on a portfolio of fully collateralized currency futures over the one-month T-bill
     rate is tested. All predictor variables are lagged one month. The table reports standardized coeﬃcients with heteroskedasticity-
     consistent t-statistics in parentheses. The sample period is 1984:1–2008:12.

              Predictor variable                         (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
              Short rate                                0.06    0.09    0.03    0.08    0.04    0.08    0.05    0.08
                                                      (0.30) (0.52) (0.17) (0.42) (0.21) (0.44) (0.27) (0.47)
              Yield spread                              0.19    0.21    0.14    0.19    0.11    0.16    0.16    0.18
                                                      (1.12) (1.25) (0.80) (1.05) (0.64) (0.93) (0.86) (1.02)
41




              Currency basis                           -0.25   -0.24   -0.19   -0.21   -0.29   -0.26   -0.42   -0.36
                                                     (-1.48) (-1.43) (-1.11) (-1.25) (-1.70) (-1.57) (-1.86) (-1.61)
              Currency market interest                          0.37            0.32            0.33            0.32
                                                              (2.48)          (2.18)          (2.25)          (2.24)
              Currency returns                                          0.26    0.12
                                                                      (1.51) (0.71)
              Currency market imbalance                                                 0.25    0.15
                                                                                      (1.98) (1.28)
              Chicago Fed National Activity Index                                                       0.32    0.24
                                                                                                      (1.41) (1.02)
              R2 (%)                                    2.03    4.55    3.19    4.77    3.07    4.90    3.47    5.28
                                     Table 9: Predictability of bond returns by bond market interest
     The predictability of monthly excess returns on the 10-year US Treasury note over the one-month T-bill rate is tested. All
     predictor variables are lagged one month. The table reports standardized coeﬃcients with heteroskedasticity-consistent t-
     statistics in parentheses. The sample period is 1984:1–2008:12.

              Predictor variable                       (1)      (2)    (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
              Short rate                              0.20      0.34   0.20    0.33   0.22    0.34       0.29      0.39
                                                    (1.18)    (1.92) (1.11) (1.84) (1.25) (1.95)       (1.81)    (2.28)
              Yield spread                            0.34      0.50   0.33    0.49   0.33    0.49       0.36      0.49
42




                                                    (2.39)    (3.00) (2.26) (2.87) (2.34) (2.95)       (2.56)    (3.05)
              Bond market interest                             -0.31          -0.31          -0.31                -0.26
                                                             (-1.91)        (-1.89)        (-1.88)              (-1.66)
              Bond returns                                             0.06    0.05
                                                                     (0.45) (0.36)
              Bond market imbalance                                                   0.06    0.04
                                                                                    (0.47) (0.30)
              Chicago Fed National Activity Index                                                        -0.31   -0.26
                                                                                                       (-1.96) (-1.75)
              R2 (%)                                  1.95     3.55   2.03     3.60    2.02     3.58      3.82    4.88
                                    Table 10: Predictability of stock returns by stock market interest
     The predictability of monthly excess returns on the Center for Research in Security Prices value-weighted stock portfolio over
     the one-month T-bill rate is tested. All predictor variables are lagged one month. The table reports standardized coeﬃcients
     with heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses. The sample period is 1984:1–2008:12.

              Predictor variable                        (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
              Short rate                               -0.55   -0.73   -0.62   -0.73   -0.30   -0.49   -0.98   -1.06
                                                     (-0.86) (-1.14) (-1.00) (-1.12) (-0.47) (-0.75) (-1.69) (-1.76)
              Yield spread                             -0.53   -0.59   -0.47   -0.57   -0.31   -0.34   -0.74   -0.76
                                                     (-1.28) (-1.42) (-1.09) (-1.22) (-0.75) (-0.83) (-1.83) (-1.86)
43




              Dividend yield                            0.77    0.81    0.82    0.82    0.48    0.46    1.02    1.02
                                                      (1.36) (1.44) (1.47) (1.46) (0.83) (0.80) (1.88) (1.88)
              Stock market interest                             0.38            0.33            0.50            0.24
                                                              (1.38)          (0.88)          (1.76)          (0.90)
              Stock returns                                             0.29    0.08
                                                                      (0.83) (0.16)
              Stock market imbalance                                                   -0.45   -0.56
                                                                                     (-1.80) (-2.12)
              Chicago Fed National Activity Index                                                       0.70    0.65
                                                                                                      (1.97) (1.84)
              R2 (%)                                    1.05    1.68    1.40    1.69    1.92    2.97    3.22    3.45
             1




                           Agriculture
                           Energy
                           Livestock
             .8




                           Metals
             .6
     Share
             .4
             .2
             0




                  1965   1970   1975     1980   1985 1990   1995   2000    2005   2010
                                                   Year



                  Figure 1: Open interest in commodity futures by sector
The share of dollar open interest in commodity futures that each sector represents is shown.
The sample period is 1965:1–2008:12.




                                                44
                                                                                   Commodity market                                                                                                                                                        Currency market




                                                                                                                                         Chicago Fed National Activity Index (standardized)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chicago Fed National Activity Index (standardized)
                                                        8




                                                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
              Open−interest growth (%, 12−month average)




                                                                                                                                                                                              Open−interest growth (%, 12−month average)
                                                                                               Open−interest growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                               Chicago Fed National Activity Index



                                                  6




                                                                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                           4




                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                      2




                                                                                                                                                               −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −1
                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                       −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2
                        −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                     −2
                                                                                                                                                −3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −3
                 −4




                                                                                                                                                                                              −4
                                                                                                                                         −4
             −6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −4
                                                            1965   1970     1975   1980     1985 1990    1995     2000   2005     2010                                                                                                       1983   1988   1993      1998    2003   2008
                                                                                               Year                                                                                                                                                               Year


                                                                                          Bond market                                                                                                                                                       Stock market




                                                                                                                                         Chicago Fed National Activity Index (standardized)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chicago Fed National Activity Index (standardized)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                       6
              Open−interest growth (%, 12−month average)




                                                                                                                                                                                               Open−interest growth (%, 12−month average)
45




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                               −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                              0




                                                                                                                                                       −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                    −2




                                                                                                                                                −3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  −2
             −4




                                                                                                                                         −4




                                                                                                                                                                                              −4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −4
                                                            1983          1988       1993        1998           2003       2008                                                                                                              1983   1988   1993      1998    2003   2008
                                                                                              Year                                                                                                                                                                Year




                         Figure 2: Growth rate of open interest and the Chicago Fed National Activity Index
     The 12-month geometrically averaged growth rate of commodity, currency, bond, and stock market interest is shown. Also the
     Chicago Fed National Activity Index, which is a weighted average of 85 monthly indicators of US economic activity, is shown.
     The sample period is 1965:12–2008:12 for the commodity market and 1983:12–2008:12 for the other markets.
                                                                                    Commodity market                                                                                                                                 Currency market




                                                         8




                                                                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
               Open−interest growth (%, 12−month average)




                                                                                                                                                                        Open−interest growth (%, 12−month average)
                                                                                                           Open−interest growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                           Return




                                                   6




                                                                                                                                         Return (%, 12−month average)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Return (%, 12−month average)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                            4




                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                        2
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                              0
                         −2




                                                                                                                                                                               −2
                  −4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −1
                                                                                                                                         −2




                                                                                                                                                                        −4
              −6




                                                             1965   1970     1975   1980     1985 1990   1995     2000   2005     2010                                                                                 1983   1988   1993      1998    2003   2008
                                                                                                Year                                                                                                                                        Year


                                                                                           Bond market                                                                                                                                Stock market




                                                                                                                                         −1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                        6
               Open−interest growth (%, 12−month average)




                                                                                                                                                                         Open−interest growth (%, 12−month average)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             8
46




                                                                                                                                         Return (%, 12−month average)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Return (%, 12−month average)
                                                4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                                        2




                                                                                                                                                                                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −2
                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                           2
                     −2




                                                                                                                                                                            −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −4
              −4




                                                                                                                                                                        −4
                                                                                                                                         3




                                                             1983          1988       1993        1998          2003       2008                                                                                        1983   1988   1993      1998    2003   2008
                                                                                               Year                                                                                                                                         Year




                                          Figure 3: Growth rate of open interest and returns
     The 12-month geometrically averaged growth rate of commodity, currency, bond, and stock market interest is shown. Also the
     12-month geometrically averaged returns on a portfolio of fully collateralized commodity futures, a portfolio of fully collateralized
     currency futures, the 10-year US Treasury note, and the Center for Research in Security Prices value-weighted stock portfolio
     are shown. The sample period is 1965:12–2008:12 for the commodity market and 1983:12–2008:12 for the other markets.
