                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS PERSPECTIVES ON PUBLIC SECTOR PENSION
                               PLANS

                                           John Beshears
                                            James J. Choi
                                           David Laibson
                                         Brigitte C. Madrian

                                        Working Paper 16728
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16728


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




We thank Gwen Reynolds, Janelle Schlossberger, Jessica Zeng, Arash Alidoust, and John Klopfer
for their help in going through state, county and city pension documents, calling many public pension
offices, and compiling and analyzing the resulting data. Karl Scholz and the other participants in the
NBER State and Local Pensions Conference provided many helpful comments. Financial support from
the National Institute on Aging (grants R01-AG021650 and P01-AG005842) is gratefully acknowledged.
The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Behavioral Economics Perspectives on Public Sector Pension Plans
John Beshears, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 16728
January 2011
JEL No. G23,G28,H76

                                              ABSTRACT

We describe the pension plan features of the states and the largest cities and counties in the U.S. Unlike
in the private sector, defined benefit (DB) pensions are still the norm in the public sector. However,
a few jurisdictions have shifted towards defined contribution (DC) plans as their primary savings plan,
and fiscal pressures are likely to generate more movement in this direction. Holding fixed a public
employee‘s work and salary history, we show that DB retirement income replacement ratios vary greatly
across jurisdictions. This creates large variation in workers‘ need to save for retirement in other accounts.
There is also substantial heterogeneity across jurisdictions in the savings generated in primary DC
plans because of differences in the level of mandatory employer and employee contributions. One
notable difference between public and private sector DC plans is that public sector primary DC plans
are characterized by required employee or employer contributions (or both), whereas private sector
plans largely feature voluntary employee contributions that are supplemented by an employer match.
We conclude by applying lessons from savings behavior in private sector savings plans to the design
of public sector plans.


John Beshears                                         David Laibson
Graduate School of Business                           Department of Economics
Stanford University                                   Littauer M-12
518 Memorial Way                                      Harvard University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015                               Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                              and NBER
beshears@stanford.edu                                 dlaibson@harvard.edu

James J. Choi                                         Brigitte C. Madrian
Yale School of Management                             John F. Kennedy School of Government
135 Prospect Street                                   Harvard University
P.O. Box 208200                                       79 JFK Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                              Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                              and NBER
james.choi@yale.edu                                   Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu
       Over the past 30 years, employer-sponsored defined contribution (DC) savings plans
have displaced defined benefit (DB) pensions in the private sector. There were 2.4 active DB
participants for each active DC participant in the private sector in 1975, but these proportions
had more than flipped by 2007, when there were 3.4 active DC participants for each active DB
participant (U.S. Department of Labor, Employee Benefit Security Administration, 2008 and
2010). Several factors have been implicated in this shift, including increased regulatory costs for
DB providers following the passage of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)
in 1974, the legislated creation of an attractive (to employers) alternative to the DB pension
through section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code in 1978, and workers‘ interest in portable
pension benefits as the labor force has become more mobile.
       The picture in the public sector is very different. In most jurisdictions, a DB pension is
still the primary retirement income benefit offered to employees. However, some jurisdictions
have followed the private sector and shifted towards a DC system. Going forward, fiscal
pressures are likely to generate more movement in this direction. Even jurisdictions with a
primary DB plan currently offer supplemental DC plans.
       The distinction between DB and DC plans is an important one. In a DB plan, participants
have little impact on the income that they will receive in retirement other than through their
choice of when to leave their job. Plan sponsors dictate the formula that determines the payments
to retired participants. Sponsors also decide with the help of highly trained financial
professionals how much money to save today to fund these future payments and where these
savings are invested.
       In a DC plan, participants usually must choose how much to spend out of their assets
during retirement, how much to contribute to the plan before retirement, and how to invest plan
assets with limited guidance from their employer or plan sponsor. The consequences of having
individuals with low levels of financial sophistication make complicated financial decisions has
been well-documented in the literature: individuals procrastinate, their savings outcomes are
heavily influenced by plan design features such as employer-selected defaults, they place too
much weight on information that is not relevant (e.g., past asset returns), and they place too little
weight on information that is relevant (e.g., mutual fund fees).



                                                  3
        We begin this paper by surveying the retirement plans offered in the public sector,
evaluating the generosity of the DB plans and describing the types of DC plans that are available.
We find that public sector DB plans generally provide high income replacement rates during
retirement for employees who retire from the public sector with long tenures, but even within
this set of employees, there is a large amount of heterogeneity in the replacement rate across
plans. In contrast, employees who leave the public sector with shorter tenures are not covered as
generously. In public DC plans, mandatory employee contributions and employer contributions
that are not contingent on employee choices are much more common than in private DC plans,
and these combined contributions are often a large fraction of employee salary. We conclude by
summarizing previous research findings on employee savings behavior in private DC plans and
discussing how this research points to areas where the design of public sector pension plans
could be improved.


I. The Public Sector Pension Landscape
A. Defined Benefit and Defined Contribution Plans in the Public Sector
        In the United States, there are over 2,500 different public employee retirement systems
providing benefits to the over 20 million individuals employed in the public sector. 1 For most of
these employees, the primary retirement income benefit is a DB pension plan. According to Snell
(2010a), ―91 percent of full-time state and local government employees are covered by a
traditional, defined benefit retirement plan.‖ Although DC plans are making some inroads in the
public sector, quantifying their importance is difficult because the data collected on public sector
retirement plans have largely focused on DB plans.
        Pensions & Investments has compiled data on the 1,000 largest retirement plan sponsors
(public and private) in the U.S., as measured by assets under management (Pensions &
Investments, 2010a and 2010b). Of the 1,000 largest plans in 2009, 222 are classified as public




1
 The number of retirement systems comes from the U.S. Census Bureau:
http://www.census.gov/govs/retire/2008ret05a.html (accessed August 4, 2010). The total number of retirement
systems is comprised of 218 state systems, 160 county systems, 2,054 municipal/township systems, and 118 school
and special district systems. The number of public sector employees comes from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics:
http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat15.pdf (accessed August 5, 2010).
                                                        4
plans.2 Among these public plans, DB plans predominate: only 6% of total assets under
management are in DC plans. But 94 of the 222 largest public pension plan sponsors have a DC
component, and 38 of these plans have over $1 billion in DC assets. 3
         To get a more complete picture of the role of DC plans in the public sector, we compiled
information on the retirement plans offered to new hires in 2010 in all 50 states, the District of
Columbia, the 20 largest cities, and the 20 largest counties in the U.S. (as measured by
population).4 Some jurisdictions have a single plan for most or all public sector employees,
whereas others have separate plans for different employee categories, such as teachers, public
safety workers, and elected officials. 5 In Tables 1A (states plus Washington D.C.) and 1B
(counties and cities), we list the plans available to a general public sector employee. Some plans
appear in Table 1 multiple times; for example, a plan that covers workers employed by all levels
of government within a state that contains a top-20 city and a top-20 county would show up three
times as a plan covering state, county, and city employees.
         Tables 1A and 1B show that DB plans are the predominant primary6 retirement plan at all
levels of state and local government. But eleven states and Washington D.C. have some sort of
DC component in their primary retirement plan, either a DC only plan, a hybrid DB/DC plan
(which combines a DB component with a DC component that is distinct from the state‘s
supplemental DC plans), or a plan that allows employees to choose a DC or a hybrid DB/DC
plan instead of a DB plan. These DC and hybrid DB/DC offerings are largely recent with all but
one being incorporated in the past 15 years. 7 Fewer large cities and counties have a primary plan
with a DC component: only seven of the 40 jurisdictions in Table 1B.
         Regardless of the nature of their primary retirement plan, all of the jurisdictions in Tables
1A and 1B have an optional supplemental DC plan available to employees, and a non-trivial

2
  Pensions & Investments classifies plans as being corporate, public, union, or miscellaneous. A handful of plans
classified as ―miscellaneous‖ appear to be public plans (e.g., the Federal Retirement Thrift plan and the Illinois State
Universities plan). In the numbers reported here, we follow the Pensions & Investments categorization.
3
  By comparison, private sector companies like Apple and 7-Eleven have roughly $1 billion in DC assets under
management and no DB assets.
4
  For more information on the legislative history of state defined contribution savings plans, see Snell (2010b).
5
  The determinants of the plan types offered to different groups of public employees is a potential area for future
research. For example, do DC plans tend to be offered to employees who are best equipped to make good choices in
them?
6
  We define a primary plan as one that is not optional, and a supplemental plans as one in which participation is
voluntary.
7
  Washington D.C. made the switch to its defined contribution plan in 1987.
                                                           5
fraction have multiple supplemental options. The need for these supplemental DC plans depends
on how well the primary plan is meeting employees‘ retirement income needs.


B. The Adequacy of State Defined Benefit Pensions
         Public sector DB pensions are often perceived by the public as being quite generous. To
see how accurate this perception is, we calculate the extent to which employment automatically
generates an annuity stream of income for a stylized public sector employee, 8 Joe the Bachelor,
in each state, assuming Joe retires on January 1, 2010. The metric we use is Joe‘s replacement
rate after taxes and retirement plan contributions: (after-tax automatic retirement annuity income
in first retirement year) ÷ (after-tax salary in final work year – mandatory retirement plan
contributions in final work year). We include state DB plan payments (or payments from the DB
component of a state hybrid plan) and Social Security payments in Joe‘s automatic annuity
income. Even though Joe is retiring on January 1, 2010, we assume that he worked his entire
career under the pension rules being offered to new hires in 2010.
         Befitting his name, Joe has never married and has no dependents. The absence of spousal
labor and pension income means that the automatic replacement rate we calculate for Joe
approximates the ratio of his retirement consumption to his pre-retirement consumption if he
does no saving outside the DB pension both before and after retirement. Of course, the before-
tax generosity of Joe‘s state pension benefits does not depend upon his marital status or number
of dependents, at least as long as he is alive.
         We assume that Joe has a final pre-retirement salary of either $50,000 or $100,000, and
has experienced 1% annual real wage growth up until age 60 and 0% nominal wage growth until
his retirement at age 65. We consider six different work histories for Joe:
         A) Joe retires having worked for 40 years, all of it in the public sector
         B) Joe retires having worked for 35 years, all of it in the public sector
         C) Joe retires having worked for 35 years, the first 5 in the private sector and the last 30
            in the public sector



8
  The analysis that follows assumes that Joe the bachelor is a general state employee. We have done the calculations
in Appendix Table B1 assuming that Joe is a K-12 teacher in state, and the qualitative results are very similar (see
Appendix B). Note that in some states, the same pension plan covers both general public employees and K-12
teachers, whereas in other states these two groups of employees are covered by separate plans.
                                                         6
        D) Joe retires having worked for 35 years, the first 30 in the private sector and the last 5
           in the public sector
        E) Joe retires having worked for 35 years, the first 15 in the private sector and the last 20
           in the public sector
        F) Joe retires having worked for 35 years, the first 20 in the public sector and the last 15
           in the private sector
        Note that in every scenario, the replacement rate Joe would get later in retirement could
be different than our calculations here due to cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs). Appendix A
(available online) includes more details on the assumptions and methodology we use to calculate
Joe‘s automatic replacement rate, the values of the automatic replacement rate we calculate for
Joe in each state, each state‘s tax treatment of labor income and pension income, and whether
each state‘s employees participate in Social Security.
        Table 2 shows summary statistics of the automatic replacement rates, broken out by Joe‘s
final salary, work history, and the type of plan offered by the state. A state that offers employees
a choice of plans appears in multiple plan categories—once in each category it offers.
        Under most of the scenarios we consider where Joe‘s final income is $50,000, the
average automatic replacement rate in plans with at least some DB component is close to or
exceeds the 70 to 75% replacement rate that is often considered adequate. As a point of
comparison, Munnell and Soto (2005) calculate that the median U.S. single individual who
retired with an employer-sponsored pension between 1999 and 2003 receives Social Security
plus pension annuity income (assuming all DC assets are annuitized) equal to 56% of his average
income in the highest five out of the last ten years prior to retirement.9 Nonetheless, a need for
additional savings remains—even for many public sector employees covered by a DB plan—for
several reasons.
        First, because the Social Security system is progressive, Joe‘s average replacement rate is
decreasing in his final salary.10 For example, when Joe has a 35 year career entirely spent in the
public sector, his replacement rate in DB-only plans is 10 percentage points lower on average
with a $100,000 final income than with a $50,000 final income.

9
  This comparison shows that public sector compensation appears to be more back-loaded than private sector
compensation. It does not show that public sector compensation is more generous than private sector compensation.
10
   The only time Joe‘s replacement rate is not affected by his final salary is in states with DC-only plans whose
employees do not participate in Social Security. The replacement rate in these states is 0% regardless of Joe‘s
income.
                                                        7
         Second, in the DB-only plans and the hybrid DB/DC plans, Joe‘s automatic replacement
rate falls if he has spent less time working in the public sector. This is because the typical DB
pension formula increases benefits with years of service.11 If Joe‘s last job is in the public sector
with a final income of $50,000, his average replacement rate in a DB-only plan decreases by 8
percentage points as his years of public sector work decrease from 40 to 35, by another 8
percentage points as his tenure decreases from 35 to 30, and by another 17 percentage points as
his tenure decreases from 30 to 20. If Joe works only five years in the public sector, there are
many states whose DB systems do not give Joe any automatic annuity because he does not
satisfy the plan vesting requirements. Thus, Joe‘s automatic annuity income would come solely
from Social Security. In most of these states, Joe would receive a refund of his contributions to
the state pension system if the system requires employee contributions. 12
         Third, conditional on working partly in the public sector and partly in the private sector,
Joe has a lower replacement rate if he ends his career in the private sector than if he ends his
career in the public sector. This is because the DB pension formulas are a function of Joe‘s
nominal final average salary in the public sector. For example, if Joe retires with a final average
salary of $50,000 and works 20 years in the public sector and 15 years in the private sector, his
average DB-only replacement rate is 20 percentage points higher if he retires from the public
sector than if he retires from the private sector (96% versus 76%).
         Fourth, even holding fixed Joe‘s final income and work history, there is substantial
heterogeneity in his automatic replacement rate across states. For example, with a final average
salary of $50,000 and a 35-year career spent entirely in the public sector, the average
replacement rate across all DB-only plans is 121%. If Joe worked in Pennsylvania, his
replacement rate would be a much higher 150%. But if Joe worked in Maine, his replacement
rate would be only 79%. Joe‘s average automatic replacement rate in states with hybrid DB/DC
plans is lower on average than in the states with DB-only plans—90% versus 121%—as would
be expected, since it is intended that Joe fund some of his retirement with assets in the DC
component of these plans. There is also substantial variation in Joe‘s automatic replacement rate

11
   In some states, the DB replacement rate is capped, so additional years of service do not increase pension benefits
after some point.
12
   In most states with DB plans, if Joe leaves public sector employment before he is vested, only his contributions
are refunded. He does not receive any investment return on his contributions nor any of the employer contributions
made on his behalf.
                                                          8
within the small number of hybrid DB/DC plans, ranging from a low of 44% in Ohio to a high of
118% in Oregon. In DC-only plans, Joe‘s replacement rate is either 0% (in states whose newly
hired employees do not participate in Social Security13) or around 50% (the replacement rate that
he gets from Social Security alone after taxes).
         The automatic replacement rates in Table 2 are derived assuming that Joe accumulates
benefits for his entire career under the rules in place for employees newly hired today. How has
this automatic replacement rate changed over time? Figure 1 plots one measure of this change for
Joe if he works his entire 35-year career in the public sector (work history B above) and has a
$50,000 final salary. The vertical axis is the highest automatic replacement rate Joe could get in
his state if he spent his entire career under the rules for today‘s new hires. The horizontal axis is
the most generous automatic replacement rate Joe could get if he spent his career under the rules
actually experienced by employees who started working in 1975 and retired at the beginning of
2010.
         Most states are fairly close to the 45-degree line, indicating that the automatic
replacement rate has not changed much over time, at least for employees who spend their entire
careers in the public sector. The few substantial changes have mostly lowered the automatic
replacement rate; conditional upon changing, the average change is a 10 percentage point
decrease.
         Several states have decreased the generosity of their DB pension in ways that do not
show up in Figure 1. For example, an increase in the years of service at which employees vest
would reduce the automatic replacement ratio of employees who leave the public sector with
years of service between the old and the new vesting thresholds. Many states have adopted ―anti-
spiking provisions‖ to combat the practice of artificially inflating pay in the final year or two
before retirement by taking extremely high amounts of overtime or getting short-term
―promotions‖ into higher-paying positions. Since pension formulas depend on some measure of
final average pay, spiking increases pension payouts in retirement. 14 We have assumed that Joe‘s
pay is flat during his last five years before retirement, so the automatic replacement rates that we

13
   Newly hired state employees in Alaska, Colorado, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Nevada and Ohio do not
make Social Security contributions, and their employer does not either. Consequently, their public sector earnings
history is not counted in determining their Social Security benefits.
14
   In practice, anti-spiking provisions cap the annual salary growth that is used to calculate a worker‘s pension
benefit.
                                                         9
calculate are not influenced by spiking. States are also reducing the generosity of their retiree
health insurance, a valuable benefit that we do not incorporate into our replacement rate
calculation. The current fiscal situation facing many jurisdictions will likely precipitate many
more such changes. To the extent that pensions are becoming less generous in some of the less
visible ways discussed above, this may increase the need for supplemental DC savings.


C. The Adequacy of State Defined Contribution Pensions
        The adequacy of DC savings plans is more difficult to assess than that of DB plans
because their adequacy often depends significantly on participant behavior: Are employees
participating, how much are they contributing, and what type of asset allocation do they choose?
In most private sector 401(k) plans, there are many ways employees can fall short (Munnell and
Sundén, 2004): they can delay enrolling in the plan, choose a contribution rate that is too low to
generate the necessary resources to maintain consumption in retirement, or choose an
inappropriate asset allocation (e.g., investing heavily in employer stock, investing in high-fee
funds, or investing in a manner that does not match their risk tolerance).
        Table 3 lists some characteristics of states‘ primary DC plans. Optional supplementary
DC plans and the DC component of hybrid DB/DC plans are not included in the table. In contrast
to most private sector DC plans, plan contributions are mandatory for most state employees
whose primary plan is the DC plan.15 Thus, in the three states whose only primary plan is the DC
plan, contributions to the DC plan are automatic and employees cannot opt out. In the states that
allow employees to choose a DC plan as their primary plan, the default primary plan is the DB
plan (or the hybrid DB/DC plan in the State of Washington), so mandatory DC plan
contributions do not commence unless the employee actively enrolls in the DC plan.
        In the private sector, most DC plans are funded by elective employee contributions and
an employer contribution that depends on the employee‘s contribution (e.g., the employer will
match 50% of employee contributions up to 3% of pay). The contribution rules in state DC plans
are usually very different. Only Michigan allows variable employee contributions that are
matched by the employer, as is the norm in the private sector. Instead, state DC plans usually
offer an employer contribution that is not contingent on employee contributions, ranging from

15
   States often exempt some groups of employees from retirement plan participation, but these employee groups tend
to be a small (e.g., temporary or part-time workers).
                                                       10
4% of salary in Michigan to 10.15% of salary in Colorado. Most also fix the employee
contribution at a level between 4% and 10% of salary, although two jurisdictions (Washington
DC and Florida) do not allow employee contributions at all.
       One area where public and private sector DC plans are similar is the investment options
offered. The number of investment options ranges from 10 to the low 20s with only one
exception, South Carolina, which has four different investment fund managers and a total of 85
funds. All of the fund menus have investment options that span the risk-expected return
spectrum, and most include target date funds. The default fund is either an age-appropriate target
date fund or a balanced fund with the exception of Michigan, where the default is a fixed income
fund. This is in line with the private sector, which has also moved toward target date and
balanced fund defaults that satisfy the Qualified Default Investment Alternative (QDIA)
guidelines of the Pension Protection Act of 2006.
       Employees‘ own contributions are always immediately vested in state DC plans. The
vesting of employer contributions varies across jurisdictions, from immediate vesting in South
Carolina to cliff vesting after 5 years in Montana. Employees in most states become
incrementally vested in their employer contributions over time, until they are fully vested after 4
or 5 years. The range of state vesting schedules mirrors what we observe in private sector plans.
       Participants in state DC plans are less likely than participants in private sector DC plans
to end up with extremely low retirement savings, since most states impose high minimum
contribution rates. Colorado and Ohio require combined employer plus employee contribution
rates in excess of 18%. Four other states mandate combined contribution rates greater than or
equal to 10%. But some states have rather low mandatory combined contribution rates.
Washington D.C. contributes only 5% of salary and allows no employee contributions, and North
Dakota‘s combined mandatory contribution is 8.12% of salary, with no possibility for employees
to contribute more. Michigan‘s minimum mandatory contribution rate is 4%, but employees can
accumulate more by making additional optional employee contributions and earning the
accompanying employer match.




                                                11
II. Behavioral Economics and Retirement Savings
       We now turn to a brief summary of the behavioral economics literature on retirement
savings. In Section III, we will apply these research findings to the public sector retirement plans
that we have described in Section I.
       Several recent papers document a pervasive lack of financial literacy in the U.S.
population (e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell, 2006 and 2007; Lusardi, Mitchell and Curto, 2010;
Lusardi and Tufano, 2009; Applied Research and Consulting, 2009). This low level of financial
literacy carries over to the specific domain of employer-sponsored retirement plans. Gustman,
Steinmeier, and Tabatabai (2007) and Chan and Stevens (2008) show that many Health and
Retirement Survey respondents do not understand important features of their retirement plan,
including whether the plan is a DB or a DC plan, the age at which they qualify for full benefits,
and the relationship between continued work and future benefits. Choi, Laibson, and Madrian
(forthcoming) similarly show that many employees in one DC savings plan do not know their
employer match. Finally, Brown and Weisbenner (2009) document that individuals participating
in the State Universities Retirement System of Illinois are confused about which plan option best
meets their needs.
       Complicated financial decisions can be overwhelming for many individuals, especially
those with little financial expertise and experience. Saving and investing for retirement can be
especially daunting, as it involves making large long-term commitments in a domain in which
many individuals will never develop significant expertise. Learning is hindered by the fact that
each individual goes through the lifecycle savings problem only once, outcomes are realized with
substantial delay and noise, and the rapid pace of financial innovation renders previously
acquired knowledge obsolete.
       The consequences for savings plan outcomes have been well documented. Several broad
patterns of behavior emerge from the literature. First, individuals procrastinate when faced with
complicated choices. In the context of retirement saving, this often implies not saving at all.
Carroll et al. (2009) document substantial procrastination in 401(k) savings plan enrollment in a
large private sector savings plan, even though the costs of delay can be substantial (Choi,
Laibson and Madrian, forthcoming). Conversely, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2009a) and



                                                 12
Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2010a) show that simplifying the savings plan enrollment
process leads to sizeable increases in participation.
       Second, savings and investment outcomes are heavily influenced by plan design features
that matter little in standard economic models. The best evidence on this front is the sensitivity
of outcomes to the plan defaults. Savings plan participation increases greatly following employer
adoption of automatic enrollment, which changes the plan default from non-participation to
participation, and contribution rates and asset allocations shift toward the automatic enrollment
defaults (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Choi, Laibson, Madrian and Metrick, 2004 and 2006;
Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian, 2008). Allowing employees to choose automatic future
contribution rates increases leads to sizeable future increases in savings (Thaler and Benartzi,
2004). Portfolios are more heavily invested in employer stock when the employer match is
invested by default in employer stock (Benartzi, 2001; Choi, Laibson and Madrian, 2009b). The
fraction of pension beneficiaries choosing a joint and survivor annuity increased substantially
when this option became the legal default for married individuals (Holden and Nicholson, 1998;
Saku, 2005).
       Defaults are not the only plan design feature that significantly influences savings and
investment outcomes. In plans without an employer match, discretionary employee contribution
rates are influenced by whether mandatory contributions are labeled as employee or employer
contributions (Card and Ransom, forthcoming). Several authors have found that asset allocation
choices are sensitive to the structure of the investment menu (Benartzi and Thaler, 2001; Brown,
Liang, and Weisbenner, 2007; Karlsson, Massa, and Simonov, 2007) and the form on which
individuals must indicate their choices (Benartzi and Thaler, 2007).
       Third, individuals pay too much attention to irrelevant information and too little attention
to relevant information. For example, individuals chase past returns in both their asset allocation
choices (Benartzi, 2001; Choi, Laibson, Madrian and Metrick, 2004; Calvet, Campbell, and
Sodini, 2009; Choi, Laibson, and Madrian, 2010) and contribution rate choices (Choi, Laibson,
Madrian and Metrick, 2009) while paying too little attention to mutual fund fees (Choi, Laibson,
and Madrian, 2010).
       A fourth pattern is a reliance on heuristics and rules of thumb in decision making. For
example, Benartzi and Thaler (2001) document what they call ―naïve diversification‖:

                                                 13
individuals diversify by investing in several different mutual funds, but they fail to account for
the underlying correlations in returns across the funds when making their choices. 16 Choi,
Laibson, Madrian and Metrick (2006) show that employees disproportionately choose 401(k)
contribution rates that are divisible by 5.
           Finally, individuals do a poor job of integrating various aspects of their financial lives;
rather, they appear to engage in mental accounting, making decisions in each subset of their
portfolio without considering their choices in other subsets (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian, 2009b;
Card and Ransom, forthcoming).
           This long list of biases has complex implications for the overall adequacy of retirement
savings. Depending on the institutional environment, some behavioral biases will generate
excessive accumulation of retirement wealth whereas other biases will generate inadequate
accumulation of retirement wealth.
           To illustrate the case of excess accumulation, consider an individual who has a large DB
pension claim, but fails to fully account for that claim when making retirement savings decisions.
For example, the individual might mentally segregate their DB claim and follow a simple
heuristic in choosing an active savings rate in his DC account, for instance, save up to the match
threshold, which is 6% of income in a typical private sector DC plan. Assuming that the
employee‘s contributions are partially matched, the total implicit saving rate could far exceed
20% once the DB accumulation and Social Security are also taken into account. In this scenario,
the individual might save far too much, particularly if he has a low level of labor income and a
correspondingly high Social Security replacement rate. Likewise, consider a completely passive
individual who works for an employer with a DB plan and also a DC plan that has automatic
enrollment, an employer match, and automatic contribution escalation. In this setting, such a
household might also end up saving far too much.
           On the other hand, the passive behavior noted above could lead to insufficient retirement
wealth accumulation in other contexts. For example, a largely passive individual who works for
an employer with neither a DB nor a DC savings plan could save far too little.
           Behavioral biases therefore predict a mixed picture of heterogeneous savings outcomes,
with this heterogeneity driven by the interaction between behavioral biases (like passivity or


16
     However, see the critique of this result by Huberman and Jiang (2006)
                                                          14
mental accounting) and the individual‘s institutional environment. Researchers who study
savings adequacy have reached differing conclusions about the extent to which individuals are
financially prepared for retirement. Some argue that individuals are largely well-positioned (e.g.
Sholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun, 2006; Engen, Gale and Uccello, 1999), while others conclude
that most individuals are falling short of where they need to be (Munnell, Webb and Golub-Sass,
2007).


III. Implications for Public Sector Retirement Plans
         What are the implications of these behavioral patterns for thinking about how well public
sector retirement plans meet the retirement income needs of public sector employees?
         We start by considering the situation of employees who have a primary DB plan. DB
plans have been characterized as being less complicated than DC plans for their participants.
Indeed, DC plans demand—or at least allow—a substantial amount of individual autonomy,
whereas DB plans require almost no choices by participants before retirement. But there are
many complicated features of DB plans that have implications for how employees use the
supplemental DC savings plans they are offered.
         The formulas determining DB pension payouts seem relatively straightforward on the
surface: final average salary multiplied by years of service multiplied by a retirement factor. But
these formulas often have complicated wrinkles, such as limits on the growth in final wages that
will count in the formula, future cost-of-living adjustments that are hard to value, and rules about
the combination of age and years of service that must be attained to receive a full benefit. Many
individuals have misconceptions about their retirement benefits, which may affect their choices
about how much to save in their supplemental DC plans.
         DB plans reward tenure, since most payout formulas depend directly on years of service
and some measure of final average pay, which is itself often related to tenure. Individuals who
leave the public sector with relatively low levels of tenure will be entitled to very little or nothing
at all. Although the common perception is that public sector workers are generally long-term
employees, a recent Maine task force report claims that over half of public sector workers in
Maine leave the public sector before reaching the 5 years of service necessary to vest (Maine



                                                  15
URP Task Force, 2010). If this is true in other states as well, then more attention probably needs
to be paid to supplemental DC plans in the public sector.
        Finally, the Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP) greatly complicates estimating the
level of Social Security income that employees of six states (Colorado, Louisiana, Maine,
Massachusetts, Nevada, and Ohio) will receive. While employed by these states, employees
make no contributions to Social Security, and neither does their employer. Consequently,
earnings from employment in these states are not counted towards determining Social Security
benefits. But some employees have long enough careers to qualify for Social Security benefits in
addition to their state pension. The WEP reduces Social Security payments to these employees.
As explained on the Social Security web site:
        ―Before 1983, people who worked mainly in a job not covered by Social Security had
        their Social Security benefits calculated as if they were long-term, low-wage workers.
        They had the advantage of receiving a Social Security benefit representing a higher
        percentage of their earnings, plus a pension from a job where they did not pay Social
        Security taxes. Congress passed the Windfall Elimination Provision to remove that
        advantage.‖
        (Source: http://www.ssa.gov/pubs/10045.html, accessed August 7, 2010.)
The annual statements that Social Security sends to participants projecting their future benefits
do not account for the effects of the WEP, so affected state employees may mistakenly believe
that they are entitled to higher Social Security benefits than they will in fact receive, altering
their savings and retirement decisions.
        In some states, employees have a choice of plans in which to participate, which adds yet
another layer of complexity. Employees do not typically have the option of procrastinating
indefinitely, because there is a deadline by which a decision must be made. 17 But in fact, the
decision does not need to be explicitly made, since the employer specifies a default plan for
individuals who do not state a preference. Table 4 lists the states that offer a choice of primary
plan, which plan is their default option, and the fraction of new employees who end up in each
option in the states from which were able to get that information. The default is the DB plan in
all of the choice states except Washington, where the default is a hybrid DB/DC plan. Consistent
with previous research, the large majority of employees—79% to 87%—end up in whichever
plan is the default.

17
  For the states with a plan choice in Table 1A, employees have between 30 days and twelve months to opt out of
the default plan.
                                                       16
        Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2008) discuss several reasons why defaults are
powerful. One may be particularly relevant here: the perception that the default is the employer-
endorsed option. Most workers probably lack the knowledge necessary to map each retirement
plan to their preferences, so the default may be particularly likely to be perceived as the correct
course of action. Yang (2005), Brown and Weisbenner (2009), and Goda and Manchester (2010)
all document strong default effects among employees who have a choice between a DB and a DC
plan (the employees studied by Brown and Weisbenner had a choice among three different
plans). In the organization studied by Goda and Manchester, the default differed by age:
employees older than 45 had a DB plan default, while employees younger than 45 had a DC plan
default. Employees who are just above the age-45 cutoff are 60 percentage points more likely to
be in the DB plan than employees who are just below the age-45 cutoff. Goda and Manchester‘s
analysis suggests that following the age-based default rule was close to optimal ex ante for
employees. However, even if the age-based default rule was optimal on average, there could be
many employees who are swept up into a plan that is not optimal for them. The organizations
studied by Yang (2005) and Brown and Weisbenner (2009) designated the DB plan as the default
for all employees. Like Goda and Manchester, Yang finds that the default is very influential,
especially for employees younger than 30, whom she calculates are least likely to benefit from
being in the DB plan.18 Brown and Weisbenner also find that the default is powerful, and
employees who opt out of the default tend to choose a dominated non-default plan.
        Instead of having a default, employees could be required to actively choose their primary
plan before a deadline. Carroll et al. (2009) study such a regime in a private 401(k) plan that
required employees to actively choose a (possibly zero) contribution rate within 30 days of hire.
This approach prevents employees from finding themselves in an inappropriate plan through
passivity, but also places a heavy burden on employees to gather enough information to make a
wise decision. Thus, active decision regimes are best accompanied by mechanisms that help
employees quickly and easily understand their options.
        An interesting design choice is whether to make the plan choice reversible. In some
states, the plan choice is irreversible, whereas in other states, employees have one or more
opportunities to switch between plans. Reversibility may complicate the decision-making task

18
  This result is consistent with the findings of Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2010b), who find that
employees who accept a sub-optimal default contribution rate tend to be of lower socio-economic status.
                                                        17
even further, and could cause employees to make their initial choice less thoughtfully. On the
other hand, flexibility is valuable if employees make a mistake in their initial choice, or if their
circumstances change.
         All states with a DC-only plan remove at least one layer of complexity by automatically
enrolling employees in the DC plan with an employer contribution that is not contingent on
employee choices. Most go a step further by also requiring a fixed contribution on the part of
employees, some at relatively high rates. The default investment fund in these plans is typically a
target date fund. Although target date funds are not perfect, they are diversified across multiple
asset classes and automatically become less risky as the participant ages.19
         The complexity in public DC plans comes from the optional supplemental savings plans,
in which employees must determine their appropriate contribution rates and asset allocations. As
noted in Section I, not all DB and primary DC plans generate high retirement income
replacement rates for all public sector workers, resulting in the need to utilize these supplemental
plans. Some aspects of the supplemental plans‘ complexity seem unnecessary. For example, a
state may have one provider administering its primary DC plan with one set of investment
options, another provider with a completely different set of investment options managing its first
supplemental plan, and yet another provider with a third set of investment options for its second
supplemental plan. If there are multiple supplemental plans, employees who want to augment
their primary benefits would have to choose which supplemental plan to use first. Like the choice
between a DB and a DC plan discussed above, this is not necessarily a straightforward decision.
         Another source of complexity in both DB and DC plans is the process of transforming
accumulated benefits into retirement income. Most private sector DC plans do not have an
annuitization option within the plan, so accumulated balances are not automatically converted
into a payment stream upon retirement. Rather, retirees must take some action to convert their
plan balances into an annuity, or they must self-manage spending down their wealth in
retirement. In the private sector DC plans that do offer an annuity option, the take-up rate of this
option is quite low. The low rate of annuitization both within and outside of DC plans is often
referred to as the ―annuity puzzle‖ because it goes against theoretical predictions that individuals
19
  Mitchell, Mottola, Utkus, and Yamaguchi (2007) find that 401(k) participants who are 100% invested in a target
date fund tend to have the target date fund as their asset allocation default. Nessmith and Utkus (2008) find that just
over half of target date fund 401(k) investors allocate their entire 401(k) to that one target date fund, while the
remaining target date investors combine the target date fund with other investment options.
                                                          18
should have a strong demand for annuities to insure against longevity risk (Yaari, 1965; Brown,
2007).20 Within-plan annuitization options are somewhat more prevalent in the public sector than
in the private sector. Of the 12 states that have a DC-only or a hybrid DB/DC plan, half have an
option within the plan for employees to annuitize their wealth upon retirement. 21
         In contrast, both private and public sector DB plans have traditionally paid out accrued
benefits as either a single or as a joint and survivor life annuity. But many DB plans have started
to offer a lump sum payout option. Mitchell (1999) reports that in 1991, when aggregate data on
lump sum payout options were first collected, only 14% of private sector DB plan participants
had the option of a lump sum payout. By 2005, more than half (52%) of private sector DB plan
participants had a lump sum option available (U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 2007). Anecdotal discussions with those in the pension and retirement savings industry
suggest that when a lump sum option is available, the majority of participants elect the lump
sum. So the trend in private sector DB plans is towards decreased levels of annuitization. Public
sector DB plans are still more aggressive in promoting annuitization. Only a third of states allow
employees the option of taking a lump sum withdrawal, and in most of these, the lump-sum
payout is limited to the equivalent of a few years of annuitized benefits. 22


IV. Conclusions
         In this paper, we have provided an overview of the public sector pension landscape in the
U.S. Although DB plans remain the predominant primary plan, some jurisdictions—particularly
at the state level—have opted to offer only a DC plan or have given employees a choice among a
DB, DC, and hybrid DB/DC plans. All jurisdictions have one or more supplemental DC plans
available to employees.

20
   Chalmers and Reuter (2009) and Previtero (2010) show that annuitization rates vary negatively with recent equity
market returns, perhaps reflecting shifts in workers‘ confidence in their ability to generate high returns by investing
their savings on their own. Hu and Scott (2007), Brown, Kling, Mullainathan and Wrobel (2008), and Agnew,
Anderson, Gerlach and Szykman (2008) argue that annuity demand is affected by framing, i.e., the arbitrary mental
filter through which individuals interpret the annuity choice.
21
   Alaska, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, and Washington have a mechanism for converting DC balances into an annuity.
Michigan facilitates annuitization of DC balances through a platform that gives participants competing quotes from
several different annuity providers.
22
   Retirees may take their entire benefit as a lump sum in Delaware, Kentucky, Pennsylvania and South Dakota. In
Oregon and Wisconsin, retirees may only take their entire benefit as a lump sum if the monthly annuity benefit to
which they are entitled is below a low threshold. The following states allow a partial lump sum payout: Arizona,
Georgia, Kansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, North Dakota, Ohio, Texas, Utah and Virginia.
                                                          19
       We document substantial heterogeneity across jurisdictions in the extent to which their
DB, DC, or hybrid DB/DC plans automatically set employees up for high retirement income
replacement rates. Employees in plans that will provide them with less automatic savings
probably need to engage in some supplemental savings in order to maintain their standard of
living in retirement. The need for supplemental savings is particularly high for low-tenured
workers who may not vest in a DB plan or who may only partially vest in a DC plan.
       We conclude by discussing how recent behavioral economics research on savings and
investing behavior applies to the institutions and choices that employees face in public sector
retirement plans. Most public sector DC plans do not allow employees any choice in how much
gets contributed to the plan, and employees‘ assets are directed by default into target date
retirement funds. By limiting the amount of choice employees have in the primary DC plan,
public sector retirement plan designers are likely to have eliminated most of the left tail of
savings outcomes that arise in private sector DC plans due to financial illiteracy, procrastination,
and time-inconsistent tastes for immediate consumption gratification, although it is unknown
how large of a welfare cost reducing choice exacts due to rational employees‘ reduced ability to
smooth marginal utility intertemporally. Public sector supplemental DC plans are typically more
complicated and confusing than those found in the private sector, since there are often multiple
supplemental plans offered, and since each supplemental plan may be operated by a different
financial services company. More research is needed to determine why the supplemental plans
are structured as they are and how variation in their structure affects how well public sector
employees do when faced with these types of choices.




                                                 20
References

Agnew, J.R., Anderson, L.R., Gerlach, J.R. and Szykman, L.R., 2008. Who Chooses Annuities:
An Experimental Investigation of Gender, Framing and Defaults. American Economic Review
98(2), pp. 418-422.

Applied Research and Consulting, 2009. Financial Capability in the United States, [online].
Available at:
<http://www.finrafoundation.org/web/groups/foundation/@foundation/documents/foundation/p1
20536.pdf> [Accessed 9 August 2010].

Benartzi, S., 2001. Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to Company
Stock? Journal of Finance 56(5), pp. 1747-1764.

Benartzi, S. and Thaler, R.H., 2001. Naive Diversification Strategies in Retirement Saving Plans.
American Economic Review 91(1), pp. 79-98.

Benartzi, S. and Thaler, R.H., 2007. Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings Behavior.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), pp. 81-104.

Beshears, J, Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., and Madrian, B.C. 2008. The Importance of Default Options
for Retirement Saving Outcomes: Evidence from the United States. In: S.J. Kay and T. Sinha
eds. Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 59-87.

Beshears, J, Choi, J.J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B.C., 2010a. Simplification and Saving. NBER
Working Paper No. 12659.

Beshears, J. Choi, J.J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B.C., 2010b. The Limitations of Defaults.
Harvard University working paper.

Brown, J.R., 2007. Rational and Behavioral Perspectives on the Role of Annuities in Retirement
Planning. NBER Working Paper No. 13537.

Brown, J.R., Kling, J.R., Mullainathan, S. and Wrobel, M.V., 2008. Why Don‘t People Insure
Late-Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the Under-Annuitization Puzzle. American
Economic Review 98(2), pp. 304-309.

Brown, J.R., Liang, N. and Weisbenner, S., 2007. Individual Account Investment Options and
Portfolio Choice: Behavioral Lessons from 401(k) Plans.‖ Journal of Public Economics 91(10),
pp. 1992-2013.

Brown, J.R. and Weisbenner, S., 2009. Who Chooses Defined Contribution Plans? In: J.R.
Brown, J.B. Liebman and D.A. Wise, eds. Social Security Policy in a Changing Environment.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 131-161.
Calvet, L.E., Campbell, J.Y. Sodini, P., 2009. Measuring the Financial Sophistication of
Households. American Economic Review 99(2), pp. 393-98.

Card, D. and Ransom, M. (forthcoming). Pension Plan Characteristics and Framing Effects in
Employee Savings Behavior. Review of Economics and Statistics.

Carroll, G.D., Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C. and Metrick, A., 2009. Optimal Defaults
and Active Decisions. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), pp. 1639-1674.

Chalmers, J. and Reuter, J., 2009. How Do Retirees Value Life Annuities? Evidence from Public
Employees. NBER Working Paper No. 15608.

Chan, S. and Stevens, A.H., 2008. What You Don't Know Can't Help You: Worker Knowledge
and Retirement Decision-Making. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), pp. 253-266.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B.C., 2004. Plan Design and 401(k) Savings Outcomes.
National Tax Journal, 57(2), pp. 275-298.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B.C., 2009a. Reducing the Complexity Costs of 401(k)
Participation Through Quick Enrollment. In: D.A. Wise, ed. Developments in the Economics of
Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 57-85.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B.C., 2009b. Mental Accounting in Portfolio Choice:
Evidence from a Flypaper Effect. American Economic Review, 99(5), pp. 2085-2095.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B.C., 2010. Why Does the Law of One Price Fail? An
Experiment on Index Mutual Funds. Review of Financial Studies 23(4), pp. 1405-1432.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B.C., forthcoming. $100 Bills on the Sidewalk: Suboptimal
Investment in 401(k) Plans. Review of Economics and Statistics.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C. and Metrick, A., 2004. Employees‘ Investment Decisions
About Company Stock. In: O.S. Mitchell and S. P. Utkus, eds. Pension Design and Structure.
New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 121-36.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C. and Metrick, A., 2005. Passive Decisions and Potent
Defaults. In: D.A. Wise, ed. Analyses in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 59-78.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C. and Metrick, A., 2006. Saving for Retirement on the Path
of Least Resistance. In E.J. McCaffrey and J. Slemrod, eds. Behavioral Public Finance: Toward
a New Agenda. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 304-351.

Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C. and Metrick, A., 2009. Reinforcement Learning and
Savings Behavior. Journal of Finance 64(6), pp. 2515-2534.
Engen, E. M., Gale, W.G. and Uccello, C.R., 1999. The Adequacy of Retirement
Saving. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, pp. 65–188.

Goda, G. S. and Manchester, C.F., 2010. Incorporating Employee Heterogeneity into Default
Rules for Retirement Plan Selection. NBER Working Paper No. 16099.

Gustman, A.L., Steinmeier, T.L. and Tabatabai, N., 2007. Imperfect Knowledge of Plan Type.
NBER Working Paper No. 13379.

Holden, K. C. and Nicholson, S., 1998. Selection of a Joint-and-Survivor Pension. Institute for
Research on Poverty Discussion Paper No. 1175-98. University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Hu, W.Y. and Scott, J.S., 2007. Behavioral Obstacles in the Annuity Market. Financial Analysts
Journal, 63(6), pp. 71-82.

Huberman, G. and Jiang, W., 2006. Offering vs. Choice by 401(k) Plan Participants: Equity
Exposure and Number of Funds. Journal of Finance 61(2), pp. 763-801.

Karlsson, A., Massa, M. Simonov, A., 2007. Pension Portfolio Choice and Menu Exposure. In:
O.S. Mitchell, B.J. Soldo and B.C. Madrian, eds. Redefining Retirement: How Will Boomers
Fare? Oxford University Press, pp. 248-271.

Lusardi, A. and Mitchell, O.S., 2006. Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for
Retirement Wellbeing. Pension Research Council Working Paper 2006-1.

Lusardi, A. and Mitchell, O.S., 2007. Financial Literacy and Retirement Preparedness: Evidence
and Implications for Financial Education. Business Economics 42(1), pp. 35-44.

Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., and Curto, V., 2010. Financial Literacy among the Young. Journal of
Consumer Affairs, 44(2), pp. 358-380.

Lusardi, A. and Tufano, P. 2009. Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences, and Overindebtedness.
NBER Working Paper No. 14808.

Madrian, B.C., and Shea, D.F., 2001. The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation
and Savings Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), pp. 1149-1187.

Maine Unified Retirement Plan Task Force, 2010. Task Force Study and Report: Maine State
Employee and Teacher Unified Retirement Plan. MainePERS.

Mitchell, O.S., 1999. New Trends in Pension Benefit and Retirement Provisions. NBER
Working Paper No. 7381.

Mitchell, O.S., Mottola, G.R., Utkus, S.P. and Yamaguchi, T. 2007. The Dynamics of Lifecycle
Investing in 401(k) Plans. Pension Research Council Working Paper 2007-28.
Munnell, A.H. and Soto, M., 2005. What Replacement Rates Do Households Actually
Experience in Retirement? Boston College Center for Retirement Research Working Paper 2005-
10.

Munnell, A.H. and Sundén, A., 2004. Coming up Short: The Challenge of 401(k) Plans.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution Press.

Munnell, A.H., Webb, A. and Golub-Sass, F., 2007. Is There Really A Retirement Saving Crisis?
An NRRI Analysis. Boston College Center for Retirement Research Issue Brief 7-11.

Nessmith, W.E. and Utkus, S.P., 2008. Target-date Funds: Plan and Participation Adoption in
2007. Vanguard Center for Retirement Research, 33.

Pensions & Investments, 2010a. The P&I 1000: Largest Retirement Funds. Data set available from
<http://www.pionline.com/section/datastore#pi1000> [Accessed 7 July 2010].

Pensions & Investments, 2010b. The P&I 1000. Pensions & Investments, Vol. 38(3), p. 13.

Previtero, A., 2010. Stock Market Returns and Annuitization. Working Paper.

Saku, A., 2005. Does the Balance of Power Within a Family Matter? The Case of the Retirement
Equity Act. Journal of Public Economics, 89(9-10), pp. 1699-717.

Scholz, J.K., Seshadri, A. and Khitatrakun, S., 2006. Are Americans Saving
‗Optimally‘ for Retirement? Journal of Political Economy, 114(4), pp. 607-43.

Snell, R., 2010a. Pension Reform: Not Easy, but Worth It. State Legislatures, [online]
July/August, pp. 32-34. Available at: <http://www.ncsl.org/?tabid=20716> [Accessed 6 August
2010].

Snell, R., 2010b. State Defined Contribution and Hybrid Pension Plans. National Conference of
State Legislatures, [online]. Available at:
<http://www.ncsl.org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=yGsmFhwoq7E%3d&tabid=18511> [Accessed
6 August 2010].

Thaler, R.H. and Benartzi, S., 2004. Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to
Increase Employee Savings. Journal of Political Economy, 112(S1), pp. S164-S187.

U.S. Department of Labor, Employee Benefit Security Administration, 2008. Private Pension
Plan Bulletin Historical Tables, [online]. Available at:
<http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/pdf/privatepensionplanbulletinhistoricaltables.pdf> [Accessed 13
December 2007].

U.S. Department of Labor, Employee Benefit Security Administration, 2010. Private Pension
Plan Bulletin: Abstract of 2007 Form 5500 Annual Reports, [online]. Available at:
<http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/pdf/2007pensionplanbulletin.pdf > [Accessed 4 August 2010].
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2007. National Compensation Survey:
Employee Benefits in Private Industry in the United States, 2005 [online]. Available at:
<http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/sp/ebbl0022.pdf > [Accessed 18 January 2011].

U.S. Census Bureau, Number and Membership of State and Local Public Employee Retirement
Systems by State: Fiscal Year 2008 [online]. Available at:
<http://www.census.gov/govs/retire/2008ret05a.html> [Accessed 4 August 2010].

Yaari, M.E., 1965. Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer. Review
of Economic Studies, 32(2), pp. 137-50.

Yang, T.S., 2005. Understanding the Defined Benefit versus Defined Contribution Choice.
Pension Research Council Working Paper 2005-4.
                                                      FIGURE 1. State Retirement Plan Replacement
                                                                    Rates Over Time
Retiring in 2010 with Final Average Salary of $50K
                                                     160%
 under Pension Plan Rules for New Hires in 2010                                                                           PA
   Highest Replacement Rate of a State Worker

     and 35 Years of Public Sector Employment

                                                                                                                         CA
                                                                                                                        AZ
                                                     140%                                                             MS
                                                                                                                      NM
                                                                                                                       HI
                                                                                                                    AR
                                                                                                                     TX
                                                                                                                    KY
                                                                                                                    ALRI
                                                                                                       MD          NC
                                                                                                                   ID
                                                                                                                   WY
                                                                                                                  SC
                                                                                                                  OK
                                                                                                                  MT
                                                                                                                KS
                                                                                                                 WV
                                                                                                                ND
                                                                                                                IA
                                                                                                                VA
                                                                                                                WA
                                                                                                                 DE
                                                                                                                NJ
                                                     120%                                                     UT
                                                                                                              MN
                                                                                                               WI
                                                                                                               OR
                                                                                                           ILSD  NY
                                                                                                        FLMO
                                                                                                        NH
                                                                                                        VTTN
                                                                                                       CT
                                                     100%                                           LA
                                                                                                   IN                  GA
                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                CO
                                                                                                OH
                                                     80%                                            NV
                                                                                           ME

                                                     60%
                                                                                   NE    DC              MI
                                                     40%

                                                     20%
                                                                       45-degree line
                                                                                              AK
                                                      0%
                                                            0%   20%     40%      60%   80%     100%    120%     140%    160%
                                                                 Replacement Rate of a State Worker Retiring in 2010
                                                                        with Final Average Salary of $50K and
                                                                        35 Years of Public Sector Employment
                  Table 1A. Primary Retirement and Savings Plans Available to Newly Hired General State Employees
    State                                  Primary plan                          State                     Primary plan
    Alabama                                DB                                    Montana                   Choice of DB or DC
    Alaska                                 DC                                    Nebraska                  Cash balance
    Arizona                                DB                                    Nevada                    DB
    Arkansas                               DB                                    New Hampshire             DB
    California                             DB                                    New Jersey                DB
    Colorado                               Choice of DB or DC                    New Mexico                DB
    Connecticut                            DB                                    New York                  DB
    Delaware                               DB                                    North Carolina            DB
    District of Columbia                   DC                                    North Dakotaa             DB
    Florida                                Choice of DB or DC                    Ohio                      Choice of DB, DC, or hybrid DB/DC
    Georgia                                Hybrid DB/DC                          Oklahoma                  DB
    Hawaii                                 DB                                    Oregon                    Hybrid DB/DC
    Idaho                                  DB                                    Pennsylvania              DB
    Illinois                               DB                                    Rhode Island              DB
    Indiana                                Hybrid DB/DC                          South Carolina            Choice of DB or DC
    Iowa                                   DB                                    South Dakota              DB
    Kansas                                 DB                                    Tennessee                 DB
    Kentucky                               DB                                    Texas                     DB
    Louisiana                              DB                                    Utahb                     DB
    Maine                                  DB                                    Vermont                   DB
    Maryland                               DB                                    Virginia                  DB
    Massachusetts                          DB                                    Washington                Choice of DB or hybrid DB/DC
    Michigan                               DC                                    West Virginia             DB
    Minnesota                              DB                                    Wisconsin                 DB
    Mississippi                            DB                                    Wyoming                   DB
    Missouri                               DB
a
    North Dakota gives a small group of state employees (<10%) a choice between a DB and a DC plan.
b
    Starting in 2011, Utah state employees will have a choice between a hybrid DB/DC plan and a DC plan.
      Table 1B. Primary Retirement and Savings Plans Available to Newly Hired General County and City Employees
County                       Primary plan                   City                   Primary plan
Los Angeles County, CA       DB                             New York City, NY      DB
Cook County, IL              DB                             Los Angeles, CA        DB
Harris County, TX            Cash balance                   Chicago, IL            DB
Maricopa County, AZ          DB                             Houston, TX            DB
Orange County, CA            Choice of DB or hybrid DB/DC   Phoenix                DB
San Diego County, CA         DB                             Philadelphia, PA       DB
Kings County, NY             DB                             San Antonio, TX        Cash balance
Miami-Dade County, FL        DB                             Dallas, TX             DB
Dallas County, TX            Cash balance                   San Diego, CA          Hybrid DB/DC
Queens County, NY            DB                             San Jose, CA           DB
Wayne County, MI             Hybrid DB/DC                   Detroit, MI            DB
San Bernardino County, CA    DB                             San Francisco, CA      DB
Riverside County, CA         DB                             Jacksonville, FL       Choice of DB or DC
King County, WA              Choice of DB or hybrid DB/DC   Indianapolis, IN       Hybrid DB/DC
Broward County, FL           DB                             Austin, TX             DB
Clark County, NV             DB                             Columbus, OH           Choice of DB, DC, or Hybrid DB/DC
Santa Clara County, CA       DB                             Fort Worth, TX         DB
Tarrant County, TX           Cash balance                   Charlotte, NC          DB
New York County, NY          DB                             Memphis, TN            DB
Bexar County, TX             Cash balance                   Boston, MA             DB
                    Table 2. Joe the Bachelor’s Automatic Retirement Income Replacement Rates: Summary Statistics
                                                                             Work history scenario
                                             A                B                C                  D               E                 F
                                       0 yrs. private   0 yrs. private   5 yrs. private   30 yrs. private   15 yrs. private   20 yrs. public
                                       40 yrs. public   35 yrs. public   30 yrs. public     5 yrs. public   20 yrs. public    15 yrs. private
                                                                               $50,000 final salary
DB-only plans
Minimum replacement rate                    85%              79%             69%               42%               65%               48%
Mean replacement rate                      129%             121%            113%               61%               96%               76%
Maximum replacement rate                   163%             150%            138%               74%              122%               98%
Hybrid DB/DC plans
Minimum replacement rate                    51%              44%             37%               49%               41%               33%
Mean replacement rate                       96%              90%             84%               55%               75%               62%
Maximum replacement rate                   125%             118%            111%               66%               95%               79%
DC-only plans
Minimum replacement rate                   0%               0%               0%                41%               15%               18%
Mean replacement rate                      32%              32%              32%               48%               38%               39%
Maximum replacement rate                   53%              53%              53%               53%               53%               53%
                                                                              $100,000 final salary
DB-only plans
Minimum replacement rate                    86%              80%             70%               34%               63%               49%
Mean replacement rate                      120%             111%            101%               50%               83%               66%
Maximum replacement rate                   154%             141%            129%               64%              107%               83%
Hybrid DB/DC plans
Minimum replacement rate                    53%              46%             38%               38%               43%               35%
Mean replacement rate                       84%              78%             72%               44%               64%               54%
Maximum replacement rate                   109%             101%             93%               54%               81%               67%
DC-only plans
Minimum replacement rate                   0%               0%               0%                32%               15%               18%
Mean replacement rate                      24%              24%              24%               37%               30%               31%
Maximum replacement rate                   41%              41%              31%               41%               41%               41%
Source: Authors‘ calculations.
                     Table 3. Characteristics of State Primary Defined Contribution Retirement Savings Plans
                                                                States with primary DC plan only
                                            Employee               Employer                    Investment
                      Participation         contributions          contributions               options                 Vesting
Alaska                Automatic and         Mandatory 8%           5% non-contingent           10 funds, target date   100% after 5 years
                      immediate                                    contribution                fund default            0-0-25-50-75-100
Michigan              Automatic and         Optional up to 100%    4% non-contingent           22 funds, fixed         100% after 4 years
                      immediate                                    contribution; 100% match    income default          0-0-50-75-100
                                                                   on employee contributions
                                                                   up to 3% of pay

Washington DC         Automatic             None                   5% non-contingent           17 funds, target date   100% after 5 years
                      after 1 yr. service                          contribution                fund default            0-0-20-40-60-100
                                                States with choice of primary plan that includes DC-only option
                                            Employee               Employer                    Investment
                      Participation         contributions          Contributions               Options                 Vesting
Colorado              Opt-in                Mandatory 8% if DC     10.15% non-contingent       21 funds, balanced      100% after 5 years
                                            plan chosen            contribution                fund default            50-60-70-80-90-100

Florida               Opt-in                None                   9% non-contingent           20 funds, balanced      100% after 1 year
                                                                   contribution                fund default            0-100

Montana               Opt-in                Mandatory 6.9% if      4.19% non-contingent        15 funds, balanced      100% after 5 years
                                            DC plan chosen         contribution                fund default            0-0-0-0-0-100

North Dakotaa         Opt-in                Mandatory 4% if DC     4.12% non-contingent        20 funds + brokerage    100% after 4 years
                                            plan chosen            contribution                window, default         0-0-50-75-100
                                                                                               unspecified
South Carolina        Opt-in                Mandatory 6.5% if      5% non-contingent           83 funds, target date   Immediate
                                            DC plan chosen         contribution                default fund

Ohio                  Opt-in                Mandatory 10% if       8.73% non-contingent        16 funds, target date   100% after 5 years
                                            DC plan chosen         contribution                default fund            0-20-40-60-80-100

Utah (starts 2011)    NA                    Allowed                  10% non-contingent          NA                    100% after 4 years
                                                                     contribution
a
 North Dakota gives a small group of state employees (<10%) a choice between a DB and a DC plan.
      Table 4. Plan Defaults in States that Offer a Choice of Primary Plan
                     Retirement                       Fraction of new employees
State                plan options                     electing each option
Colorado             Defined Benefit (default)                      --
                     Defined Contribution                           --

Florida               Defined Benefit (default)                       79%a
                      Defined Contribution                            21% a

Montana               Defined Benefit (default)                         --
                      Defined Contribution                              --

North Dakota          Defined Benefit (default)                         --
                      Defined Contribution                              --

Ohio                  Defined Benefit (default)                      87%b
                      Hybrid DB/DC                                   5.6% b
                      Defined Contribution                           7.4% b

South Carolina        Defined Benefit (default)                      ~85% c
                      Defined Contribution                           ~15% c

Washington               Hybrid DB/DC (default)                        81%d
                         Defined Benefit                              19% d
We calculate the fraction of new employees electing each option from the annual reports
of the states that report active members by year for each plan.
a
  Florida: the fraction of new employees hired between 2000 to 2009
b
  Ohio: the fraction of new employees hired between 2003 and 2008
c
  South Carolina: rough estimate from a state employee in the South Carolina pension
office (personal communication)
d
  Washington: the fraction of new employees hired between 2002 and 2008
               Appendix A: Calculation of Retirement Income Replacement Rates


        Our calculation of the automatic retirement income replacement rates used in Table 2
(and Appendix Table B1) incorporates both the defined benefit pension and Social Security
income available to state retirees. We do not transform accumulated defined contribution
retirement wealth into an income stream in retirement.


Assumptions
        Our calculations of automatic retirement income replacement rates are based on a stylized
public sector employee, Joe the Bachelor. We make the following assumptions:
       Joe was born on January 2, 19451 and entered the labor force in either 1970 (if he has a
        40 year career) or 1975 (if he has a 35 year career).
       Joe retires on December 31, 2009, just before his 65th birthday, so that he has no labor
        income in the year in which he turns 65.
       Joe is single when he retires, has never been married, and has no dependents.
       Joe’s earnings trajectory is independent of the sector in which he is employed.
       Joe retires with a final average salary of either $50,000 or $100,000.
       Joe’s earnings grow at a real annual rate of 1 percent until age 60, at which point his
        earnings are constant in nominal terms at either $50,000 or $100,000 until he retires. This
        makes Joe’s final average salary, which is used in the defined benefit pension formulas,
        the same as his final salary in the majority of states.
       We calculate Joe’s nominal wage profile up until age 60 from his real wage profile using
        the Social Security Administration wage index factors. Note that Social Security only
        indexes wages up through age 60.
       In calculating Joe’s defined benefit pension income, we assume that Joe was covered
        throughout his career by the plan rules in effect for newly eligible employees in 2010.
       In Figure 1, we also calculate Joe’s defined benefit pension income assuming that Joe
        was covered by the plan rules in effect for newly eligible employees on January 1, 1975.


1
 We assume that Joe’s birthday is on January 2, 1945 rather than January 1, 1945 because federal tax law uses Joe’s
age on January 1 in determining whether Joe can claim an additional exemption for being age 65 in the computation
of Joe’s tax liability for the previous calendar year. Tax laws in several states have a similar provision.
Calculating Defined Benefit Pension Income for State Employees
       We calculate the public pension benefits for all states (plus the District of Columbia) that
have either a defined benefit or a hybrid DB/DC plan for their general employees. If a state
retirement plan has a hybrid DB/DC structure, we only count the defined benefit portion of the
available retirement benefit towards the automatic replacement rate. The state’s pension
contribution to the automatic replacement rate is zero for states with defined contribution or cash
balance plans. It is also zero for the defined contribution portion of states’ hybrid DB/DC plans.
       If Joe does not satisfy his plan’s vesting rules under a particular scenario, then he is
ineligible to receive a pension benefit. If Joe satisfies the vesting rules, we calculate his normal,
unreduced yearly retirement benefit using the plan rules in place for newly eligible employees in
2010. Even though Joe is not a newly eligible employee in 2010, this gives us a measure of the
pension plan generosity in place for new employees like Joe going forward. For Figure 1, we
also calculate the pension benefit Joe would receive under the plan rules in place for newly
eligible employees on January 1, 1975. If the state subsequently increased its pension plan
generosity, we assume that Joe switched to the newer plan that provides a greater future
retirement benefit if he is offered the option of changing plans.
       For every scenario, we calculate Joe’s pension income assuming a pre-retirement final
salary of $50,000 or $100,000. We calculate Joe’s final average salary, which is used in each
state’s defined benefit pension benefit formula, from Joe’s nominal earnings profile. His years of
credited service consist solely of his public sector tenure, which varies by scenario. Once we
have calculated the yearly pension benefit provided by each plan, we compare these amounts
with the plan’s minimum and maximum allowances, if they exist, and modify his pension
benefits if necessary to satisfy these constraints.


Calculating Social Security Benefits for State Employees
       We assume that Joe claims his Social Security benefit when he retires in 2010 at age 65.
In order to calculate the benefit amount, we take the lower of Joe’s nominal earnings and the
maximum Social Security taxable earnings for each year of his career. We index the resulting
values by multiplying them by the Social Security Administration wage index factors. To obtain
Joe’s average indexed monthly earnings (AIME), we sum the 35 years of highest indexed
earnings, divide by 420 (= 35 years × 12 months), and round to the nearest lower dollar. Using
the 2007 bend points of $680 and $4,100, we multiply the first $680 of the AIME by 0.9, the
amount over $680 and less than or equal to $4,100 by 0.32, and the amount over $4,100 by 0.15.
We add the three values generated from the previous step and round to the nearest lower 10 cents
to get the primary insurance amount (PIA). To account for cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs),
the PIA is increased beginning in 2007, the year that Joe reaches age 62. We multiply his PIA by
the 2007 COLA factor and round the resulting amount to the nearest lower 10 cents. We repeat
this process using the 2008 COLA factor. In effect, we obtain the full monthly Social Security
benefit. However, since Joe chooses to receive his benefit prior to reaching the normal Social
Security retirement age of 66 for individuals in his birth cohort, his benefit is reduced. In Joe’s
case, his benefit is reduced by 5/9 of 1 percent for each of the 12 months that he receives a
benefit before age 66. After making this reduction, we multiply the revised monthly benefit by
12 to obtain his annual Social Security benefit.
       In states whose general employees are covered by Social Security, Joe is entitled to the
above benefit. In states whose employees do not participate in Social Security, Joe only receives
a Social Security benefit if he has at least 10 years of substantial earnings through private sector
employment. If Joe has fewer than 30 years of creditable earnings, Joe’s benefit is reduced in
accordance with the Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP). In states without Social Security
participation, the WEP is relevant in scenarios E and F (in which Joe has 15 years of private
sector employment and 20 years of public sector employment). Under these scenarios in states
without Social Security participation, we change the 0.9 multiplicative factor for the first 2007
bend point to 0.4 and compute the resulting Social Security benefit.


Calculating State and Federal Income Taxes
       Before retirement, we assume that Joe’s only source of income is his salary. Once Joe
retires at age 65, we assume that his public pension and Social Security benefits are his only
sources of income. Using the NBER’s TAXSIM, we calculate Joe’s federal income tax liability
using the 2009 tax rules (the most recent effective tax rules). We assume that Joe takes the
standard deduction and does not itemize. Because TAXSIM does not distinguish between public
and private sector pensions in calculating state income tax liabilities, and because many states
have preferential tax treatment for public sector pension income (Table A1), we calculate state
liabilities on our own using the 2009 tax rules. If Joe is employed, we subtract his public sector
pension contributions, if made on a pre-tax basis, from his income. We then subtract the
applicable state-level personal exemption and standard deduction from his salary to calculate his
state-level taxable income before retirement. If Joe is retired, we first subtract state individual
income exemptions for public pensions and Social Security, if applicable, from Joe’s respective
public pension income and Social Security income. Next, we add together the remaining taxable
pension and Social Security income. We then subtract applicable state-level personal exemptions
and standard deductions, giving us Joe’s post-retirement taxable income at the state level. For
both employed Joe and retired Joe, if Joe’s state taxable income is zero or negative, we assume
that he has zero state individual income tax liability. Otherwise, we apply the state individual
income tax brackets to his taxable income and calculate his initial state tax liability. From this
tax liability we subtract any tax credits for which Joe is eligible (for example, some states have
special tax credits for either older individuals with retirement income or for individual who are
single). The remaining amount, as long as it is non-negative, represents his state individual
income tax liability; otherwise, we assume that Joe has zero state tax liability.


Calculating Retirement Income Replacement Rates
       The numerator of Joe’s automatic retirement income replacement rate is the sum of his
public pension and his Social Security benefit minus his federal and state income taxes. The
denominator of his automatic replacement rate is his gross pre-retirement income. We calculate
Joe’s gross pre-retirement income as his public sector salary minus any mandatory state pension
plan contributions and minus his federal and state income taxes and his portion of the FICA tax
(for states whose employees participate in Social Security). We divide the numerator by the
denominator to obtain Joe’s automatic retirement income replacement rate.
Appendix Table A1. State Participation in Social Security for Newly Hired General Public
            Employees and the State Taxation of Public Pension Benefits
                        Part of   Has an
                        Social    Income
State                  Security     Tax    State Taxation of State Pension Benefits

Alabama                  Yes       Yes     Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
Alaska                   No        No      No personal income tax
Arizona                  Yes       Yes     $2,500 public pension exclusion
Arkansas                 Yes       Yes     $6,000 public pension exclusion
California               Yes       Yes     Public pension fully taxed
Colorado                 No        Yes     $24,000 exclusion for Social Security and public and
                                           other qualified pension income for those 65+
Connecticut              Yes       Yes     Public pension fully taxed
Delaware                 Yes       Yes     $12,500 public pension exclusion for those 60+
District of Columbia     Yes       Yes     $3,000 pension income exclusion for those 62+
Florida                  Yes       No      No personal income tax
Georgia                  Yes       Yes     $35,000 retirement income exclusion
Hawaii                   Yes       Yes     Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
Idaho                    Yes       Yes     Public pension fully taxed
Illinois                 Yes       Yes     Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
Indiana                  Yes       Yes     Public pension fully taxed
Iowa                     Yes       Yes     $24,000 public pension exclusion
Kansas                   Yes       Yes     Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
Kentucky                 Yes       Yes     $41,110 public pension exclusion
Louisiana                No        Yes     Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
Maine                    No        Yes     Exclusion of $6,000 minus Social Security benefits
Maryland                 Yes       Yes     $24,500 pension exclusion for those 65+
Massachusetts            No        Yes     Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
Michigan                 Yes       Yes     Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
Minnesota                Yes       Yes     Public pension fully taxed
Mississippi              Yes       Yes     Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
Missouri                 Yes       Yes     May deduct the greater of $6,000 or 50% of public
                                           pension for those 62+; pension exemption limited to
                                           the amount of Social Security income
Montana                  Yes       Yes     Pension exclusion of up to $3,600 if Adjusted Gross
                                           Income < $30,000
Nebraska                 Yes       Yes     Public pension fully taxed
Nevada                   No        No      No personal income tax
New Hampshire            Yes       No      No personal income tax
New Jersey               Yes       Yes     $15,000 pension exclusion for those age 62+ if AGI
                                           ≤ $100,000
New Mexico               Yes         Yes      Retirement income exclusion of up to $2,500 for
                                              those with AGI ≤ $39,667
New York                 Yes         Yes      Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
North Carolina           Yes         Yes      $4,000 public pension exclusion
North Dakota             Yes         Yes      Public pension fully taxed
Ohio                     No          Yes      Retirement income tax credit of up to $200 if
                                              retirement income ≥ $500
Oklahoma                 Yes         Yes      Retirement income exclusion of up to $10,000
Oregon                   Yes         Yes      Tax credit of up to 9% of pension income if
                                              household income < $22,500
Pennsylvania             Yes         Yes      Public pension fully excluded from taxable income
Rhode Island             Yes         Yes      Public pension fully taxed
South Carolina           Yes         Yes      Public pension exclusion of up to $15,000 for those
                                              65+
South Dakota             Yes         No       No personal income tax
Tennessee                Yes         No       No personal income tax
Texas                    Yes         No       No personal income tax
Utah                     Yes         Yes      Tax credit of up to $450
Vermont                  Yes         Yes      Public pension fully taxed
Virginia                 Yes         Yes      Pension exclusion of up to $12,000 for those 65+
Washington               Yes         No       No personal income tax
West Virginia            Yes         Yes      $2,000 public pension exclusion; additional
                                              retirement income exclusion for those age 65+
Wisconsin                Yes         Yes      $5,000 pension exclusion for those 65+ if Adjusted
                                              Gross Income < $15,000
Wyoming                  Yes         No       No personal income tax
Note: State participation in Social Security is categorized for newly hired public sector
employees. Some states in which newly hired employees are part of the Social Security system
have older cohorts of employees that are not a part of Social Security.
                                 Appendix Figure A1. Joe the Bachelor’s Retirement Income
                                       Replacement Rates under Various Scenarios
                                       (Final Average Salary of $50,000 Annually)

                             (A) $50K FAS: 0 Years in the Private Sector, 40 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%




                              NM
                               NJ
                                ID
                               KS




                              NC
                              NH




                               TX
                              MD

                              MS




                               VT
                              NV
                              CO




                               KY



                              MO

                              ND




                                RI




                              CO
                              OH




                               VA




                               IN
                              OK




                              WY

                               DC


                               SC
                               AR




                               SC




                              OH

                              OH
                                FL
                                IA




                                FL
                              MN




                              WA
                               PA




                              WA
                               CT




                              ME

                              MT




                               UT




                              MT
                                 IL




                              GA
                               NE




                               TN
                               NY
                               AL




                                HI



                               LA
                              MA




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV
                               AK
                               AZ
                               CA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI
                             (B) $50K FAS: 0 Years in the Private Sector, 35 Years in the PublicSector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                              NC

                               NJ
                                ID
                               KS




                              NH
                              MD

                              MS




                               TX
                              NV
                              OH




                               VT
                              CO




                              MO

                              ND




                                RI
                               SC




                              CO
                               DC

                              OH
                               SC

                              OH
                               VA




                               IN
                               AR




                               KY




                              OK




                              WY
                                FL
                                IA




                              WA
                                 IL




                              MN




                               PA




                                FL




                              WA
                               CT




                              ME

                              MT
                               NE




                               TN
                               UT




                               AK


                              MT

                              GA
                               LA




                               NY
                               AL




                                HI




                              MA




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV




                              OR
                               AZ
                               CA

                               DE




                               MI
                             (C) $50K FAS: 5 Years in the Private Sector, 30 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                              NC

                               NJ
                                ID
                               KS




                              NH




                               TX
                              MD

                              MS




                              NV
                              OH
                              ND




                                RI




                               VT




                               SC
                              CO




                               KY



                              MO




                               SC




                              CO
                               DC

                              OH

                               IN
                              OH
                              OK




                               VA


                              WY
                               AR




                                IA
                                FL




                              ME
                              MN




                              WA
                               PA




                                FL


                              GA

                              WA
                               CT



                                 IL




                              MT




                               UT




                              MT
                               NE




                               TN




                               AK
                               LA




                               NY
                               AL




                                HI




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV
                               AZ
                               CA




                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI




                                     Cash Balance Plan   DB Plan    DC Plan    Hybrid DB/DC Plan

Note: States whose general public employees do not participate in Social Security have a black border.
                             Appendix Figure A1 (cont’d). Joe the Bachelor’s Retirement Income
                                       Replacement Rates under Various Scenarios
                                        (Final Average Salary of $50,000 Annually)

                             (D) $50K FAS: 30 Years in the Private Sector, 5 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%




                              NM
                               NJ
                                ID
                               KS




                              NC
                              NH




                               TX
                              MD

                              MS




                               VT
                              NV
                              CO




                               KY



                              MO

                              ND




                                RI




                              CO
                              OH




                               VA




                               IN
                              OK




                              WY

                               DC


                               SC
                               AR




                               SC




                              OH

                              OH
                                FL
                                IA




                                FL
                              MN




                              WA
                               PA




                              WA
                               CT




                              ME

                              MT




                               UT




                              MT
                                 IL




                              GA
                               NE




                               TN
                               NY
                               AL




                                HI



                               LA
                              MA




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV
                               AK
                               AZ
                               CA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI
                             (E) $50K FAS: 15 Years in the Private Sector, 20 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                              NC

                               NJ
                                ID
                               KS




                              NH
                              MD

                              MS




                               TX
                              NV
                              OH




                               VT
                              CO




                              MO

                              ND




                                RI
                               SC




                              CO
                               DC

                              OH
                               SC

                              OH
                               VA




                               IN
                               AR




                               KY




                              OK




                              WY
                                FL
                                IA




                              WA
                                 IL




                              MN




                               PA




                                FL




                              WA
                               CT




                              ME

                              MT
                               NE




                               TN
                               UT




                               AK


                              MT

                              GA
                               LA




                               NY
                               AL




                                HI




                              MA




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV




                              OR
                               AZ
                               CA

                               DE




                               MI
                             (F) $50K FAS: 20 Years in the Public Sector, 15 Years in the Private Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                              NC

                               NJ
                                ID
                               KS




                              NH




                               TX
                              MD

                              MS




                              NV
                              OH
                              ND




                                RI




                               VT




                               SC
                              CO




                               KY



                              MO




                               SC




                              CO
                               DC

                              OH

                               IN
                              OH
                              OK




                               VA


                              WY
                               AR




                                IA
                                FL




                              ME
                              MN




                              WA
                               PA




                                FL


                              GA

                              WA
                               CT



                                 IL




                              MT




                               UT




                              MT
                               NE




                               TN




                               AK
                               LA




                               NY
                               AL




                                HI




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV
                               AZ
                               CA




                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI




                                      Cash Balance Plan   DB Plan    DC Plan    Hybrid DB/DC Plan

Note: States whose general public employees do not participate in Social Security have a black border.
                                  Appendix Figure A2. Joe the Bachelor’s Retirement Income
                                        Replacement Rates under Various Scenarios
                                        (Final Average Salary of $100,000 Annually)


                             (A) $100K FAS: 0 Years in the Private Sector, 40 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%




                              NM
                              NC
                                ID
                               KS




                               NJ
                              CO




                              ND
                              NH

                              NV




                               TX




                              CO
                               DC
                              MD

                              MS
                               AR




                               IN
                                RI




                               VT

                              WY




                               SC
                               KY


                              MN
                              MO




                              OH

                               SC




                              WA
                              OK




                              OH

                              OH
                              WA
                                FL
                                IA




                               PA




                               VA
                               CT




                                FL
                                 IL

                               LA

                              ME




                               TN
                              MT




                               NY




                               UT




                              MT

                              GA
                               AL
                               AZ
                               NE




                              WV
                                HI




                               SD




                               WI

                               AK
                               CA




                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI
                             (B) $100K FAS: 0 Years in the Private Sector, 35 Years in the PublicSector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                                ID




                              NC
                               KS




                               NJ
                              NV
                              ND
                              NH




                               DC
                               TX
                               AR

                              CO




                              MD

                              MS
                              MO




                               IN
                               VT

                              WY
                              CO
                              WA




                               SC
                               KY


                              MN




                              OH
                              OK
                                RI
                               SC




                              WA
                              OH

                              OH
                               CT
                                FL




                               PA




                               VA
                                IA




                                FL
                               NY
                               NE
                               AL




                                 IL




                               TN
                               AZ




                               LA

                              ME

                              MT




                               UT




                              GA
                               SD




                              WV




                              MT
                                HI




                               WI

                               AK
                               CA




                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI
                             (C) $100K FAS: 5 Years in the Private Sector, 30 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                                ID
                               KS




                              NC

                               NJ
                              MS




                              NV




                               TX
                              ND
                              NH
                              CO




                              MD

                              MO




                              CO
                                RI




                               VT

                              WY

                               DC


                               SC
                               IN
                               AR




                               KY


                              MN




                              OH
                              OK

                               SC
                               CT




                              WA




                              OH

                              OH
                                FL
                                IA




                               PA




                               VA




                                FL




                              WA
                               LA




                               NY
                               NE
                               AL




                                 IL
                               AZ




                              ME




                               TN
                              MT




                               SD

                               UT


                              WV




                              MT

                              GA
                               CA


                                HI




                               WI

                               AK
                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI




                                      Cash Balance Plan   DB Plan    DC Plan    Hybrid DB/DC Plan

Note: States whose general public employees do not participate in Social Security have a black border.
                      Appendix Figure A2 (cont’d). Joe the Bachelor’s Automatic Retirement Income
                                      Replacement Rates under Various Scenarios
                                      (Final Average Salary of $100,000 Annually)


                             (D) $100K FAS: 30 Years in the Private Sector, 5 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                       80%

                       40%

                        0%




                              NM
                              NC
                                ID
                               KS




                               NJ
                              CO




                              ND
                              NH

                              NV




                               TX




                              CO
                               DC
                              MD

                              MS
                               AR




                               IN
                                RI




                               VT

                              WY




                               SC
                               KY


                              MN
                              MO




                              OH

                               SC




                              WA
                              OK




                              OH

                              OH
                              WA
                                FL
                                IA




                               PA




                               VA
                               CT




                                FL
                                 IL

                               LA

                              ME




                               TN
                              MT




                               NY




                               UT




                              MT

                              GA
                               AL
                               AZ
                               NE




                              WV
                                HI




                               SD




                               WI

                               AK
                               CA




                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI
                          (E) $100K FAS: 15 Years in the Private Sector, 20 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                       80%

                       40%

                        0%
                              NM
                                ID




                              NC
                               KS




                               NJ
                              NV
                              ND
                              NH




                               DC
                               TX
                               AR

                              CO




                              MD

                              MS
                              MO




                               IN
                               VT

                              WY
                              CO
                              WA




                               SC
                               KY


                              MN




                              OH
                              OK
                                RI
                               SC




                              WA
                              OH

                              OH
                               CT
                                FL




                               PA




                               VA
                                IA




                                FL
                               NY
                               NE
                               AL




                                 IL




                               TN
                               AZ




                               LA

                              ME

                              MT




                               UT




                              GA
                               SD




                              WV




                              MT
                                HI




                               WI

                               AK
                               CA




                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI
                          (F) $100K FAS: 20 Years in the Public Sector, 15 Years in the Private Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                       80%

                       40%

                        0%
                              NM
                                ID
                               KS




                              NC

                               NJ
                              MS




                              NV




                               TX
                              ND
                              NH
                              CO




                              MD

                              MO




                              CO
                                RI




                               VT

                              WY

                               DC


                               SC
                               IN
                               AR




                               KY


                              MN




                              OH
                              OK

                               SC
                               CT




                              WA




                              OH

                              OH
                                FL
                                IA




                               PA




                               VA




                                FL




                              WA
                               LA




                               NY
                               NE
                               AL




                                 IL
                               AZ




                              ME




                               TN
                              MT




                               SD

                               UT


                              WV




                              MT

                              GA
                               CA


                                HI




                               WI

                               AK
                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI




                                      Cash Balance Plan   DB Plan    DC Plan    Hybrid DB/DC Plan

Note: States whose general public employees do not participate in Social Security have a black border.
               Appendix Table B2. Joe the K-12 Teacher’s Retirement Income Replacement Rates: Summary Statistics
                                                                          Work history scenario
                                          A                B                C                  D               E                 F
                                    0 yrs. private   0 yrs. private   5 yrs. private   30 yrs. private   15 yrs. private   20 yrs. public
                                    40 yrs. public   35 yrs. public   30 yrs. public     5 yrs. public   20 yrs. public    15 yrs. private
                                                                            $50,000 final salary
DB-only plans
Minimum replacement rate                 82%             77%              67%               42%               62%              43%
Mean replacement rate                   125%            118%             109%               60%               92%              72%
Maximum replacement rate                163%            150%             138%               70%              115%              91%
Hybrid DB/DC plans
Minimum replacement rate                 48%             43%              37%               49%              41%               30%
Mean replacement rate                    93%             87%              82%               55%              73%               60%
Maximum replacement rate                124%            117%             110%               66%              95%               79%
DC-only plans
Minimum replacement rate                0%               0%               0%                41%              15%               15%
Mean replacement rate                   20%              20%              20%               45%              29%               29%
Maximum replacement rate                53%              53%              53%               53%              53%               53%
                                                                           $100,000 final salary
DB-only plans
Minimum replacement rate                 83%             78%              68%               33%              61%               44%
Mean replacement rate                   118%            109%              99%               50%              81%               64%
Maximum replacement rate                155%            141%             128%               61%              99%               79%
Hybrid DB/DC plans
Minimum replacement rate                 50%             44%              38%               38%              42%               32%
Mean replacement rate                    81%             76%              70%               45%              63%               52%
Maximum replacement rate                109%            101%              93%               54%              80%               67%
DC-only plans
Minimum replacement rate                0%               0%               0%                32%              15%               15%
Mean replacement rate                   15%              15%              15%               35%              25%               25%
Maximum replacement rate                41%              41%              41%               41%              41%               41%
                              Appendix Figure B1. Joe the K-12 Teacher’s Retirement Income
                                      Replacement Rates under Various Scenarios
                                       (Final Average Salary of $50,000 Annually)

                             (A) $50K FAS: 0 Years in the Private Sector, 40 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%




                              ND




                               VA
                                IA




                               PA




                              WA




                              WA
                                 IL




                              NM




                               TN
                              GA




                               LA




                               NE


                               NY
                               AL




                               SD




                              WV
                               AK
                               AZ
                               CA




                                HI
                                ID


                              MA




                               WI
                               KS




                              NC


                               NJ




                              OR
                               DE




                              MD




                              NH
                               MI




                               TX
                              MS




                              NV




                               VT
                              CO
                               DC




                              MO




                              CO


                               IN
                               KY




                              WY
                               AR




                              OH
                              OK
                                RI
                               SC




                              OH
                               SC
                              OH
                              MT




                               UT
                               CT

                                FL




                              MN




                                FL
                              ME



                             (B) $50K FAS: 0 Years in the Private Sector, 35 Years in the PublicSector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              ND
                                IA




                               VA
                              GA


                                 IL




                               PA




                              WA




                              WA
                               AL




                               LA




                               NE

                              NM




                               TN




                               AK
                               NY
                                HI




                              NC


                               NJ




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV




                              OR
                               AZ
                               CA




                                ID


                              MA
                               KS
                               DE




                              NH
                              MD
                               MI




                               TX
                              MS




                              NV
                              CO
                               DC




                              MO




                              OH




                               VT
                                RI
                               SC




                              CO
                              OH
                               SC
                              OH
                               IN
                               AR




                               KY




                              OK




                              WY
                                FL




                              ME




                                FL
                               CT




                              MN

                              MT




                               UT




                             (C) $50K FAS: 5 Years in the Private Sector, 30 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              ND
                                IA




                               VA
                              GA


                                 IL




                               PA




                              WA




                              WA
                               TN




                               AK
                               AL




                                HI



                               LA




                               NE

                              NM
                               NY
                              NC
                               CA




                              MA




                               NJ




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV




                              OR
                               AZ




                                ID
                               KS
                               DE




                              NH




                               TX
                              MD
                               MI

                              MS




                              NV
                              CO
                               DC




                              OH

                                RI




                               VT




                              OH
                               KY




                              MO




                               SC




                              WY
                              CO

                               SC
                               IN
                              OH
                               AR




                              OK
                                FL




                              ME




                                FL
                               CT




                              MN

                              MT




                               UT




                                     Cash Balance Plan   DB Plan    DC Plan    Hybrid DB/DC Plan

Note: States whose general public employees do not participate in Social Security have a black border.
                        Appendix Figure B1 (cont’d). Joe the K-12 Teacher’s Retirement Income
                                     Replacement Rates under Various Scenarios
                                     (Final Average Salary of $50,000 Annually)

                             (D) $50K FAS: 30 Years in the Private Sector, 5 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%




                              ND




                               VA
                                IA
                              GA


                                 IL




                               PA




                              WA




                              WA
                              NM




                               TN
                               AL




                               LA




                               NE


                               NY




                               AK
                                HI




                              NC




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV
                               AZ
                               CA




                                ID


                              MA




                               NJ




                              OR
                               KS
                               DE




                              NH




                               TX
                              MD
                               MI

                              MS




                              NV




                               VT
                              CO
                               DC




                              MO




                              OH

                                RI




                              CO
                              OH
                               IN
                              OH
                               KY




                               SC
                              OK




                              WY


                               SC
                               AR




                                FL




                              ME




                                FL
                               CT




                              MN

                              MT




                               UT
                             (E) $50K FAS: 15 Years in the Private Sector, 20 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              ND
                                IA




                               VA
                              GA


                                 IL




                               PA




                              WA




                              WA
                               AL




                               LA




                               NE

                              NM




                               TN




                               AK
                               NY
                                HI




                              NC


                               NJ




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV




                              OR
                               AZ
                               CA




                                ID


                              MA
                               KS
                               DE




                              NH
                              MD
                               MI




                               TX
                              MS




                              NV
                              CO
                               DC




                              MO




                              OH




                               VT
                                RI
                               SC




                              CO
                              OH
                               SC
                              OH
                               IN
                               AR




                               KY




                              OK




                              WY
                                FL




                              ME




                                FL
                               CT




                              MN

                              MT




                               UT




                             (F) $50K FAS: 20 Years in the Public Sector, 15 Years in the Private Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              ND
                                IA




                               VA
                              GA


                                 IL




                               PA




                              WA




                              WA
                               TN




                               AK
                               AL




                                HI



                               LA




                               NE

                              NM
                               NY
                              NC
                               CA




                              MA




                               NJ




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV




                              OR
                               AZ




                                ID
                               KS
                               DE




                              NH




                               TX
                              MD
                               MI

                              MS




                              NV
                              CO
                               DC




                              OH

                                RI




                               VT




                              OH
                               KY




                              MO




                               SC




                              WY
                              CO

                               SC
                               IN
                              OH
                               AR




                              OK
                                FL




                              ME




                                FL
                               CT




                              MN

                              MT




                               UT




                                      Cash Balance Plan   DB Plan    DC Plan    Hybrid DB/DC Plan

Note: States whose general public employees do not participate in Social Security have a black border.
                               Appendix Figure B2. Joe the K-12 Teacher’s Retirement Income
                                       Replacement Rates under Various Scenarios
                                       (Final Average Salary of $100,000 Annually)

                             (A) $100K FAS: 0 Years in the Private Sector, 40 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%




                              NM
                               NJ
                                ID
                               KS




                              NC

                              NH




                               TX
                              MD


                              MS




                               VT
                              NV
                              CO




                               KY
                               DC




                              MO


                              ND




                                RI




                              CO
                               VA




                               IN
                              WY
                               AR




                              OH
                              OK

                               SC




                              OH
                               SC
                              OH
                                FL




                                FL
                                IA




                               PA




                              WA




                              WA
                               CT


                              GA




                              ME
                              MN

                              MT




                               UT
                                 IL


                              MA




                               NE




                               TN
                               NY
                               AL




                                HI



                               LA




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV
                               AK
                               AZ
                               CA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI


                             (B) $100K FAS: 0 Years in the Private Sector, 35 Years in the PublicSector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                                ID




                              NC
                               KS




                               NJ
                              NV
                               DC




                              ND
                              NH




                               TX
                               AR

                              CO




                              MD


                              MO
                              MS




                               IN
                               VT


                              WY
                              CO
                              OK
                                RI
                               KY




                               SC




                              WA




                               SC


                              WA
                              MN




                              OH




                              OH

                              OH
                               CT




                               PA




                               VA
                                FL




                                FL
                               NY
                               AL




                                IA
                                 IL




                               TN
                               AZ




                              GA




                               LA

                              ME


                              MT

                               NE




                               UT
                               SD




                              WV
                                HI




                               WI

                               AK
                               CA




                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI




                             (C) $100K FAS: 5 Years in the Private Sector, 30 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                                ID
                               KS




                              NC


                               NJ
                              NH




                               TX
                              MD


                              MS




                               VT
                              NV
                              ND




                                RI
                              CO
                               DC




                               IN
                               KY




                              MO
                               AR




                              OH
                              OK

                               SC


                               VA


                              WY
                              CO
                              OH
                               SC
                              OH
                                FL

                                IA




                              MT




                               PA




                                FL
                              WA




                              WA
                               CT


                              GA




                              ME
                              MN




                               UT
                                 IL




                               TN
                               LA
                              MA




                               NE


                               NY
                               AL




                                HI




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV
                               AK
                               AZ
                               CA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI




                                      Cash Balance Plan   DB Plan    DC Plan    Hybrid DB/DC Plan

Note: States whose general public employees do not participate in Social Security have a black border.
                        Appendix Figure B2 (cont’d). Joe the K-12 Teacher’s Retirement Income
                                     Replacement Rates under Various Scenarios
                                     (Final Average Salary of $50,000 Annually)

                             (D) $100K FAS: 30 Years in the Private Sector, 5 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%




                              NM
                               NJ
                                ID
                               KS




                              NC

                              NH




                               TX
                              MD


                              MS




                               VT
                              NV
                              CO




                               KY
                               DC




                              MO


                              ND




                                RI




                              CO
                               VA




                               IN
                              WY
                               AR




                              OH
                              OK

                               SC




                              OH
                               SC
                              OH
                                FL




                                FL
                                IA




                               PA




                              WA




                              WA
                               CT


                              GA




                              ME
                              MN

                              MT




                               UT
                                 IL


                              MA




                               NE




                               TN
                               NY
                               AL




                                HI



                               LA




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV
                               AK
                               AZ
                               CA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI


                         (E) $100K FAS: 15 Years in the Private Sector, 20 Years in the Public Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                                ID




                              NC
                               KS




                               NJ
                              NV
                               DC




                              ND
                              NH




                               TX
                               AR

                              CO




                              MD


                              MO
                              MS




                               IN
                               VT


                              WY
                              CO
                              OK
                                RI
                               KY




                               SC




                              WA




                               SC


                              WA
                              MN




                              OH




                              OH

                              OH
                               CT




                               PA




                               VA
                                FL




                                FL
                               NY
                               AL




                                IA
                                 IL




                               TN
                               AZ




                              GA




                               LA

                              ME


                              MT

                               NE




                               UT
                               SD




                              WV
                                HI




                               WI

                               AK
                               CA




                              MA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI




                         (F) $100K FAS: 20 Years in the Public Sector, 15 Years in the Private Sector
                      160%
   Replacement Rate




                      120%

                      80%

                      40%

                       0%
                              NM
                                ID
                               KS




                              NC


                               NJ
                              NH




                               TX
                              MD


                              MS




                               VT
                              NV
                              ND




                                RI
                              CO
                               DC




                               IN
                               KY




                              MO
                               AR




                              OH
                              OK

                               SC


                               VA


                              WY
                              CO
                              OH
                               SC
                              OH
                                FL

                                IA




                              MT




                               PA




                                FL
                              WA




                              WA
                               CT


                              GA




                              ME
                              MN




                               UT
                                 IL




                               TN
                               LA
                              MA




                               NE


                               NY
                               AL




                                HI




                               SD




                               WI
                              WV
                               AK
                               AZ
                               CA




                              OR
                               DE




                               MI




                                      Cash Balance Plan   DB Plan    DC Plan    Hybrid DB/DC Plan

Note: States whose general public employees do not participate in Social Security have a black border.
