NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USING SURVEY DATA TO TEST SOME
STANDARD PROPOSITIONS REGARDING
EXCHANGE RATE EXPECTATIONS

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kenneth Froot

Working Paper No. 1672

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1985

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity and
Industrial Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1672
July 1985

Using Survey Data to Test Some
Standard Propositions Regarding
Exchange Rate Expectations

P3 ST RACT

data provide a measure of exchange rate expectations
superior to the commonly-used forward exchange rate in
the respect that it does not include a risk premium. We use sur'icy data and the technique of bootstrapping to test a number of
propositions of interest. We are able to reject static or "random

that

Survey

is

walk" expectations for both nominal and real

exchange

There is
rates. Expected depreciation ii large in magnitude.
even statistically significant unconditional bias: during the 198 185 "strong dollar period't the market persistently overestimated
depreciation of the dollar.
Expected depreciation is also
variable1 contrary to some recent claims. The expected future
spot rate can be viewed as inelastic with respect to the contemporaneous spot rate, in that it also puts weight on other variables:
the lagged expected spot rate (as in adaptive expectations), the
lagged actual spot rate (distributed lag expectations), or a longIn one irnporrun equilibrium rate (regressive expectations).
taut case, the relatively low weight that investors' expectations
put on the contemporaneous spot rate constitutes a statistical
rejection of rational expectations: we find that prediction errors
are correlated with expected depreciation, so that investors would
do better if they always reduced fractionally the magnitude of
expected depreciation. This is the same result found by Bilson,
lana. and many others, except that it can no longer be attributed
to a risk prerniunt.

Jeff rey A. Frankel

Kenneth Froot

Departnent of Economics

Departnent of Economics

University of California, Berkeley

University of

Berkeley, California 94720

California, Berkeley
Berkeley, California. 94720

Using Survey Data to Test Some Standard Propositions

Regarding Exchange Rate Expectations
Jeff &anlcel

and
Ken P,-oot

University of California. Berkeley

No variable is as ubiquitous in international finance and yet as elusive
empirically as exchange rate expectations. In this paper we adopt a new data

set (two, in fact) to measure expectations: a survey that the Economist has
been conducting six times a year since 1981. and a less frequent one that American Express began conducting in 1976.
1. THE LITERATURE ON EXCHANGE RATE EXPECTATIONS

We begin with brief descriptions of some simple models of exchange rate

expectations that have been prominent in the past theoretical literature, to be
followed by a discussion of how they relate to the standard empirical tests in

the more recent literature on forward market efficiency. Later sections will

present our attempts to apply the survey data to test standard propositions
regarding exchange rate expectations.
We would like to thank Dick Meese and Charles Engel for comments on an earlier draft, John

Calverley, Barbara Bruer, Stephen Marris and Laura Knoy for help in obtaining data, and
the National Science Foundation (under grant no. SES-8218300) and the Institute for Business and Economic Research at Ut. Berkeley for research support.

-21.1. ALTERNATIVE MODELS OF EXPECTATIONS

Lid. Static Expectations (Random Walk)

The simplest hypothesis would be that the expected rate of depreciation is

always zero. Expectations are "static if

Ej M÷j = 0

(i)

where E[ as÷1] is the rate of depreciation of the domestic currency that is
expected by investors (not the mathematical expectation). Models of exchange

rate determination often assume static expectations for lack of a better alternative. For example, Branson, Halttunen and Masson (1977) did so, giving as a
reason that "we have very little empirical evidence on alternative, more compli-

cated expectations formation mechanisms' (p. 308).

The immortal Mundell-

fleming model of exchange rates under conditions of perfect capital mobility
can be interpreted as having assumed static expectations, so that international
arbitrage equated domestic and foreign interest rates.

More recently, Meese and Rogoff (1983) have found statistically that the

lagged spot exchange rate is a better predictor of the future rate than are
standard monetary models, time series models, or the lagged forward exchange

rate, that is, the exchange rate seems to follow a random walk.1 This finding
suggests that static expectations may be the rational specification, though this

is not the same as saying that it accurately characterizes the expectations that
investors actually hold.
i.i.2. Bandwagon (Extrapolative) and Distributed Lag Expectations

One characterization of expectations formation often claimed by market

participants themselves is that the most recent trend is extrapolated: if the
Other empirical papers exploring the random walk hypothesis include Poole (1967),
Giddy and Dully (1975), Mussa (1979), and Meese and Singleton (1982).

-3currency has been depreciating, then investors expect that it will continue to
depreciate.2 Such extrapolative or "bandwagon" expectations are represented:
(2)

where Ess is the most recent observed change in the tog of the exchange rate.

and g is hypothesized to be positive. (Static expectations would be the special
case where g =

0.)

it has long been a concern of critics of floating exchange rates that
bandwagon expectations would render the system unstable.

For example,

Nurkse (1944, p. 116):

[Speculative] anticipations are apt to bring about their own realization. Anticipatory purchases of foreign exchange tend to produce or
at any rate to hasten the anticipated fall in the exchange value of the
national currency, and the actual fall may set up or strengthen expectations of a further fall.... Exchange rates under such circumstances
are bound to become highly unstable, and the influence of psychological factors may at times be overwhelming.

Nurkse's view was challenged by Friedman (1953), who argued that specu-

lation would be stabilizing. "Speculation" can be defined as buying and selling
of currency in response to expectations of exchange rate changes, as compared

to the counterfactual case of static expectations. This is the definition used,
for example, by Kohlhagen (1979) to evaluate whether or not speculation is des-

tabilizing. A property of bandwagon or extrapolative expectations is that the

expected future spot rate as a function of the observed current spot rate has
an elasticity that exceeds unity, as contrasted to static expectations, which has

an elasticity equal to unity. It follows that speculation based on bandwagon

expectations is destabilizing because speculators sell currencies that are
appreciating.
Z

See,

for example, the discussion in Dooley and Shafer (1q83, pp. 47-8).

-4The

next several models to be discussed go the opposite direction. They

can all be subsumed under the label Ine1astitZxpectatJo- a change in the
current spot rate induces a revision in the expected future level of the spot
rate that, though it may be positive, is less than proportionate.
An observed
appreciation of the currency generates an anticipation of a future depreciation
of the currency back, at least partway, toward its previously expected level. It
then follows that speculation is stabilizing, because speculators sell currencies

that are appreciating. Argy and Forter (1972), Niehans (1975) and Dornbusch
(1976a) pointed out the impltcations of inelastic expectations for stability in
macroeconomic models of the Mundell-Flem.ing type. Under static expectations,

perfect capital mobility would tie the domestic interest rate immovably to the

world interest rate. As a consequence a monetary expansion, for example,
would have to induce a very large depreciation of the currency, large enough so

that the excess supply of money could be absorbed without a decline in the
domestic interest rate. (The depreciation would normally work to increase the
demand for money by stimulating output.) Under inelastic expectations1 on the

other hand, a depreciation would generate expectations of future appreciation;
as a consequence,
would be willing to hold domestic bonds when the

domestic interest rate fails short of the world interest rate, so that the depreci-

ation of the currency need not be large enough to accomplish in itself the
entire equilibration of the domestic money market. In other words, the
exchange rate need not be as variable under inelastic expectations as it would
be under static expectations (let alone under bandwagon expectations).
One case of inelastic expectations is equation (2) with g less than zero. An
equivalent representation would be

E Cs ÷3 = (1+g)s —
where

(2')

is the logarithm of the current spot rate and g is hypothesized to be

-5negative. The hypothesis is a simple form of Distributed Lag Expectations.
(Obviously we could have longer lags.)

However there are several other

examples of inelastic expectations that are more prominent in exchange rate
theory.

1.1.3. Adaptive Expectations

The form specified by Argy and Porter (1972) and Dornbusch (1975a) was

an old standby in the economist's traditional arsenal of expectations models:
the expected future spot rate is formed adaptively, as a weighted average of the

current observed spot rate and the lagged expected rate:
=

where

(1y)s +

(3)

is hypothesized between 0 and 1 for expectations to be inelastic.

Adaptive expectations have also been considered by Kouri (1976). as a third

alternative after static and rational expectations, as well as by many other
authors.3
1.1.4. Regressive Expectations

Dornbusch (1976b) followed with a more elegant specification, consistent
with dynamic models in which variables such as goods prices converge toward

their long-run equilibrium values over time in accordance with differential
equations (or in discrete time, in accordance with difference equations):

E[s÷1](1—i); + .
Here

(4)

is the long-run equilibrium exchange rate, and i5 (a number between 0

and 1 in this discrete-time version) is the speed at which s is expected to
regress toward

as can perhaps be seen more clearly in the equivalent

See Kohihagen (1978, pp. 9-17) ror a survey of adaptive and other models of expectatioris avpearing in the earlier exchange rate literature.

U

-5representation,

—

—)

E[ As÷1] = —i3(s

(4')

The long-run equilibrium, s, can itself change. It is normally assumed to obey
Purchasing Power Parity, increasing proportionately in response to a change in
the domestic money supply and price level.
1.1.5. PPP Expectations

The hypothesis of ex ante Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) suggests an alter-

native specification for expected depreciation, that it is given by the expected
inflation differential:
.S{ As÷1] =

where R[ rr1 —

is

[

—

(5)

defined as expected inflation at home minus abroad.

One can think of this equation as having been derived by taking first differences

on PPP in its level form. If PPP actually held in level form, it would simply be

the special case of regressive expectations, which we just considered, where ,
the speed of adjustment to PPP, is equal to 1. But deviations from absolute FPP

are observed to have been extremely large. Indeed it is often impossible to
reject statistically the hypothesis that the speed of adjustment to PPP is zero.

Such empirical findings have led some economists to swing from the one
extreme, the hypothesis that the real exchange rate is constant, to the opposite extreme, that the real exchange rate follows a random walk, in other words

that PPP holds jj1 in expected rate of change form. This alternative way of
deriving equation (5) is said to have a basis in efficient markets theory, as an
arbitrage condition so that agents considering buying goods in one country and

shipping them to another cannot expect to make excess profits. (See Roll
(1979).) This argument seems to ignore that, to the extent that international
goods arbitrage is possible in rate-of-change form, it should in theory be even

-7more powerful in level form. When one country's goods have become more
expensive relative to other countries, as in the recent very large real apprecia-

tion of the dollar, goods arbitragers should buy goods in the country where
they expect prices to be the lowest, not in the country where they expect the

lowest inflation rate. Thus arbitrage should work to push the real exchange

rate back toward the equilibrium level, not to enforce a zero expectation of
future changes in the real exchange rate. Nevertheless PPP in expected rate-

of-change form warrants testing. Theoretical arguments aside, there are
enough empirical studies supporting the random walk hypothesis for the actual

real exchange rate process to make it a serious hypothesis for describing the

expected process. In any case, it is certainly true that those countries that
experience chronically high inflation rates, for example Italy, have currencies

that tend to depreciate against those of countries with low inflation rates, for

example Switzerland, and investors can be expected to incorporate this tendency.4

1.1.6. Inflation-Adjusted Regressive Expectations

Our last form of expectations combines the tendency for the exchange rate

to regress toward an equilibrium value, represented by equation (4), with the

tendency for the equilibrium value itself to change over time with secular
inflation, represented by equation (5).

E[&÷1] =t(a
The

—se)

+ E[ir+1 —7r1]

(6)

augmentation of regressive expectations with the secular term is necessary

in models 'with steady state rates of money growth. These are useful for study4 While

ICrugman (1978) and many others documented the slow tendency to adjust to-

ward PPP, Frenkel (1981) was clearly the most influential in eradicating support for it as a

literal statement about the levels of exchange rates and prices in the short run. Roll (1979)
makes the "market efficiency' argument for PPP in rate-of-change form. Roll (1979) and
Darby (1981) offer enipirical support for the hypothesis.

L,.

-8ing. for example, the overshooting resulting from recent disinflations in the
United Kingdom, the United States, and other countries.5

In equation (6) we test iS =
ex

0

to test the null hypothesis of equation (5) --

ante FFP expectations in the Roll (1979) sense that the real exchange rate

follows a random walk -- against the meaningful alternative that the exchange

rate is expected to regress toward its historic PPF level. As in the case of sim-

ple regressive expectations, the closer 15 is to unity, the more rapidly is the
exchange rate expected to adjust to PPP.

So far we have not paid much attention to the idea of Rational Expectations,

or its analog in deterministic models, perfect foresight. Making the

assumption of rational expectations is the sine qua non of modern
macroeconomic model-building; but what it actually entails is entirely depen-

dent on the rest of the model. For example, regressive expectations are
rational within the context of the Dornbusch model (with a particular value

imposed on the parameter 15, closely related to the speed of adjustment in

goods markets). Similarly, static expectations are rational if the true spot
exchange rate process is a random walk. Adaptive expectations can be rational
in other models (as Mussa (1976) has shown in the context of expected money

growth rates). Even the sort of exchange rate instability associated with
bandwagon expectations is consistent with rational expectations in models of

speculative bubbles.6 Thus rational expectations cannot be listed as a welldefined alternative specification of expectations formation on a par with the six
Frankel (1979), Buiter and Miller (1982), and others have proposed equations like (8) in

order to introduce secular expected inflation into the Dornbusch overshooting model. In

theory, the secular term can be defined variously as the expected money growth

difterential, the expected short-term rate of change of relative price levels, or the rate of
change of a longer-term equilibrium target S. But, as Obstfeld and Rogoff (1964) have
shown, the various alternatives are equivalent in the type of models generally used; all that
changes is the precise nature of the dependence of the rational value of 15 on the other
parameters in the system..
Papers exploring models of stochastic bubbles include Blenchard (1979), Dornbusch
(1982), and Meese (1955).

-9enumerated above. But the rational expectations hypothesis is integral to the
largest existing empirical body of literature relevant to the subject of exchange

rate expectations, tests of efficiency in the forward exchange market, to which
we now turn.

1.2. FORWARD MARKET EFFICIENCY TESTh

Most empirical work on exchange rate expectations uses the forward rate

as the measure of investors' expectations. If one were interested only in choosing the most realistic specification for the formation of expectations, one might

simply regress the measure of expectations directly against some of the variables that appear in the foregoing equations: the current and lagged spot rate,

lagged expectations, and so forth. Such "direct" regressions are tried out
below. But a major drawback with this approach, which applies here and in
much of macro-econometrics, is that there is no good reason to think that the

error terni in such a regression would be independent of the righthand-side
variables. This may explain why there have not been many direct regressions of

the forward rate.

Instead, most empirical work features the forward rate prediction error,

that is, the ex post realized future spot rate less the current forward rate, as

the dependent variable. Under the assumption that the forward rate indeed
accurately reflects investors' expectations, a regression against any vatiables

available to investors at the time that expectations are formed is a test of
rational expectations. Under the null hypothesis, the error term should be
uncorrelated with the righthand-side variab'es and serially uncorrelated, and
all coefficient estimates should be zero. Most tests of rational expectations do
not consider what the alternative hypothesis is. But we shall see that in some of

the tests, the alternative hypothesis does have a natural interpretation in

Cd.

- 10 -

terms of the models discussed above.

The majority of existing rational expectations tests fall into two categories.

In the first, the prediction error is regressed against its own lagged values; in
the second, the righthand-side variable is the forward discount.
1.2.1. Tests of Serial Correlation

A simple univariate test of seriaL correlation in the prediction errors made

by the forward rate, or by any other measure of the expected future spot rate
.E[ as÷1],7 is the following regression:
—

where '

is

4÷1 = 7(E_1[S]—S) ÷

(7)

the autocorrelation coefficient. In the early years after exchange

rates began to float in 1973, it was possible to use univariate tests to nd statistically significant serial correlation.8 A more sophisticated test is to regress

the prediction error in a given country's exchange rate against the previous
prediction errors in other exchange rates. In later years it may have become
more difficult to reject the null hypothesis without the more sophisticated tech-

niques.9
The

null hypothesis, rational expectations, is zero coefficients on all lagged

prediction errors. What is the alternative hypothesis? It is that investors'
expectations are insufficiently, or overly, adaptive. Assume that the true best
predictor of the future spot rate is a weighted average of the current spot rate
and the lagged expectation:
ft = (1 72)t +

(8)

2.t +

Then investors' expectations would be rational if and only if

from equation

When speaking of the forward rate as an accurate measure of expectations, we are implicitly assuming that there is no risk prerrilurn.
See for example, Dooley and Shafer (1976, 1983). Cornell (1977) and Frankel (1980).
See Hansen and Hodricl< (1980), Curnhy and Obstfeld (1981), and Frankel (1985),

- 11 -

(3) were equal to 72 from equation (8). If we take the difference of equations (3)

and (8),

E[ s +1] — St÷1 = f(1—y) — (1—72)]s

()

÷ (71—y2)E_1[s 3 +

we get an equation precisely equivalent to (7), with 7 =

—

Thus

we see

that a positive autocorrelation coefficient 7 means that expectations are
insufficiently adaptive, and a negative autocorrelation coefficient means that
they are overly adaptive.

1.22. Tests of 'Excessive Speculation'
A large number of studies of forward market efficiency feature as the right-

hand side variable the expected rate of depreciation rather than the lagged
prediction error or other variables:

E[s1]

= a

4-

dE[As1+1} +

(10)

If investors' expectations are measured by the forward rate, then £[ 21] s
the forward discount.

random a =

ci

= 0.

The null hypothesis is that the prediction errors are

A more common representation of the equation can be

derived in terms of changes, by noting that the lefthand expression is equal to

E[ &÷J — As÷1. The equivalent test is to regress the ex post realized rate of
depreciation against the forward discount, with a hypothesized coefficient of 1:
= —a +
(1—d)E{ As1]

—

(10')

Regression equations like (10') evolved from earlier regressions of the sim-

ple level of ;41 against the level of the current forward rate (by Frenkel (1976)
and others), after it was realized that the levels were likely to be nonstationary.

Tests in either the form of (10) or (10') have been performed by, among many
others, Tryon (1979), Levich (1980). Bilson (1981a), Longworth (1961), Fama

(1964) and Huang (1984). If the rational expectations null hypothesis is

=

0,

- 12what interpretation can we give the alternative hypothesis? Bilson (1981b) pro-

posed that the alternative of d greater than 0 be termed "excessive speculation", because it would imply that investors could do better if they were always

to reduce fractionally the magnitude of their forecasts of exchange rate
changes, and that the alternative of ci less than 0 be termed "insufficient
speculation", because it would imply that investors could do better if they were

always to raise multiplicatively the magnitude of their forecasts of exchange

rate changes ,

The

usual finding has been the former: a coefficient (i-ci) in

equation (io') significantly less than 1, i.e. a positive value of ci. Indeed, the
coefficient (i-ci) has often appeared much closer to 0, which is the random walk

hypothesis, than to 1:

the current spot rate is a better predictor of the

future spot rate than is the current forward rate.10 Occasionally (i-d) has even

appeared to be significantly less than 0, suggesting that the exchange rate
tends to move in the opposite direction from that expected by investors! More

often, the optimal predictor has appeared to be a convex combination of the
spot and forward rates.
1.2.3. Systematic Expectational Errors or Risk Premium?

The most popular alternative hypothesis in regressions of equations like
(10) is that domestic and foreign securities are imperfect substitutes because
of risk. The forward rate does not accurately reflect investors' expectations in
the first pLace; the two differ by a risk premium, defined as follows:

"re f —E2[s÷1]
where

(ii)

is the log of the forward exchange rate used in the regressions

described above. Equivalently, the risk premium can be defined in terms of
rates of change:
10 This
finding appears in Frankel (1980), Bilson (198!a, 1985), Meese and Rogoff (1983),
and Huang (1984), among others.

- 13=

(11')

fd1 —E[As1+1].

where fd is the forward discount, defined as f — s.11
The

crucial impediment, when systematic prediction errors (separating the

forward rate from the optimal predictor) are detected empirically, lies in distin-

guishing whether they are due to a failure of rational expectations (separating

investors' expectations from the optimal predictor), or to the existence of a
risk

premium

expectations).

(separating

the

forward

rate

from

investors'

Most of the literature arbitrarily assumes away one of the

two, in order to concentrate on the other. For example, in interpreting their
tests of equations (to)

and (10'), Fama (1984), Hodrick and Srivastava (1955)

and Bilson (1985) explicitly assume that expectations are rational, in order to
learn about the behavior of the risk premium. Bilson (1981a. 1981b), Longworth

(1961) and others, on the other hand, explicitly assume away the risk premium.

in order to learn about expectations.

In his provocative paper, Fama proposes a decomposition of the forward

discount into the risk premium and the expected rate of depreciation, as in
equation (11') above:

fd

+[M÷1].

(11")

His finding is that tbe variance of the risk premium is larger than the variance

of expected depreciation, though it is not entirely meaningful to speak of how
much of the variance of the forward discount is attributable to the variance of

the risk premium and how much to the variance of expected depreciation
(because of a large negative covariance). Hodrick and Srivastava (i985) report

the same finding (p. 18). Bilson (1985 p. 63) speaks of a new 'empirica paradigm that most of the variation in the [forward] premium reflects variation in
Sonic of the tests described above use the domestic-foreign interest differential in
place of the forward discount; the two are normally equal, by covered interest parity.

- 14

-

the risk premium rather than variation in the expected rate of appreciation."

He takes the argument a step further, and suggests that possibly none of the

forward discount is attributable to expected depreciation on the part of the
market: "It is consequently not possible to reject the view that the forward
premium, and hence international differences in short-term interest rates, are

unrelated to either actual or market forecasts of exchange rates.

In other

words, flilson (1955) concludes, from estimates close to d = 1 in equations like
(10) and (10'), that the random walk holds not only as a description of the

actual spot rate process but also as a description of expectations formation)2

2. THE SURVEY DATA

Without a measure of exchange rate expectations that is more direct than
the forward rate, any conclusions regarding the nature of either the risk premium or expectations formation can be no more than assertions.

This paper uses survey data of exchange rate expectations compiled from
two separate sources. The Amex Bank Review (AMEX) publishes surveys taken

once or twice annually from early 1976 to the present.13 For each survey, 250-

300 central and private bankers, corporate treasurers and finance directors
and economists were asked to record their expectations of the level of five

major currencies against the dollar, six months into the future. The second
survey was conducted by the the Economist Financial Report (ECON). Begin-

fling in June 1981, the Economist polled a sample of 13 leading international
banks six times annually, asking for their expectations at three and six month
12 Earlier
papers ñnding that the rational expectation is closer to zero depreciation than
to the forward discount, such as Bilson (1981a), Meese and Rooff (1983) and Huang (1984),

did not explicitly conclude that the sante is necessarily true of investors' expectations;

these authors supported the random walk model of the spot rate! but were relatively agnostic on investors' expectations.
Artier Bank approximate survey dates were January 78, July 76, January 77, June 77,
November 77, June 78. November 78, June 81, June 82, June 83, and June 84.

- 15 -

horizons.

Both surveys record expectations of the same five major currencies

against the dollar: the pound, French franc, mark, Swiss franc, and yen.

Economists generally distrust survey data. It is a cornerstone of positive

economics" that we learn more by observing what people do (in the marketplace) than what they say. Nevertheless, alternative measures of expectations

all have their own drawbacks. For this reason, closed-economy macro and

finance economists have found survey data useful, in studies of expected
inflation (where the Livingston survey has been the most popular), expected
announcements of the money stock and other macroeconomic variables (where

Money Market Services, Inc. is the source), and even expectations of interest

rates.

To our knowledge, there have been no studies of exchange rate expec-

tations using survey data. This might be considered surprising in light of the

great interest in the subject evident in the large literature on the forward
market discussed in the preceding section. One could even argue that the case

for using survey data on exchange rate expectations is on firmer ground than

the case for using survey data on inflation expectations: the respondents to
the AMEX and Economist surveys are probably more direct participants in the

spot and forward; exchange markets than the respondents to the Livingston
survey are in the various financial and goods markets of interest. In any case,
the exchange rate survey data surely contain at least some useful information

that warrants study. It seems likely that the failure of economists in the past
to use the data is attributable only to lack of awareness of its existence.

One serious limitation to the AMEX and Economist data should be
registered from the start, the very small number of observations that are available as of 1985:

only 11 dates for the AMEX data and 24 for the Economist

data.14 We alleviate this problem by pooling the cross-section of five currencies.
14

14.

largest sample of non-overlapping observations for the Economist data is only
If overlapping observations are used, e.g. 6-month forward expectations observed

The

C

- 16 and

we use Zellner's Seemingly Unrelated Regressions to correct for the obvi-

ous existence of contemporaneous correlation of error terms across currencies. Furthermore, because it has been claimed that exchange rates may have
non-normal distributions1 which would render regular test statistics particularly unreliable in small samples, we adopt the technique of bootstrapping to
get better estimates of the standard errors.
3. PRELIMINARY RESULTS

Before we set out to test the hypotheses of interest, some descriptive
statistics and preliminary tests are in order.
3.1. EXPECTED DEPRECIATION VERSUS TilE RISK PREMIUM

First and perhaps foremost, by using survey data some light can be shed
on questions concerning the relative size and volatility of exchange rate expec-

tations. As we have already noted, recent papers by Farna (1984), Hodrick and

Srivastava (1985), and Bilson (1985) argue that their apparent rejections of
simple forward market efficiency can be viewed as evidence of a risk premium

that is more variable than expectations. To see this argument, note that the
slope coefficient (1—d) in equation (10') can be rewritten as,
1—d =

cov[t.sst÷1,fd]

cav[b4[ As÷1], fd}

—=

var [fd]

var[E [
+

÷1J]+var [rp ].i-2cov [E [

41]1 I

(12)

cov[L[as+1],7p]

var[E[ As÷1]] + var[rp] + 2ccv[E[ As1]. rm]
where the second equality follows from assuming rational expectations. Tf
every 3 months, the prediction errors are serially correlated even under the null hypothesis
of rational expectations. See for example Hansen and Hodrick (1980) or Frankel (1980, ap-

pendix).
See for example, Westerfield (1977)

U/

- 17d>

it follows that var(rpg) > var(F[ £s+1]). We have already mentioned

that since the exchange rate is approximately a random walk, rationally
expected depreciation would be small in magnitude. Equation (12) and the

empirical finding that 1—ti is relatively close to zero seem to confirm that
investor-expected depreciation is relatively static as well.

Both our sets of survey data, however, indicate that expected depreciation

does exhibit considerable variation, often more in fact than does the implied
risk premium. Table 1 shows the variance of expected changes in the spot rate

and of risk prernia for each data set, individually and averaged across curren-

cies.18 Note to begin with that the magnitude of the ex post exchange rate
changes (first column) dwarfs the forward discount (second column), an empiri-

cal regularity noted by Mussa (1979) and many others. For example. a variance
of .04 is a standard deviation of .20 and implies that roughly 95 percent of quar-

terly exchange rate changes lie in a band of plus or minus 40 percent on an
annualized basis (or 10 percent in a quarter).
Of greater interest, the variance of expected depreciation is comparable in

size to (or slightly larger than) the variance of the risk premium, and is also

several times larger than the variance of the forward discount. The relative

stability of the forward discount masks considerable variation in its components, corroborating Famas (1964) finding that the risk premium is negatively correlated with the change in the spot rate.

To give an idea of the relative importance of expected spot rate changes

and the risk premium as components of the forward discount, mean squared
values (MSV) are compared in Table la. An implication of static expectations is

that the MSV should be zero. The table shows this is clearly not the case. Not
16

Averaging

the variance across cunencies is equivalent to computing the variance of

the entire sample when allowing countries to have difierent means.

U2

- 16-

only is the MSV of expectations greater than that of the risk premium, but it is
surprisingly large in comparison with the MSV of the forward discount.

These measures of variability suggest that survey expectations do not
merely mimic the forward discount. The same conclusion follows from the first

moments.17 Table 2 shows the averages of alternative measures of expected
depreciation. The most striking fact is that the survey numbers show consid-

erably greater expected depreciation of the dollar against other currencies
than do the forward market numbers. For purposes of comparison,the nominal

interest differential on Eurocurrency deposits is also shown. The interest
differential is much closer to the forward discount, confirming past evidence
that covered interest parity holds, and foreign exchange markets today can be
treated as essentially frictionless.
3.2. UNCONDITIONAL BIAS

The simplest possible test of market efficiency is to see if expectations are
unconditionally biased, if inve stors systematically overpre dict or underpredict

the future spot rate. Tests performed in the 1970s clearly failed to find any
unconditional bias.36 But in the iPSOs the dollar has consistently sold at a
discount in the forward exchange market against most other major currencies,

as is shown in Table 2, and yet the great long-anticipated dollar depreciation
has failed to materialize. Could there be unconditional bias in the more recent
data?

Table 3 reports formal tests of unconditional bias. In the case of each of
the five currencies, the 3 and 6 month forward discounts have indeed systemat-

ically underpredicted the value of the dollar (overpredicted its depreciation)
17 The Amsz Bank Survey of &pectations; Summary of ResuLts 1976-1978 also reports
finding considerable diflerences between survey data and the forward discount.
18 See Cornell (1977), Stockman (1978) and Frankel (1980).

- 19-

during the period June 1981 to March 1955. The bias is highly significant statistically.

There are four possible explanations for this finding. The first is a risk
premium separating the observed forward discount from investors' true expec-

tations. But hi Table 3 we also use our Economist survey data for the period
Lune 1961 to March 1985, and we find unconditional bias even larger in magni-

tude and in level of statistical significance (as one would expect from observing

in Table 2 that the survey data shows an even greater rate of expected dollar

depreciation in the 1960s than the forward discount). If the survey numbers

are to be believed at all, the unconditional bias is present in actual investor
expectations, and cannot be attributed to a risk premium.
The second possible explanation is a convexity or Jensen's inequality term

that enters into the mathematical expectation of the log of an uncertain
exchange rate even when risk-aversion is not a concern. However, the convex-

ity term is bounded above by the conditional variance of the exchange rate;
with an unconditional variance of depreciation on the order of 0.0428 (3 month

annualized annualized rates) and conditional variances on the order of 0.0424

or 0.0370 (conditional on the forward discount and survey numbers, respec-

tively), the convexity term is necessarily too small to explain the bias that
shows up in Table 319
The

third explanation is that there is indeed a gross failure of rational

expectations, unattractive as such a conclusion would be on theoretical
grounds. The fourth, which is the one to which we tentatively incline, is that
the rational expectation for the value of the dollar in recent years has been the
weighted average of a small probability of a large decline coupled with a large
In Frankel (3985), footnote 13, the upper bound for the convexity term under risk
neutrality is shown to be the conditional variance of the spot rate.
More generally.
McCulloch (1975) disáuss the convexity term and its small size given actual variances

Cd.::

- 20-

probability of continued strength. This could be the case if the 1980-85 appreciation of the dollar were due either to a speculative bubble as mentioned above
(in which case the small-probability event would be the bursting of the bubble)

or to fundamentals (in which case the small-probability event would be a large

change in fundamentals such as the monetary/fiscal policy mix). Either way.

the distribution of the exchange rate would be non-normal and the reported
test statistics would be untrustworthy.2°

It requires emphasis that this new finding of unconditional bias is an
artifact of the strong-dollar period, and not of our survey data. The Economist
survey data is not available before 1981. but the AMEX data is, and it shows no

statistically significant unconditional bias when the pre-1980 years are
included, even though -- like the Economist data -- it shows a statistically
significant tendency to overpredict the value of foreign currencies against the

dollar during the post-1980 period. The unconditional bias is uniquely a
phenomenon of the "overvalued dollar" period.

Whichever of the explanations for the unconditional bias during the 1980s

is the correct one, we think it desirable to separate it out from conditional
biasedness and other hypotheses to be tested. We would like to know if predic-

tion errors in one period are associated with prediction errors in the following

period even taking the unconditional bias as given. So that the unconditional
bias would not dominate the results, in most of the test results reported in the
following section we included constant terms for each currency and a dummy
variable for the 1981-1984 period.

20 This econometric difficulty is often known as the "peso problem;" Krasker (i980) off en
a technique for dealing with it,

- 21

-

4. TESTS WHETHER EXPECTATIONS PUT TIlE CORRECT 'WEIGHT ON TILE CONTEM-

PORANEOUS SPOT RATE AS OPPOSED 10 SEVERAL OTHER CANDIDATES IN THE INFORMATION SET

In this section we investigate alternative specifications of expectations

mentioned above and test whether the results are consistent with rational
A general framework for expressing equations (1) through
(to') would be to write the expected future spot rate as a weighted average of

expectations.

the current spot rate with weight 1—fl1, and some other element,;, with weight

E[ M÷1J = a1

÷ fl1(; — s)

+

(13)

A regression of equation (13) is the direct test of whether the other element

is important in the formation of expectations. A finding that ; is not important1 or that fl1 = 0. would be interesting in itself since it would be consistent

with the ease of static expectations.

Then, once we have a sense of the weight placed on z in equation (13), it
would be helpful to know if the spot rate follows a process which gives comparable weight to
=
The

a2 +

ft2(z

—) + s2141

hypothesis that expectations are rational is simply that a1 = a2 and

(14)
= fl2.

This hypothesis can be tested formally by subtracting equation (14) from equation (13),

.E[ &÷] —

= a + fl(z

—.s) +

(15)

andtestingaO.fl=0,whereaa1—a2andfl=fl1—fl2. We referto this as
an indirect test of expectations formation. A reason for preferring an indirect

test of expectations, equation (15), is that it is hard to think of stories for

V

- 22 -

equations

(13) and (14) in which the error term is uncorrelated with the

righthand-side variables. But under the null hypothesis of rational expectations the error term in (15) does satisfy the Gauss-Markov assumptions,21 By

testing = 0 it is possible to determine if expectations put too much or too little weight on the contemporaneous spot rate as opposed to x, relative to what
is rationaL In addition, by examining j3 and
(14) separately, we can determine whether

in the direct equations (13) and
is in fact a meaningful input into

the formation of expectations and whether it describes the actual spot rate
process. If not, then a test of fi

=

0 in the indirect equation (15) is not a power-

ful test of rational expectations: a finding that investors put the correctweight
on

is a less interesting finding if that weight is zero. Finally, by running each

of these regressions once using the survey data

once using the forward

discount, we can highlight the extent to which a risk premium in the forward
discount makes fd an unreliable proxy for expected depreciation.
In light of the relatively small number of data points, for each regression
we conserve degrees of freedom by constraining slope parameters to be equal
across currencies. The coefficients can then estimated using OLS. A problem

with such aggregation is that the nominal degrees of freedom are overstated
due to highly significant contemporaneous correlation across currencies. This

difficulty is to be expected since all cross rates are expressed in terms of the
dollar (and also since the EMS restricts the relative variability of the DM the
French Franc, and to a limited extent the Pound). To exploit the correlation we

use Seemingly Unrelated Regressions on the largest data set, the Economist
survey 3 month data.22

21

22

Throughout the paper we assume conditional homoscedasticity.
Frankel (1980), Bilson (1981a) and Fama (1954) are forward market studies which dis-

cuss the use of the StiR technique.

23Although SUR offers some improvement in efficiency, it comes at a high
cost in- small samples. The estimates become nonlinear functions of the residu-

als so that, even under normality, it is necessary to appeal to asymptotic distri-

bution theory for standard errors. With only 12 or 13 data points per currency

such practice warrants more than the usual healthy skepticism of reported
confidence regions. In support of the asymptotic standard errors, bootstrap
regressions are performed.
ing - standard

Bootstrapping is a nonparametric way of estimat-

errors by resampling the data.23 We draw random samples with

replacement from the initial pool of residuals. With these samples and the ini-

tial parameter estimates, artificial observations of the dependent variables are
formed. Using the constructed data, new regressions are then run. An empiri-

cal distribution of the parameters is then formed by repeating this procedure
many times.24

More specifically, bootstrapping attempts to estimate the true distribution

of the parameters from the empirical distribution of the residuals.The procedure, however, is only valid if the assumption that the true errors are iid
holds. Moreover, the validity of inferences based on bootstrapping remains
sensitive to the particular sample chosen. If the sample distribution of the resi-

duals is very far from the true distribution, then the bootstrap may contain littie additional information. This would be the case if, for example, there was a

small probability of a large dollar depreciation that we know ex post did not
occur in the sample.
4.1. BANDWAGON EXPECTATIONS

Here we consider the hypothesis obtained when
See for example. Freedman and Peters (1984).
In this paper, bootstrap repetitions are performed 1000 times.

in equations (13), (14),

- 24 and

(15) is replaced by the past value of the spot rate. In equation (13) for

expected depreciation, this would give us equation (2). in which the bandwagon
parameter was called g (the equivalent of —fl1 in the general case).

Negative

weight on past values of the spot rate implies extrapolative or 'bandwagon'
expectations. while a positive weight implies that expectations are stable and

conform to a distributed lag formulation. Table 4a presents the direct and
indirect regression results using the forward discount, the traditional measure
of expected depreciation.
To begin, we look for bandwagon effects by regressing the forward discount

and the ex post change in the spot rate directly on the lagged change in the
spot rate, comparable to equations (13) and (14).

The results are presented

in the first two panels of Table 4a. The top panel shows the results of regress-

ing the forward discount on current and past levels of the spot rate. Here
> 0, indicating that the forward discount puts positive weight on past levels

of the spot rate. Since the data are irregularly spaced and thus are not true
time series, values of Durbin-Watson d test must be interpreted with caution.

Nevertheless, the null hypothesis of no 'serial' correlation is still appropriate.
and the low reported values of d suggest that we could reject such a hypothesis.

We attempt to minimize the serial correlation problem by allowing each
country's residuals in the SUB regression to follow an AB(1) process. While we

do find borderline evidence of serial correlation, the coefficients are similar in

size and significance to the uncorrected SUB regression, and so the results are

Thus, after taking account of the unconditional bias
no,t reported here.
reflected in the highly significant as. the forward discount is closer to a distributed lag than to a bandwagon. The finding is that, in this context, expectations are inelastic.

In the middle panel of Table 4a, we regress the actual change in the spot

- 25 -

rate on the current and lagged level of the spot rate. We cannot
reject P2 =
i.e.,

the random walk hypothesis. As we have mentioned, this is a common
result.
Within the framework of equations (13)-(15). the finding that the forward discount puts more weight on the past level of the spot rate than the spot

rate process itself, seems to be prftna facie evidence that the forward rate puts
"too much" weight on s1

to be a rational expectation.

Whether rational expectations holds is precisely the question the indirect
regression in the bottom panel is intended to answer. In none of these regres-

sions, which are comparable to equation (15) above, can we reject the
hypothesis that = 0. At first glance this seems inconsistent with finding
= 0.
> 0, and
But the tendency of the forward discount to follow a
significant though slight distributed lag is overwhelmed by the much greater
volatility of the spot rate. Thus although the forward discount follows a distri-

buted lag, it still places enough weight on the current spot rate to avoid a statistical rejection of rational expectations.

One might reasonably ask whether this is a very powerful test of rational

expectations. Since there is only slight evidence that

is an important fac-

tor in determining either expectations or the future spot rate! a finding of =

0

in the indirect regression may not tell us much about the rationality of expec-

tations. But in any case, the failure to reject does not imply that expectations

as given by the forward discount are rational since the constant term is
significantly different from zero, as one would expect from the finding of uncon-

ditional bias reported in the previous section.

Table 4b reports corresponding sets of regressions using the survey data

for expected depreciation. In the top panel we again find evidence of distributed lag effects in the formation of expectations i.e., fl > 0 (though only in the
AMEX data). As before, we cannot reject the hypothesis that fl2

0 in

the direct

- 26 -

tests of the spot process itself. Similarly, we cannot reject the rational expec-

tations constraint fi

= U in

the indirect tests.

Taking the results of Tables 4a and 4b together, there is nothing to show

that expectations are systematically extrapolative. To the contrary, expectations as measured by the forward discount or the survey data seem to exhibit

more significant stability than does the actual spot rate. But it may still be
true that psychological factors are important.

While apparent bandwagon

effects could be the result of speculative bubbles in the data, the absence of

such effects does not rule out bubbles. Speculative bubbles which are constantly forming and popping would not yield systematic bandwagon effects in

the spot rate. And stochastic bubbles can even be consistent with a constant
rate of expected depreciation, as pointed out by Dornbusch (1982).
4.2. ADAPTIVE KXPECFATIONS

A second potential candidate to replace z in equation (13) is the previous

period's expected depreciation, which would give us equation (3). Now p1
becomes

y. In Tables 5a and 5b this alternative specification is tested using

the forward discount and survey data, respectively, as proxies for expectations.

Regressions using AMEX data are omitted because gaps in the survey dates do
not permit the construction of enough observations with lagged expectations.

Turning first to the direct regressions, there is evidence that the forward
discount (Table 5a) can be viewed as placing weight on lagged forward rates,
The survey data (Table bb), however, seem to put little weight on prior predic-

tions. Because serial correlation is likely to be a problem, we correct the SUR
estimates for first order serial correlation. This procedure yields a significantly
positive coefficient in the forward discount regression. From the middle panels

of Tables 5a and 5b, we can see that the optimal predictor of the future spot

- 27 -

rate also gives weight to past expectations. The evidence
is, however, not very

cornpeUingsthce the random walk hypothesis can be rejected in only one of the
3 data sets.

In the indirect regressions of Tables 5a and Sb, there is no evidence that
expectations are insufficiently adaptive, i.e. that > 0. For one data set (CONII
S Month) expectations actually appear to be overly adaptive, to place too much

weight on the current spot rate to be rational. Once again the constant terms,
particularly in the survey data regressions, are significantly positive1 indicating
a failui-e of rational expectations.25
4.3. REGRESSIVE EXPECTATIONS
We

next consider the possibility that expectations are determined by the

current deviation from long-run equilibrium

Thus x in equations (13), (14).

and (15) now becomes , the long-run equilibrium value of the spot rate, as in
equation (4), with i =

1—

fl1. A complete consideration of what determines ç is

beyond the scope of a paper on exchange rate expectations. Here we interpret
the long-run value in two separate ways.

The simplest 'possible description of the long-run equilibrium is that it is
constant over our sample. Thus we regress the left hand side variables in equa-

tions (13). (14). and (15) on the current spot rate and a constant term. The
results are presented in Tables 6a and Sb. A second specification for the longrun value of the exchange rate is purchasing power parity. In this case, § is
not constant but rather moves with relative inflation differentials, More irnpor-

tantly, when the regressions are run without a constant term, such a measure

of 1 based on a reference period like the 1970's, implies that throughout the
Serial correlation appears less prevalent in the indirect regressions than in the direct
regressions. If it were present, it would in itself constitute a rejection of the null hypothesis
of rational erpectations, and no correction would be needed.

- 26 1981-84 in-sample

period the dollar would be expected to depreciate, not just in

those months when the dollar happens to have Seen above its 1961-84 average.
These regressions are reported in Tables 7a and 7b.

The general conclusions that come out of Tables 6 and 7 are the same.
First, expectations as measured by the surveys are strongly regressive in the
Economist data. The estimates of

are not significant in the AMEX survey data

and are even of incorrect sign. However, this is partly an artifact of including
the 1981- 1984 dummy variables, which in both tables show large, positive shifts

in the long-run value of the dollar. When the dummies are removed, and

is

forced to remain constant (o evolve slowly with inflation differentials), the
coefficients become significantly positive (results not reported).

The direct

regressions of the Economist survey data in Tables Sb and 7b show that the
spot rate is expected to eliminate 20 to 30 percent of the deviation from PFP
within a year.26 Second, the forward discount is not significantly regressive, and

the point estimates are decidedly smaller in magnitude than those for the survey data. Third, looking at the indirect equations in the bottom panels, there is

evidence that survey expectations are overly-regressive, tending to predict a
more rapid return to long-run equilibrium than is rational, beyond that implied

by the significantly positive constant terms. The forward rate does not appear

to have this element of irrationality since fi = 0 cannot be rejected in the
indirect regressions in Tables Ga and 7a.

The finding of regressive expectations, like the findings of distributed-lag
or adaptive (as opposed to bandwagon or static) expectations in the preceding
two sections, says that the expected future spot rate is relatively inelastic with

respect to the contemporaneous spot rate- Because a current increase in the
For example, in Table 6b, the case of a constant long-run equilibrium exchange rate
the SUR regression on the 3 month dta set shows deviations from PPP are expected to decay at an annual rate of (1 - 0.9457
19 percent, and the ECONif data shows an expected annual rate of decay of (1 - 0.8559 ) = 27 percent.

)r

- 29 value of a currency generates expectations of future depreciation! speculators

will tend to dampen the original increase. Speculation is stabilizing. Our
finding is that if expectations were rational, they would be more elastic, put
more weight on the contemporaneous spot rate, which has the implication that
overshooting would be greater than it is.27

-

4.4. PPP EXPECTATIONS

Jt is also possible to think of
future
+ EZI

spot rate
—

which

first

in equations (13)-(15) as the level of the
differences

of PPP would predict,

If ex ante FPF held, expectations would give zero weight

to the contemporaneous spot rate alone (fl1

=

1) and a weight of one to

÷ E[ 1r÷1 — ir÷1]. Similarly, if expectations follow a random walk, i.e. are

perfectly inelastic, with respect to changes in relative inflation rates, then the
contemporaneous spot rate would get full weight and no importance would be

attached to an inflation-adjusted prediction of the future spot rate.

Equation

(13) can therefore be rewritten with the expected inflation differential26 as the
sole regressor:
.E'[ As,1] = a1 +

fl( E[

—

'1÷3 ) +

(13')

Tables Ba and Sb report tests of FPP expectations.29 Looking at the direct

regressions of expected spot rate changes, it is clear that, in forming their
27

Frankel (1983) shows theoretically that if expectations were more elastic with respect
to the contemporaneous spot rate and less elastic with respect to other factors, as would
be the case under rational expectations according to Tables 61, and 7b, the degree of
overshooting in the Dornbusch model would be increased. Findings of 'excessive speculation' in the sense of Bilson, as in the statistically more significant results reported in the
next section, have the same implication (p. 43): the nature of observed failure of rational
expectations is to rpdi,r overshooting not to increase it.
See the Data Appendix for a description of the estimates of expected inflation we use
in this paper.
29 Unlike
in the preceding regressions we constrain the intercepts to be equal across
currencies in the equations with expected inflation, for three reasons: (1) the paucity of
data points makes it desirable to conserve degrees of freedom; (2) Expected inflation
differentials tend to vary more across countries than across time; (3) The data are more
amenable to the constraint that the constant terms are equal across countries here than
for the other equations.

(.c.
- 30 -

expectations, investors put a large and significant weight on the FPP predictor

of the future spot rate. Using either the forward discount or the survey data, in

seven regressions it is not possible to reject fl1

= 1,

the PPP expectations

hypothesis. The AMEX data regressions however, show a clear rejection of both

the static expectations and the FPF expectations hypotheses.30 In the middle
panels of Tables Ba and Sb we cannot reject the hypothesis that the actual spot
process conforms to PPP.

In the indirect regressions there is no statistically significant potential for
using the published survey numbers to improve on exchange rate forecasts, i.e.,

we are again unable to reject rational expectations but for the constant term.
4.b. INFLATION-ADJUSTED REGRESSIVE EXPECTATIONS

In Tables 9a and 9b we again consider regressive expectations, this time in

the context of a secular inflation diflerential that causes ä to change over
time. In models with non-zero steady state growth of nominal prices and
money, it is the real exchange rate as in equation (6) that should exhibit a ten-

dency to regress to the long-run equilibrium, E. A test of inflation-adjusted
regressive expectations can be interpreted in terms of the general equations

(13)-(15) as a test of whether investors' expectations of the future j
exchange rate puts the correct weight, if any, on the long-run equilibrium.

°

Notice that, under the assumtion of covered interest parity, the direct regressions of
the forward discount in Table Ba also can be interpreted as tests of real interest rate
In all the forward discount regressions the hypothesis a1 = 0, fl1 = 1, and
parity,
dumznyO can be rejected. indicating that real interest parity fails. The Economist regressions indicate that the real interest differential 1981-85 is significantly positive, a;-

proximately 1.5 percent per annum.

-31Such a test also provides a meaningful alternative to the ax ante PPP
hypothesis, the proposition that investors expect the real exchange rate to follow a random walk. In the direct regressions of expectations using the forward

rate in Table 9a there is no evidence that expectations, measured by the
inflation-adjusted forward discount are regressive.31 Survey data expe ctations

(TabLes 9b), however, demonstrate a tendency for expectations to predict a
return to the long-run equilibrium. The estimates of ii are significant for the
196 1-85 Economist data set. They are not significant for the AMEX data set, but

are somewhat better than under the tests of simple regressive expectations
without any secular inflation term.
4.6. TESFS OF EXUESSWE SPECUlATION

Another possible repLacement for

-

in equations (13)-(15) is the expected

future spot rate itself, giving us equations (10) and (10'), with d = fi. We are
thus asking whether investors put the correct weight on the contemporaneous

spot rate versus all other factors that enter their expectations, whatever they
may be. Equation (13) now becomes an algebraic identity, with

=

1.

Further-

more, equations (14) and (15) have identical statistical properties, with a = —a2
and fi =

Table lOa uses the forward discount as the expectational variable. The
results are similar to the many aLready published. in three of the five equations, we can reject the null hypothesis of simple forward market efficiency. In

the top panel of Table lOb we regress the survey expectational error on the

survey expected depreciation. Here we can reject the null hypothesis even

more strongLy than in the previous table, ba. All five data sets yield
significantly positive slope parameters. The optimal predictor would place less
31 Because

of the low yaue of the Durbth-Watson d statistics, the forward discount

results should be interpreted with caution.

- 32 -

than full weight on the survey expectation and would place some weight instead

on the contemporaneous spot rate.

Recall that a rejection of d

=0

in equation (10), which is the common

finding if the forward discount is used as a proxy for expectations, can be
explained by two alternative hypotheses. One is that investors should fraction-

ally reduce their expectations in order that they be rational: in Bilson's
(1981b) terminology, there is excessive speculation. The other is that there is a
time-varying risk premium which allows the variance of expectations rationally

to exceed the variance of the forward discount. If, however, the survey data are

used as expectations, the alternative of a time-varying risk premium is elim-

inated, and we are left with a single, unambiguous alternative hypothesis: a
failure of rational expectations in the form of excessive speculation.

- 33

-

5. CONCLUSIONS

To summarize our findings:

(1) Exchange rate expectations are not static. The observed nonzero forward
discount numbers, far from being attributable to a risk premium, have

stated the degree of expected dollar depreciation during the recent
period.

Our results tend to undermine the claims of Fama. Hodrick and

Srivastava. and Bilson (1985) that the variance in the risk premium exceeds the

variance in expected depreciation.

(2) Exchange rate expectations are also not extrapolative. We find that the
elasticity of the expected future spot rate with respect to the current spot rate

is significantly less than unity;

expectations put positive weight on the
"other factor", regardless whether it is the lagged spot rate (distributed lag

expectations), lagged expected rate (adaptive expectations), the forward rate,
the long-run equilibrium rate (regressive expectations) or the predictions of ex

ante PFP. The general finding of inelastic expectations is important because it

implies that a current increase in the spot exchange rate itself generates anti-

cipations of a future decrease, as in the overshooting model, which tends to
moderate the extent of the original increase, Speculation is stabilizing.

(3) Often the actual spot exchange rate process is close to a random walk.
Combined 'with point (1). this would suggest that expectations are excessively

speculative in the sense of Bilson (1981b). Indeed the common finding that
prediction errors are significantly correlated with the expected rate of depreciation is upheld even more strongly when we measure expectations with the sur-

vey data than with the traditional forward discount. Thus we are able to reject
rational expectations, a finding that holds also when we use the bootstrapping

- 34 -

technique to estimate the standard errors. When forming their expectations,

investors would do better to put more weight on the contemporaneous spot
rate. This is the same result that Bilson and many others have found with for-

ward market data; but now that we have found it in the expectational survey
data, it cannot be attributed to a risk premium.

- 35 6. DATA APPENDIX

In this appendix we brieñy describe the construction of the AMEX and
Economist data sets more specifically.

The Economist Financial Review has conducted 24 surveys beginning in
June, 1981.Surveys took place on a specific day on which the foreign exchange

markets were open. Respondents were asked for their expectations of the value
of five currencies (the pound. French franc, mark, Swiss franc, and yen) against

the dollar in 3 months and 6 months time. We matched a given day's survey
results with that day's actual rates, and with actual rates as close to 90 and 180

days later as possible. Data points which did not overlap by more than afew

days were grouped into separate data sets. Survey dates, the horizon dates,
and the data set separation scheme are all reported in Table Al.

The Amex Bank Review has conducted 11 surveys beginning in January,
1976. Respondents were asked for their expectations of the value of the same

five currencies in 6 months time. The first 3 surveys, however, included only

the pound and the mark.

Future foreign exchange market realizations were

matched in a manner similar to that used for the Economist data. Amex Bank
surveys were conducted by mail, and hence it was impossible to pick specific
days which were used by all respondents as reference points with any degree of

certainty. Since exchange rates vary so much within a month, two methods of

choosing the contemporaneous spot rate were employed. First, single days
within the survey period were selected (AMEX DAY data set). Second, 30 day

averages of daily rates were constructed to encompass the entire survey period
(AMEX MONTH data set). The days and averages used are reported in Table A2.

Since both methods gave very similar quantitative results in the body of the
paper, the lack of a precise reference point should not arouse much concern.

- 36 -

Actual market spot and forward rates were taken from DRJ. They

represent
the average of the morning bid and ask rates from New York. Interest rates are

calculated as the average of the bid• and ask rates for Eurocurrency
deposits.

Interest differentials are defined as:
In

l+ttt+k

1 +i ,t -I-k
where

is the Euro-bill rate on dollars at time t to mature at time t+k, and
is the corresponding rate for a foreign currency.

The purchasing power parity level of any foreign currency against the dol-

lar (used as an approximation to the long-run equilibrium level of the dollar, 1)
is calculated as
÷

hi

Pt/Pa
Pat / P.0

where

s0 is the log of the average nominal value of that currency in terms of

dollars, 1973-1979, P and P are the current monthly levels of the US and
foreign CPIs respectively, and P0 and P are the average levels of the US and
foreign CPJ5, 1973-1979.

Lagged exchange rates (used for "bandwagon' expectations) are market
rates approximately 90 days before survey dates, These dates are reported in
the last columns of Table Al and Table A2.

Relative inflation differentials were taken from two separate sources. In
addition to expected depreciation, AMEX surveys also reported respondents'
estimates of expected inflation for the U.S.. U. K., West Germany, and, in several

surveys, France. These observations match precisely the date and horizon (6
months) of the AMEX exchange rate expectations. The Economist survey does

not include respondents' expectations of inflation. Instead DRI forecasts of

- 37

-

inflation for the U. S.. Ti. K.. France, West Germany, and Japan were used. Fore-

casts were performed at approximately the same time as the surveys were

taken (the dates are given in the second-to-last column of Table Al). DRI
inflation forecasts are reported at 3 year horizons, and have a slightly different

interpretation than the AMEX expected inflation: expected inflation can be
thought of as representing the longer-run secular trend in relative price levels.

U

- 38 7. REFERENCES

Amex Bank, Ltd., Survey Unit, "The Amex Bank Survey of Expectations on
Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and Inflation: Summary of Results 19781978,120 Morgate, London.
Argy. Victor and Michael Porter, "Forward Exchange Market and Ma Effects of
Domestic and External Disturbances under Alternative Exchange Rate Systents,' IMF SLafl Papers, 1972, 503-28.

Bilson, John, "The Speculative Efficiency Hypothesis," Journal of Business, July
1981, 54, 435-51 (1981a).

"Profitability and Stability in International Currency Markets,"

NBER Working

Paper no. 664, April 1961 (1981b).

___________ "Macroeconomic

Stability and Flexible Exchange Rates", American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 1985, 75, no. 2, 62-67.

Blanchard, Olivier, "Speculative Bubbles, Crashes and Rational Expectations,"
Economic Letters, 1979, 387-69.

Branson, William, Rannu Ralttunen and Paul Masson, "Exchange Rates in the
Short Run: The Dollar-Deutschep-,.a,k Rate," European Economic Review 10
(1977) 303-324.

Buiter, Willem and Marcus Miller, "Real Exchange Rate Over-shooting and the
Output Cost of Bringing Down Inflation," European Economic Review,
May/June 1982, 18, 85-123.
Cornell, Bradford, "Spot Rates, Forward Rates, and Exchange Market Efficiency,"
Journal of Financial Economics, 1977, 5, 55-65.
Cumby. Robert, and Maurice Obstfeld, "Exchange Rate Expectations and Nominal
Interest Differentials: A Test of the Fisher Hypothesis," Journal of Finance,
1981, 36, 697-703.
Darby, Michael, "Does Purchasing Power Parity Work?" Proceedings of Fifth West

Coast Academic/Federal Reserve Economic Research Seminar,
Reserve

Bank of San Francisco, December 1981, 136-167.

Federal

Dooley, Michael and Jeffrey Shafer, "Analysis of Short-Han Exchange Rate
Behavior: March 1973 to September 1975." Federal Reserve Board International Finance Discussion Paper 123, 1976.

"Analysis of Short-Run Exchange Rate

Behavior: March 1973 to November 1981," in Exchange Rate and Trade Instability: Causes, Consequences, and Remedies, P. Bigman and T. Taya, eds.,
1963.

- 39

Dornbusch,

-

Rudiger. "The Theory of flexible Exchange Rate Regimes and

Macroeconomic Policy," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, May 1976, 78,
no. 2. 255-79.
• "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political Economy, December 1976. 84, 1161-76.
• "Equilibrium and Vise quilibrium Exchange Rates," Zeitschrift
fur Wirtschafts-und Sozialwissenshaften, 1982, 102, no. 6, 573-599.

Fama, Eugene, "Forward and Spot Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 1984.

Frankel, Jeffrey. "On. the Mark: A Theory of floating Exchange Rates Based qn
Real Interest Differentials," American Economic Review, Sept. 1979, 69, no.
4. 610-522.

____________ "Tests of Rational Expectations in the Forward Exchange
Market," Southern Economic Journal, April, 1990, 46, 1083-1101.

____________,"The Effect of Excessively Elastic Expectations on Exchange-Rate
Volatility in the Dorrthizsch Ciuershooti.ng Model," Journal of International
Money and Finance, 1983, voL 2, 39-46,

___________ "The Implications of Mean- Variance Optimization for Four Questions in International Macroeconomics," Journal of International Money and
Finance, 1985 (forthcoming).

Freedman, David A. and Stephen C. Peters, "Bootstrapping an Econometric
Model: Some Empirical Results," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, vol. 2, no. 2, April, 1984.

Friedman, Milton, "The Case of flexible Exchange Rates," in IL. Friedman, Essays
in Positive Economics, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1953, 157-203.

Frenkel, Jacob, "A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Doctrinal Aspects
and Empirical JA'i4ence," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, May 1976, 76,
200-24.

___________ "The Collapse of Purchasing Power Parities During the 1970s,"
European Economic Review, 1981, 16, 145-165.

Giddy. Ian and Gunter fluffy, "The Random Behavior of flexible Exchange Rates,"
Journal of International Business Studies 6 (Spring 1975), 1-32.

Hansen. Lan and Robert Hodrick. "Forward Rates as Optimal Predictors of
Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis," Journal of Political Economy,
October 1980, 88, 829-53.

-40Hodrick. Robert. and Sanjay Srivastava, "An Investigation of Risk and Return in
Forward Foreign Exchange," Journal of International Money and Finance,
April 1984, 3, no. 1, 5-30.
______________________________ "The Covaflation of Risk Premiums and
Expected Future Spot Rates," Goldwater Conference, Arizona State Tjniver-

sity, March 1985. Forthcoming. Journal of International Money and

Finance.

Huang, Roger, "Some Alternative Tests of Forward Exchange Rates as Predictors
of Future Spot Rates," Journal of International Money and Finance 3, no. 2
(August 1984). 157-67.
Kohlhagen, Steven, "The Behavior of Foreign Exchange Markets -- A Critical 5'urvey of the Empirical Literature," N.Y.U. Monograph Series in Finance and
Economics (1978).
______________ On the Identification of Destabilizing Speculation," Journal of

International Economics, August 1979. vol. 9, 321-340.

Krasker, William, "The 'Peso Problem' in Testing the Efficiency of Forward
Exchange Markets," Journal of Monetary Economics, April 1980, 5, 289-76.

Krugrnan, Paul "Purchasing Power Parity and Exchange Rates: Another Look at
the Evidence," Journal of International Economics, August 1978, 8, no. 3,
3 97-407.

Longworth, David, "Testing the Efficiency of the Canadian- U.S. Exchange Market

Under the Assumption of No Risk Premium," Journal of Finance, March

1981, 36, 43-49.

McCulloch, J. H. "Operational Aspects of the S'iegal Paradox," Quarterly Journal
of Econoniics.;Vol. 89, no. 1, February, 1975, 170-172.

Meese, Richard, "Testin for Babbles in Exchange Markets: The Case of Spar/cling Rates," Journal of Political Economy, 1986, forthcoming.
Meese, Richard and Kenneth RogotT, "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
Seventies: Do They flt Out of Sample?", Journal of International Econoinics, February 1983, 14, 3-24.
Meese, Richard and Kenneth Singleton. "On Unit Roots and the Empirical Modeling of Exchange Rates," Journal of Finance, vol. 37, 1029-35.
Mussa, Michael, "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments and Monetary and
flscal Policy under a Regime of Controlled Floating," Scandinavian Journal
of Economics, May 1976, 78. 229-45.

"Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates and
Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market," Carnegie-Rochester Series on

Public Policy, Autunm 1979, 11, 9-57.

- 41 -

Niehans, Jurg, "Some Doubts about the Efficacy of Monetary Policy under FZerthle

Exchange Rates," Journal of International Economics, August 1975, 5, 27581.

Nurkse, Ragnar, International Currency Experience, League of Nations, 1944.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, "Exchange Rate Dynamics with Sluggish
Prices under Alternative Price-Adjustment Rules," International Economic
Review, February 1954, 25, no. 1, 159-174.

Poole, William, "Speculative Prices as Random Walks: An Analysis of Ten Time
Series of Flexible Exchange Rates," Southern Economic Journal, 3 (April
1967), 463-75,

Roll, Richard, "Violations of Purchasing Power Parity and Their Implications for

Efficient Inter-national Commodity Markets," International Finance and

Trade, M. Sarnat and C. Szego, eds., Cambridge, Ma.: Bauinger, 1979. vol.
133- 176.

1,

Stockman, Alan C., "Msk, Information and Forward Exchange Rates," in J.A.
Frenkel and H. C. Johnson, eds., The Economics of Exchange Rates, Reading, Ma.: Addison Wesley. 1975.

Tryon, Ralph, "Testing for Rational Expectations in Foreign Exchange Markets,"

Federal Reserve Board International Finance Discussion Paper no. 139,
1979.

Westerfield, J. M., "An Exarntnation of Foreign Exchange Risk under Fixed and
Floating Rate Regimes," Journal of International Economics, vol. 7, no. 2,
1977,

Table Al
DATES USED Ii CONSTRUCT ECONOMIST DATA SETS

OR! Inflation

Approxitata
Survey Data *

Forward Date

Forward Date

23—Jzn—91 * *4

21—Sep—81

18—Dec—81

Jun—81

03—Aug—31

30—Oct—81

29—Jan—82

Jul—91

14—Dec—81

12—Mar—82

Sep—91

25-Jan-82

23-Apr-82

NA

08—Mar—82

04—Jun—82

Jan—92

15—Seo—31

I HI

27—Oct—81

3—Month

6—Month

Forecast Date

19—Apr—82

4 *4
* *44

19—Jul—92

15—Oct—92

Apr—82

01—Jun—32

4!

31—Aug—82

29—Nov—92

Jul—92

23-Aug—92

*

22—Nov—92

22—Mar-83

* 1*4

Aug—82

16—Nov—82

14—Feb—83

13—May—93

Nov—82

03—Jan—83 *4

01—Apr—93

01—Jul—83

Dec—92

14—Feb—93 *

13-May—93

12—Aug—33

Mar-93

28—Mar—83

24—Jun—33

23—Sep—83

NA

09—May—93 *4*

05—Aug—83

04—Nov—83

NA

21-Jun—33 * 4*

19—Sep—83

16—Dec—83

09—Dec—31

01—Aug—93

24—act—as *

14*

06—Dec—93

24—Jan—84 * It
05—Mar—84
29—May—84

* 4*4

21—Aug—84

* *4

28—Oct—83

27—Jan—84

NA

20—Jan—84

20—Apr—84

Oct—83

05—Mar—84

01—Jun—84

Oec—83

23—Apr—84
01—Jun—84

20—Jul—84

Jan—84

31—Aug—84

NA

27—Aug—84

23—Nov-84

May—94

19—Nov—84

05—Mar-85

Sep—94

14—Dec—84 4 4*4

14—Mar—95

12—Jun—OS

Dec—84

05—Feb—85

06—May—OS

04—Aug—95

Feb—85

17—Jun—85

15—Sep—85

Mar—85

19—Mar—95 $

4*

4

The day on which the Econotist Financial

I

Indicates that the 3 aonth horizon survey observation was used in the ECON 3 Month data set.

Review conducted their survey.

4$ indicates that the 6 &cnth horizon survey observation was used in the ECON 6 Month data set.

*4* Indicates that the 6 ianth horizon survey observation was used in the ECONII 6 Month data set.

Table A2
DATES USED TO CONSTRUCT AMEX DATA SETS

6—Month

Approximate
Survey Date S

3—Month

Forward Date

Lag Date

AMEX DAY DATES *

30—Jan—76 St

30—Jul—76

31—Oct—75

30—Jul—76 It
31—Jan—77 It

31—Jan—77.

30—Apr—là

29—Jul—77

01—Nov—76

30—Jun—fl

01—Dec—77

01—Apr—77

01—Dec—77

01—Jun—78

30—Jun—78

29—Dec—la

02—Sep—77
31—Mar—78

01—Dec—78

01—Jun—79

01—Sep—78

30—Jun—al

31—Dec—B!

01—Apr—B!

30—Jun—82

31—Dec—32

01—Apr—82

30—Jun—83

30—Dec—83

01—Apr—83

27—Jun—84

31-Dec—84

30—Mar—84

Approximate

6—Month

Survey Date I

3—Month

Forward Date

Lag Date

MEl MONTH DATES I
From

Ta

From

To

From

To

01—Jan—76 31—Jan—76 *4

01—Jul—76 31—Jul—76

01—Nov—75 30—Nov—75

01—Jul—76 31—Jul—76 4*

01—Jan—77 31—Jan—77

30-Apr—76 30—flay—là

01—Jan—77 31—Jan—77 *4

01—Jul—fl 31—Jul—fl

31—Oct—76 29—flay—là

16—Jun—fl 15—Jul—77

16—Dec—77 15—Jan—78

19—Mar—77 16—Apr—fl

16—Nov—fl 15—Dec—77

16—May—78 15—Jun—TB

17—Aug—77 16—Sep—fl

01—Jun—78 30—Jun—78

01—Dec—78 31—Dec-78

01—Apr—78 01—May—i

16—Nov—78 15—Dec—78

16—May—79 15—Jun—79

17—Aug—78 16—Sep—78

16—Jun—81 15—Jul—B!

16—Dec—81 15—Jan—82

18—Mar—81 16—April

16—Jun—82 15—Jul—52

16-Dec—82 15—Jan—83

18—Mar—82 16—Apr12

16—Jun—83 15—Jul—83

16—Dec—83 15—Jan—84

18—Mar—83 16—Apr—63

16—Jun—84 15—Jul—84

16—Dec—84 15—Jan—85

18—Mar—84 16—Apr14

* Because each

AMEX suney took place over 2 to 4 weeks, two different

sets ol

market

reference dates were used. The first is a single day approximating the survey date, and

the

second uses averages over

corresponding

St Suveys included only the pound and

the

30 day periods.

mark.

P8LE 1
COmPARISON OF VARIANCES OF Etds(1+1)j AND RP(t)
(in percent per annua)
Data Set

Appraxiaate
Dates

EDH

3 MCMTH t

1981—25

lix

Yar(Etds(t+1JJ)
N

Var(dsltffll

70
14

-

FR

14
14

SW

14

14

14

ECON 6 MOMIHU

1981—25

40

UK

8

FR

8
8

SW

8

JA

8

0.009

0.987
0.297

—0.022

0.020

0.371

0.366

0.005

0.040

0.352

—0.011

0.074

0.219

0.363
0.229

1.170
0.713
0.932
0.998
2.442
0.764

0.066

0.234
0.168
0.390
0.238
0.220
0.152

0.036
0.199
0.013
0.034
0.047
0.012
0.017

FR

6

W6

6

SW

6

JA

6

0.05!
0.016

0.035
0.092

SW

8

JA

0

2.635
2.094
1.813
2.120
4.267
2.020

46

2.563

0.094

11

2.61

3

1.693
1.894
4.173
2.423

0.157
0.076
0.052
0.017
0.108

11

FR

8
11

AMEX MONTH

1976—84

UK

FR

11
SW

JA

8

.

B

var(ds, N=65
—

It For

Var(rp(tfl

0.448

1.5:6

46

—

0.458
0.965
0.392

0.584
0.804
1.250
2.484
2.55?

1976—84

Var(rp(tJl

0.051
0.117

6

UK

ECON

0.060

30

1981—85

AMEX DAY

ds(t+1)

4.230
2.703
4.792
4.003
6.053
3.517

UK

ECONII 6 MONTH

t Far

Var(fd(t)) Var(E[ds(t+t)l1

0.094

0.145
0.085
0.052
0.077
0.109

0.105
0.188
0.207

4/19/82,

0.2:0

-0.010

0.091

0.061

0.129
0.132
0.230
0.064
0.179
0.035

0.136
0.141
0.199
0.106
0.205
0.031

—0.008

0.313
0.227
0.117
0.273
0.513
0.434

0.164
0.050
0.031
0.164
0.335
0.242

0.148
0.176
0.086
0.110
0.177
0.192

0.273
0.270
0.155
0.32?
0.412
0.199

0.133
0.073
0.075
0.207
0.247
0.064

0.140
0.197
0.000
0.121
0.165
0.135

var(ds), N:35

8/W82, 11/16/82, 2/14/83, 6121/83, 10/24/83, 1/24/34,

3/29/84, 9/21/84, 12/14/84, 3/19/85.
ECON

6

Month data are at 6 ionth horizons after the following survey dates:

6/23/01,

12/3/01, 6/1/82, 1/3/83, 6/21/83, 1/24/84, 8/21/84, 3/19/85.

500911 & survey dates comprise a second grouping of 6 ianth non—overlapping responses:
9/15/81, 4/19/02, 11/16/82, 5/9/83, 10/24/83, 5/29/84, 12/14(84, 3/19/85.
AMEX DAY data are at 6 ionth horizons alter the following approxitate survey dates: 1/30/76,

7/30/76, 1/31/77, 6/30/77, 12/1/77, 6/30/78, 12/1/70, 6/30/81, 6/30/02, 6/30/83, 6/29/04.

AMEX MONTH data are at 6 ionUt horizons after the foliowing approxiiate averaged

dates: 1/1/76—1/31/76, 7/1/76—7/31/76, 1/1/771/31/77,

0.048

-0.01?
0.103
0.025

3 Month data are expected spat rates at three sonth horizons. The survey dates are:
12/8/81,

—0.010

0.212

log percentage depreciation of the dollar over following period.

6723/31, 9/ 15/81,

0.085

survey

6/16/17—7/15/77, 11/16/77—12/15/77,
6/1/78—6130/75, 11/16/70—12/15/73, 6/16/31—7/15/81, 6/15/82— 7/15/82, 6/16/83—7/15/83, 6/16/84—7/15/84.

—0.009

0.031
—0.042
—0.026

0.005

TABLE ía

COMPARISON OF MEN SURED ABSOLUTE VALUE OF Etdst+I)] AND RP(t)
(in percent per annua)

Data Set

Approxiaate
Dates

N

MSAV(ds(t+1fl

MSAV(fdW) NSAV(Etds(t+t)]) MSAV(rp(t))

ECON 3 MONTHS

198115

70

4.930

0.263

1.452

0.965

ECON 6 NONTUU

1981—95

40

2.762

0.276

1.235

0.732

ECCNII 6 MONTH

1981—85

30

2.109

0.265

1.105

O.56í

AMEX DAY

1976-84

46

2.754

0.278

0.422

0.222

AMEX MONTH

1974—84

46

2.648

0.290

0.451

0.216

AMEX DAY LATE

1981—84

20

2.444

0.3fl

0.623

0.198

AMEX MONTH LATE

1981—84

20

2.537

0.324

0.808

0.269

* Far MSAV(ds(t41fl, N65
1* For MSAV(ds(t+Lfl, @35

AMEX DAY LATE survey dates are:

AMEX MONTH LATE survey

6116182—1/15/82,

dates

6/30/81,

6/30/82, 6/30/83,

are: 6/16/B1—7/15/81

6/16/83—7/15/83, 6/16/84—7/15184.

6/30/84.

Table 2

VARIOUS MEASURES OF EXPE:tD DEPRECIATION
OVER THE FOLLOWING MONTHS
CX percent per annug)

SURVEY DATA
Data Set

SOON 3 MONTH 1

ACTuAL

PARITY

CHANGE

N s(tl

flU—sit]

i—it

s(tl Ut

s(t+1)—

70

7.55

2.29

2.10

-9.64

UK

14

6.30

o.sa

0.43

—16.19

FR

14

4.72

—4.65

—3.99

—[2.85

14

12.49

4.29

3.89

—6.76

14

12.12

6.14

5.61

—5.69

14

12.14

5.03

4.56

—1.71

SW

ECON

INTEREST

ElsItti]]—

Appraxiiate
dates

1991-35

FORWARD
DISCOUNT

6 MONTH$$

199115

40

9.29

2.05

1.94

—[2.61

8

3.92

0.39

0.28

—17.46

UK
FR

8

4.60

—5.44

—4.93

—17.23

WG

8

12.81

4.28

4.00

—10.37

SW

9 12.35

5.87

5.55

—10.71

JR

3

12.71

5.16

4.78

ECON!! 6 MONTH

1981—95

30

9.04

2.51

2.35

—7.91

UK

6

5.59

1.19

1.11

—10.78

FR

6

2.42

—5.52

—5.09

—14.76

WE

6

12.83

4.69

4.39

—7.23

SW

6

[2.00

6.70

6.22

-4.97

JR

6

12.36

5.4?

5.12

—1.81

46

3.57

2.45

2.59

3.98

11

1.39

—1.52

—1.50

—3.40

FR

9

2.13

—2.72

—2.37

—0.56

WG

11

4.85

4.07

3.82

5.81

SW

8

3.54

6.92

6.50

12.0G

34

8

5.94

5.50

6.50

6.03

46

4.26

2.45

2.54

3.31

11

1.93

—1.63

—1.67

—4.53

FR

3

2.90

—2.61

—2.39

—1.54

WE

11

5.27

4.10

3.94

5.00

SW

9

4.62

6.86

6.47

11.23

JR

8

6.69

5.59

6.47

6.38

AMEX DAY 6 MONTH

1976—84

UK

AJIEX MONTH 6 MONTH

1976—84

UK

AMEX DAY LATE

1981—84

20

6.74

3.80

3.55

—5.06

UK

4

6.11

2.56

2.24

—15.14

FR

4

2.25

—3.36

—2.31

—10.07

WE

4

10.30

5.46

5.07

—5.18

SW

4

6.31

7.56

7.00

0.90

JR

4

8.73

6.77

6.25

4.13

20

8.03

3.89

3.61

-4.98

4

7.20

2.45

2.13

—15.98

AMEX MONTH LATE

1981—84

UK
FR

4

3.68

—2.84

—2.57

—9.86

We

4

11.77

5.57

5.15

-4.99

SW

4

8.25

7.4-4

6.92

1.72

JR

4

9.25

6.84

6.37

4.19

S For s(t+12J—s(t), N:65

** For slt+12)—s(t), N35

11* sCttL2)—slti does not include final survey obeservation.

Table 3
UNCONDITIONAL BIAS OF VARIOUS NESURES OF EXPECTED CHANGES

IN THE SPOT RATE

(in percent per annua'
SURVEY

FORWARD

ERROR

INTEREST

DISCOUNT

PARITY

ERROR

Data Set

Apprcxinte

N

MEAN

Dates

ECON 3 MONTH

1981—85

SD

of

t stat

MEAN

MEAN

SD

of

ERROR

t stat

MEAN

MEAN

SO

of

t stat

MEAN

65

19.3

2.8

6.36

11.0

2.5

4.36

10.3

2.5

4.29

IlK

13

24.0

5.9

4.09

17.1

4.7

3.67

16.?

4.6

3.65

FR

13

16.3

6.4

2.87

8.0

6.1

1.31

8.7

6.1

1.47

13

20.5

6.2

3.30

11.1

5.6

1.98

10.7

5.6

1.91

SW

13

19.1

7.5

2.55

12.0

6.3

1.77

11.5

1.69

JA

6.9

13

21.2

6.1

3.48

6.9

5.4

1.28

6.4

5.4

1.19

ECON 6 MONTH

35

22.6

2.0

11.11

14.8

1.8

8.29

14.6

1.8

8.26

DX

7

22.1

5.61

18.2

3.4

5.29

18.1

3.4

5.26

FR

7

22.2

5.68

11.3

3.3

3.47

11.9

3.3

3.63

NO

7

24.3

3.9
3.9
4.5

5.34

14.8

4.0

3.71

14.5

3.9

3.67

SW

7

24.1

7.1

3.37

17.1

5.9

2.94

16.7

JA

5.8

2.36

7

20.6

3.7

5.56

12.4

3.4

3.61

12.!

3.4

3.53

ECONI! 6 MONTE

1981—85

1981—95

30

17.0

2.4

7.20

10.4

2.3

4.51

10.3

2.3

4.46

DX

6

16.4

4.3

3.78

12.0

3.2

3.79

11.9

3.1

3.32

FR

17.2

3.8

4.54

9.2

4.1

2.26

9.7

4.1

2.35

20.1

4.7

4.28

11.9

4.8

2.47

11.6

4.8

2.41

SW

6
6
6

17.0

7.1

2.39

11.7

6.7

1.73

11.2

6.7

1.66

JA

6

14.2

7.2

1.97

7.3

7.5

0.98

6.9

7.4

0.94

46

—0.1

—1.3

2.5

1.9

FR

0.55

—2.2

—0.44

—1.8

NO

11

—1.0

—0.37

—2.0

2.4
5.6
4.9
4.6

—0.49

0.65

-4.53
0.33

—1.2

4.8
2.7

SW

8

—8.5

—0.65

—5.5

7.8

—0.43
—0.70

JA

8

—0.1

2.8
5.7
4.9
5.3
9.3
6.7

—0.04

11
8

—0.09

0.5

5.2

0.09

46
11

FR

8

1.3
6.4
4.4

—0.23

UK

NO

AMEX DAY

197614

DX

AMEX MONTH

1976—84

—0.18

—1.7

—0.91

—5.1

—0.01

—0.5

5.6
4.9
4.7
7.9
5.8

2.7
5.5

0.46

—0.6

2.4

—0.25

-0.6

2.4

1.15

2.8

0.53

2.9

5.4

0.53

4.7

0.95

—1.1

5.4
4.7

—0.23

-P0.9

L7

—0.18

1.9

0.34
—0.37

NO

11

0.3

5.2

0.05

—0.9

4.5

—0.20

—1.2

4.4

-0.26

SW

8

—6.6

9.0

-0.74

—4.4

7.7

—0.56

—4.3

7.7

—0.62

JA

8

0.3

6.4

0.05

1.8

6.2

—0.13

0.1

5.7

0.01

AMEX DAY LATE

1981—84

20

11.8

3.4

3.42

8.9

3.2

2.77

8.6

3.2

2.69

AMEX MONTH LATE

1981—84

20

13.0

3.4

3.79

8.9

3.2

2.77

8.6

3.2

2.67

TABLE 4a
BANDWAGON EXPECTATIONS / indeoendent variable: sit—I) —
EURUARO DISCOUNT REGRESSIONS

Direct

Regression ol Expected Change: 1(t) — sit) = a

SUR Reqressicn
Asyaptotic se's

OLS

aiir)

a(uk)

——_______

+

blE sit—i) — sit)

a(sw)

a{ia)

0.0151
0.0011

0.0126
0.0018

0.0557
0.0097

0.0126
0.0015

0.0492
0.0127

a(wg)

—0.0003 —0.0147
0.0011
0.0025

0.0093

.0000 -0.0144

0.0095
0.0016

0.0)52

0.0016

0.0013 —0.0333
0.0041
0.0042

0.0199
0.0041

0.0303
0.0041

0.0282
0.0041

—0.0014 —0.0341
0.0046
0.0045

0.0199
0.0040

0.0299
0.0040

0.0253
0.0038

—0.0107 —0.0200
0.0045
0.0053

0.0166
0.0044

0.0304
0.0054

0.0250
0.0056

6 Month (Month) —0.01)8 —0.0197
0.0045
0.0053

0.0168
0.0045

0.0296 0.024622
0.0054 0.005687

-

0.0009

sit)

81—84

bI

OW

BE

t:51:i)

r2

59

5.77 U

0.37

0.99

59

3.88 *1

023

0.0984
0.0262

1.12

29

3.75 11

0.95

0.1455
0.0534

1.18

24

2.72 II

0.89

0.0053
0.0055

0.0932
0.0489

1.70

39

1.90

0.74

0.0060
0.0061

0.0886
0.0573

1.63

39

1.55

0.73

OW

OF

t:b2=0

59

0.17

1.98

59

1.26

0.16

Reressicns

ECCN3 Month

0.0016
SOON

6 Month

ECONII

6 onth

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

AMEX

Direct Regression o4 Actual

Change: s(t+1) — sit)

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

s(t)

I

a(fr)

alsw)

awg)

a(ja)

81—84

—0.0414 —0.0331 —0.0175 —0.0145 -0.0044
0.0132

0.0152

0.0143

0.0179

b2
0.0215
0.1241

0.0136

.00 5

0.1500

—0.0924 —0.0935 4.0562 —0.0555 -0.0327
0.0200

0.2071
0.1288

2.22

29

1.61

0.61

—0.0294 —0.0519 —0.0243 —0.0126 —0.0017
0.0306
0.0295
0.0263
0.0264
0.0254

—0.4057

2.63

24

—1.37

0.32

39

—1.15

0.31

1.94

39

—0.47

0.26

O

OF

0.0204

0.0201

0.0199

0.1192

0.3539

0.0085
0.0226

0.039!
0.0267

0.0567
0.0223

0.0951
0.0271

0.0600 0.0605 0.2059
0.0283 0.0277 0.2477

AMEX 6 Month (Month) 0.0024

0.0300
0.0272

0.0506
0.0229

0.0907
0.0278

0.0644 —0.0638 —0.1385
0.0291
0.0314 0.2930

0.0231

Indirect Regression: fit) — s(t+1)

a + hi

sit—I) —

sEt)

Duny

a(uk)

atfr)

a(Na)

a(sw)

Asyiptotic se's

0.0426
0.0134

0.0199
0.0155

0.0279
0.0144

0.0301
0.0177

Bootstrap se's

0.0173
0.0141

0.0019
0.1238

0.0129

0.0161

0.0143

0.0164

0.0134

0.1435

0.0473
0.0154

0.0246

0.0303

0.0314

0.0180

4.1008

0.0154

0.0148

0.0145

0.0144

0.1210

0.0937
0.0209

0.0602

0.0761

0.0059

0.0609

—0.1097

0.0211

0.0208

0.0206

0.0207

0.1332

0.0281
0.0327

0.0178
0.0316

0.0442
0.0281

0.0425
0.0282

0.0270
0.0272

SUR Reqresston

r2

—0.0473 —0.0390 —0.0213 —0.0162 —0.0054
0.0152 0.0152
0.0146
0.0143
0.0142

0.0202
ECONII 6 Month

a + b2( sEt—i) —

Ouny

a(uk)
SUR Regression
Asyiptotic se's

0.0015

aljalBl—04

b

59

t:b0
0.02

r2
0.00 $

0.01

OLS Reqressions

ECOW3 Month

LOON 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

—0.0191

59

—0.33

0.2Q

2.30

29

0.22

0.65

0.6312
0.3703

2.54

24

1.67

0.39

0.0659
0.0289

0.3791
0.2585

1.92

39

1.47

0.26

0.0295

6 Month (Month) —0.0142 —0.0497 —0.0339 —0.0611 —0.0399
0.0243
0.0286
0.0241
0.0292
0.0306

0.0699
0.0330

0.2270
0.3081

2.09

39

0.74

0.20

0.0235
AMEX

1.97

t . U indirata cinnflranrn +

—0.0591 —0.0401 4.0647 -0.0351
0.0279

0.0233

0.0283

and I? 1.,,.1 .

TABLE 4b
BANC WAGON EXPECTATIONS / Indegendent variable: sit—i) —
SURVEY OATh REGRESSIONS

Direct Regression of Expected Change: E Es(t+1)l —

—

sit)

bli

= a +

sit—I) —

sit)

I

Du.iy

aluk)

aifrI

0.0208
0.0061

0.0150
0.0044

0.0213
0.0041
0.0211

a(sw)

a(ja)

0.0353
0.0026

0.0338
0.0028

0.0320
0.0031

-4.0300

0.0154
0.0041

0.0356
0.0040

0.0340
0.0039

0.0321
0.0038

—.04Q0

0.0216
0.0088

0.0677
0.0090

0.0654
0.0086

0.0685
0.0086

0.0031

0.0593

0.0550

0.0082

0.0073

0.0073

—0.0003 —0.0045

0.0153
0.0070

0.0076

0.0235

0.0129

0.2140

0.0084

0.0085

0.0089

0.0087

0.0774

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0003 —0.002?
0.0061
0.0071

0.0163
0.0060

0.0100
0.0073

0.0233
0.0076

0.0199
0.0082

0.1912
0.0769

SUR Reqression

Asystotic se's

sit)

a(wg)

OF

t:bl:0

59

—107

0021

1.79

59

—1.24

0 30

0.0840
0.0557

2.09

29

1.51

085

0.0588

0.2002

0.0070

1.36

24

0.0980

2.04

0.90

2.86

39

2.76 1*

0.56

2.48

39

2.4? 1*

0.70

81—84

OW

0.0280

r2

OLS Reqressions

WON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

0.0087
ECUNII 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

0.0179
0.0085

0.0071

Direct Regression of Actual Change: sittli —
aiuk)
SIJR

Reressjan

Asyiptotic

se's

a(fr

sit)

0.0152

a + b2( sit—i) —

sit)
Duny

a(wg)

—0.3414 -0.0331 —0.0175
0.0132

0.0322

0.0143

a(sw)

aiJa)

81—84

—0.0145 —0.0044

0.0179

b2

OW

0.0215

0.0136

0.1241

—0.0473 -0.0390 —0.0213 —1.0162 —0.0054
0.0142

0.1500
0.1192

—0.0924 —0.0935 —0.0542 —0.0555 —0.0327
0.0202
0.0204
0.0201
0.0199
0.0200

0.2071

OF t:b2:0

r2

59

0.17

1.98

59

1.26

0.16

2.22

29

1.61

0.61

.00 $

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

0.0152 0.0152 0.0146

ECON 6 Month

EC0NII 6 Month

6 Month (Day)

—0.0294 —0.0519 —0.0243
0.0306
0.0295
0.0263

0.0143

—0.0126 —0.0017

0.0264

0.0254

—0.4857
0.3539

2.63

24

—1.37

0.32

0.0600 —0.0605 4.2859

1.75

39

—1.15

0.31

1.94

39

—0.47

0.26

0.0085
0.0226

0.0391
0.0267

0.0567
0.0223

0.0951
0.0271

AMEX 6 Month (ilonth) 0.0024

0.0300
0.0272

0.0506
0.0229

0.0907
0.0278

AMEX

0.0231

Indirect Regression: S [sittl)] — s(t+1)

0.1288

0.0283

0.0277

0.2477

0.0644 —0.0639 —0.1385
0.0314
0.2930

0.0291

a + bi sit—Il — sit)

)

Dujisy

SUR Regression

Asyototjc se's
Bodttrap se's
01.5 Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

aluk)

a(frl

a(g)

a(sw)

aiJa)

0.0675
0.0163
0.0155

0.0533
0.0163
0.0163

0.0562
0.0154
0.0151

0.0499
0.0196
0.0184

0.0373
0.0155
0.0144

—0.1657
0.1281
0.1474

0. 0686

0. 0544

0.0160

0.0375
0.0160

—0. 1900

0.0171

0.0569
0.0164

0. 0502

0.0170
0.1134

0.1151

0.1239

0.0245 0.0249 0.0245

0.1208
0.0242

0.1013
0.0243

0.0473
0.0331

0.0676
0.0286

0.0061
0.0275

0.0551

0.0835

0.0319 0.0285

0.0295

0.0247

0.0300

0.0313

AMEX 6 Month (Month) -0.0027 —0.032? —0.0343 —0.0807 —0.0411
0.0246

St

0.0239

0.0244

indicate significance at 52 and it levels.

0.0296

0.0310

b

OW

OF t:b0
59

1.29

r2
0.03 $

1.12

1.78

59

1.42

0.41

-4.1231
0.1567

2.51

29

—0.79

0.76

0.6859
0.3827

2.37

24

1.79

0.63

0.4999
0.2740

2.10

39

1.82

0.33

0.0306
0.0827
0.0334

0.3294
0.3117

2.07

39

1.06

0.33

0.1336

—0.0098 —0.0436 —0.04(4 —0.0875 1.0365 0.0733
0.0250

I ,

81—84

r2 corresDonds to aooroTiaf! r f.c+

e.. I1

L

TABLE 5a
ADAPTIVE EXPECTATIONS / tndeaendent variab1e f!t—l) — sCt)

F0RARO DISCOUNT RE5AESSIONS

Direct

Regression of Expected

Change 4(t) — sit)

athk)

a(fr)

a +

bI(

f(t—L) — sCt)

a(sw)

aWl

0.0102
0.0011

0.0150
0.0015

0.0116
0.0016

0.0217
0.0083

54

2.46 ti

0.0344
o.oooy

54

4.99 U

a(wgl

SUB Regression
Asyiptotic se's

0.0004 —0.0126

SUR Reoression with

0.000! —0.0124

ARU) Correction

0.0007

0.0033

0.010!
0.0008

0.0151
0.0009

0.0119
0.0019

—0.33

0.63

—0.28

—0.43

0.27

Asyaptotic

0.0011

0.0026

bi

OW

DE t:blrO

r2

o.io $

se's

AR(1) coefficient
015 Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

0.0002 —0.0127

0.0101

0.0017

0.0017

0.0149
0.0017

0.0116
0.0017

0.0266
0.0154

1.35

0.0017

54

1.73

0.80

0.0013 —0.0313

0.0220
0.0064

0.0301
0.0067

0.0243
0.0063

—0.0017
0.0574

1.42

24

—0.03

0.77

0.0223
0.0048

0.0329
0.0048

0.0230
0.0046

0.0037
0.0343

1.74

19

0.11

0.85

OW

OF

t:bZtO

54

—0.43

2.17

54

0.6L

0.19

1.96

24

1.28

0.77

0.4593
0.1942

2.51

19

2.36 t

0.45

b

OW

0.0069
ECONII 6 Month

0.0060

0.0042 —0.0285
0.0048

0.0047

Direct Regression of Actual Change: silt!) —
aluk)

SUB Regression

4syptotic se's

015 Regressions
ECON 3 Month

0.0127

015 Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

EC0NII 6 Month

0.0163

1.0506

0.0327
0.1356

0.0146

0.0148

0.0148

0.0146

—0.1077 —0.1065 -0.0787 —0.0970 —0.0561
0.0169

0.0202

0.0212

0.0200

—0.0923 —0.0899 —0.0618 —0.0614 —0.0115
0.0267

sIttI)

aluk)

Bootstraa se's

0.0149

—0.0401 —0.0411 —0.0244 —0.0222 -0.0046

Indirect Regression: fIt) —

Asvototi: se's

0.0147

b2

a(jal

0.1181

0.0271

SUB Regression

a(sw)

a(wg)

0.0149

0.0219

EC0NII 6 Month

a + b2( fCt—1) — sCt)

—0.3350 —0.0391 —0.0214 -0.0193 —0.0028

0.0154
ECON 6 Month

aCfr)

s(t)

= a +
aifrI

0.0272

bI

0.0269

i(t—1) —

0.0262

0.2317
0.1615

a(sw)

ala)

0.0329
0.0149
0.0143

0.0356
0.0183
0.0175

0.0133
0.0153
0.0143

0.0129
0.1187
0.1635

0.0403 0.0284 0.0344

0.0273
0.0145
0.0145

.00 $

sIt)

a(wg)

0.0377
0.0126
0.0124

.

r2

—_____

OF t:br0_—— r2
—
54

0.11

.00

0.08

0.0155

0.0162
0.0147

—0.0561
0.1370

54

—0.41

0.0149

0.0371
0.0149

2.07

0.0148

0.23

0.1090
0.0232

0.0148
0.0201

0.1007
0.0214

0.1271
0.0225

0.0803
0.0212

—0.2334
0.1925

2.04

24

—1.21

0.79

0.0866
0.0303

0.0614

0.0846

0.0944
0.0301

0.0345
0.0293

-0.4556
0.2171

2.56

19

—2.10 I

0.45

0.0299 0.0304

TABLE Sb
AOP1IVE EXPECTATIONS I Indeoendent variable:
SURVEY DATA RESRESSIONS

Direct Regression of Expected Change: E tsCt+U1 —

stt)

a +

bI(

ER—li (sIt)] -

O

a(fr)

alwg)

aisw)

0.0204
0.0065

0.0138
0.0042

0.0347
0.0031

0.0335
0.0031

0.0313
0.0333

0.0202
0.0066

0.0139
0.0052

0.0338
0.0026

0.0329
0.0024

0.0306
0.0027

0.13

0.26

—0.13

—0.19

—0.19

ECON 3 floath

0.0215
0.0044

0.0147
0.0043

0.0356
0.0044

0.0343
0.0043

0.031?
0.0042

—0.0031
0.0349

ECON 6 Month

0.0295
0.0120

0.0290
0.0123

0.0760
0.0123

0.0740
0.0125

0.0687
0.0124

ECONII 6 Month

0.0226
0.0070

0.0150

0.064!

0.0636

0.0073

0.0076

0.0071

SUR Regression
Asy.ptutic se's

sIt)

s(t)

aCuk)

bi

aCia)

E(t—1J15ft)] —

DF

t:bI:0

0.0178
0.0273

54

0.65

0.0406
0.0226

54

1.90

2.05

54

—0.09

0.81

—0.0216
0.0810

1.85

24

—0.27

0.96

0.0574

0.0533

2.27

19

1.08

0.94

0.0070

0.0495

DW

OF

t:b2i)

54

—0.63

oats

StIR Regression with

MCi) Ccrrection
Asyiptotic se's
ARC!) coefficient

aS Regressions

Direct Regression of Actual Change: s(t+1) — sit]
aCuk)
StiR Regression

Asyiptotic se's

alfr)

alwg)

a + b21 ER—i) (sit)]

alsw)

— s(t)
b2

aCia)

r2

—0.0333 —0.0370 —0.0193 —0.0176 —0.0012
0.0134
0.0154
0.0156
0.0185
0.0152

—0.0713

—0.0412 -0.0241 —0.0217 —0.0046

0.0341
0.1250

2.24

54

0.27

0.19

0.1396
0.1492

1.97

24

0.94

0.77

0.0229

—0.1074 —0.0914 —0.0729 —0.0277
0.0299
0.0311
0.0289
0.0286

0.4714
0.2019

2.28

19

2.34 $

0.45

D

OF

0.01 $

0.1133

CU

Regressions
ECON 3 Month

—0.0337

0.0159
ECUN 6 Month

0.3153

0.0156

-0.1031 0.i09B

—0.0799
0.0236

0.0222
EC0NII 6 Month

—0.0913

0.0287

0.0227

Indirect Regression: E (sCt+1i3 — sIft]

StIR Regression

Asymototic se's
Bootstrap se's

0LS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECDN 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month

It

0.0153

-0.9532 —0.0567
0.0231

a + bi ER—ti

aCuk)

aCir]

a(wg)

0.0596
0.0174

0.0555
0.0160

0.0173
0.0601

0.0151

(sIt)]

—

sit]

alsw)

afla)

b

0.0592
0.0169

0.0556
0.0202

0.0362
0.0176

—0.0276
0.1195

0.0154

0.0163

0.0192

0.0169

0.2449

0.0559
0.0173

0.0597
0.0176

0.0560

0.0366

—0.0372

0.0179

0.0173

0.0170

0.1413

0.t326

0.1395

0.1553

0.1693

0.1253.

0.0244

0.0250

0.0260

0.0254

0.0251

0.1198
0.0311

0.1224
0.0323

0.1455
0.0337

0.1365
0.0314

0.0906
0.0310

en...t ......+ CV ,...4 U! 1nale lTh.M ,..r.se.."...le I

54

t:b=0
-0.23

r2
.00 1

0.11
2.20

54

0.26

0.44

—0.1612
0.1642

2.00

24

—0.98

0.39

—0.4181
0.2191

2.24

19

—1.91

0.70

J._

C S.S —. .11

...è

S—-.

TABLE 6a

REGRESSIVE EXPECTATIONS I/Independent variable:—s(t)
Long Run Eouilibriu2 Constant
FORWARD RATE REGRESSIONS
Direct

Regression of Expected

Change: 1(t) —

Asymptotic

se's

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

a(wg)

0.0053 —'0.0253
0.0031
0.0124

0.0046
0.0059

0.0108 —0.0235
0.0337

0.0061

0.0037 —0.0183

0.0080
0.0062

0.0135 —0.0041

0.0126

40.0031
0.0063

0.0140 —0.0702
0.0103
0.0360

0.0029
0.0176

0.0155 —0.0862
0.0144

0.1005

0.0027 —0.0139
0.0115
0.0446

0.0299
0.0213

0.0387
0.0173

0.0034
ECON 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month [Day)

Dummy
81—84

a(ir)

a(uk)
SUR Rearession

sct) r a — bl[ s(t) )
a(sw)

0.0048

0.0051

a(ja)

bI

OW

10.0067

59

1.O9

0.01$

1.26

59

'0.49

0.79

40.0208
0.0184

1.56

29

[.13

0.79

0.0655
0.1241

—0.0069

1.24

24

—0.31

0.85

1.92

39

3.76 2*

0.79

1.80

39

—3.34 *2

0.79

OW

OF

t:b2rO

59

thIS

0.02 $

2.23

59

—0.80

0.15

3.05

29

—1.01

0.59

0.0347

0.0227

—0.0484
0.0104

0.0796
0.0268

0.0640
0.0134

0.0676
0.0114

0.3796
0.0846

0.0207 -1.0591

AMEX 6 Month [Month) —0.0495
0.0102

0.0797
0.0263

0.0638
0.0131

0.0670
0.0112

0.3395
0.0829

0.0213 —0.0591
0.0043
0.0154

Direct Regression

of Actual Change: s(t+1I — s(tl

0.0043 0.0157

a — b2( s(t)
-

a(uk)
SUR Rearession

Asymptotic se's

dIr)

OF t:blrOr2

a(sw)

a(wg)

Oummv

81—94

dial

b2

—0.0262 —'0.0941 —0.0464 —0.0379 —0.1752

40.0314

0.0160

0.0487

0.0261

0.0244

0.1230

0.0237

-'0.0602
0.0284

0.0531
0.1071

0.0238
0.0526

0.0134

0.2317
0.2942

—0.0431

0.0430

—0.1262

0.0665
0.1520

0.0206
0.0742

0.0033
0.0606

0.3948
0.4242

—0.0789

—0.0423 —0.1193 —0.057? 1.0422 —0.1377

r2

OLS Rearessions

ECOE3 Month

ECON 6 Month

0.0434
ECONII 6 Month

0.0537
0.0777

0.2684

0.1285

tO.0235
0.1364

24

+0.17

0.7474

2.83

0.1041

0.27

—'0.0077

0.0934

0.0855

0.1226

0.2485 —0.0767 —0.0330

0.0599

1.80

39

—0.37

0.29

0.1538

0.0768

0.0655

0.4858

AMEX 6 Month (Month) 0.0052 0.0285

0.0516
0.0766

0.0931
0.0656

0.0654 —0.0749 +0.0007

1.916

39

•0.01

0.26

DW

OF

0.0694
AMEX 6 Month (Day)

0.0598

-

Indirect Regression: 1(t) —

s(t+1)

a(uk)

SUR Regression
Asymptotic se's
Bootstrap se's

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON

S Month

ECONII 6 Nonth

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

0.1535

0.044!
0.0151
0.0178

0.0248

0.4847

0.0252

a(ja)

Dummy
81—84

0.0902

0.0899

a — b( s(t)
dIr)

0.0140
0.0421
0.0627

a(wgl

a(sw)

0.0250
0.0213
0.0320

0.0278
0.0225
0.0263

b

—

0.0007
0.1088
0.1695

iO.0030
0.0198
0.0307

0.0638 —'0.0715 —0.0153 —0.0049 4.2359
0.0286
0.1078
0.0530
0.0433
0.2962

+0.0463

tO.15

r2
.00 $

tO.10

2.20

59

+0.86

0.20

0.0541

0.1401 —'0.1367 —0.0176
0.0430
0.1507
0.0736

0.0122 1.4810

29

+1.29

0.66

0.4206

f0.0997
0.0771

2.87

0.0601

0.0455 0.1059
0.0755 0.2917

0.0809
0.1131

0.2032
0.8124

—0.0304
0.1463

2.72

24

—0.21

0.31

-0.0408 —0.0137 —0.0215 —0.0550

1.86

39

—0.27

0.23

1.96

39 —0.63

0.20

0.0878
0.1396

0.1622

0.0810

0.0691

0.0911
0.5125

0.0974 —0.0261

0.0632

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —00545

0.0513

0.0122 —0.0260

0.2741

0.0967 —0.0598

0.0628

0.1612

0.0805

0.5009

0.0264

* , It

59

t:brj

0.0689

indicate significance at St and IX levels. S

0.0262

r2 rnrrncnnnde 4.

0.0951

0.0944

TABLE 6b
REGRESSIVE EXPECTATIONS I I Independent variabl;--p)
Lana Run Equilihrius Constant
SURQEY DATA REGRESSIONS

Direct

Regression of Expected Change: E ts(t+1)1 —

a(ukY

—
STiR Regression

se's

Asy.ptotic

a(fr)

sIt)

a — bI( s(t)
Dunv

a(Nq)

a(ss)

a(jaI

bI

9(14-

0.0429 —3.0877 —0.0133 —0.0053 1.0249

OW

0.0679

40.3513
0.0124

0.0467 —0.t042 —0.0217 —0.0116 —0.2942
0.0065
0.0246
0.0121
0.0099
0.0677

iO.0596
0.0124

0.3751 —0.1794 —0.0272 4.0114 —0.5061
0.1522

0.0960 —0.2701 10688 1.0465 1.0727
0.0E4 0.0516 0.0247 0.0200 0.1438

0.0068

0.0247

0.0120

0.0098

t:blrr)

OF

r2

59

r4.13U

0.20

1.60

59

•4.82 St

025

40.1052
0.0279

1.53

29

i377 :5

0.39

40.1441

2.71

24

+5.49 II

0.75

3.14

39

-2.34 1

0.54

2.79

39

—2.67 11

0.71

OW

OF

t:b2=0

59

'1.35

0.02 $

2.22

59

—0.50

0.15

3.05

29

—1.01

1

013 Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

0.0156
ECONII 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month Day)

0.0545

0.0266

0.0217

0.0262

—0.0444

0. 1081

0.0189

0.0486

0.0680
0.0243

0.0474
0.0207

0.3734
0.1535

0.0381 .0.0665

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0414
0.0155

0.1018
0.0398

0.0645
0.0199

0.0474
0.0170

0.3506

0.0432 -0.0621

0.1255

0.0065

Direct

Regression of Actual Change: s(t+11 — s(t) ra — h2(
a(uk)

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

ECONI1 6 Month

0.0295
0.0233

s(t) )

Duaty
a(fri

—

SUR Regression
Asyiptotic se's

0.0078

a(wg)

a(sw)

aIja)

8114

—0.0262 —0.0941 —0.0464 —0.0379 —0.1758

b2

+0.0314
0.0233

0.0160

0.0487

0.0261

0.0244

0.1280

—0.0602
0.0284

0.0531
0.1071

0. 0233

0.0184
0.0430

0.2317
0.2942

--0.043!

—0.1262
0.0434

0.0665

0.0206

0.0742

0.0033 0.1942
0.0606
0.4242

—0.0789

0.1520

—0.0423 —0.1199 —0.0579 —0.0422 -0.1377

0.0526

r2

0.0537

0.0777

0.0694

0.2684

2.93

40.17

0.7474

0.27

0.1041

40.0235
0.1364

24

0.1285

—0.0077

0.0934

0.0855

0.1226

0.2495 —0.0767 —0.0330

1.80

39

0.0599

0.0768

4.37

0.29

0.1538

0.0655

0.4852

AMEX 6 Month (Month) 0.0052
0.0598

0.0285
0.1535

0.0516
0.0766

0.0931
0.0656

0.0654 —0.0749 40.0007

1.92

39

-0.Ot

0.26

OW

OF

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

Indirect

Regression: E (s(ttl)I —

a(uk)
STiR Regression

0.4047

0.0248
0.0252

0.0899

s(t+1) r a — h( s(t) I
Dunv
a(fr)

a(wq)

a{sw)

a(ja)

81—34

0.1048 —0.1487 —0. 0413 —0.0267 —0.5021

Asyaototic se's
9ootstrap se's

0.0902

b

0.0932
0.1923

*0.0984
0.0168
0.0350

0.1069 —0.1573 —0.0455 —0.0300 —0.5259

-'0.1027

0. 0162

0.0206

0.0369
0.0706

0.0223
0.0359

0.0223
0.0313

t:brO

+5.34 U

59

r2
0.18

42.81 U

OLS Regressions

ECON 3 Month

0.0313
ECON 6 Month

0.42

•0.1841
0.0867

3.52

29

2.12 1

0.78

+0.1206
0.1493

2.92

24

+0.81

0.59

0.0147 -0.0176 1.0752 0.1248
0.1743
0.0870
0.0743
0.5509

0.1149 --0.0335

2.08

39

-0.33

0.29

0.012? —0.0457

0.1191 -.0.0629
0.0269
0.0962

1.96

39

0.65

0.32

0.2013 —0.245? —0.0477 —0.0148 —0.9009
0.1695

0.0829

0.0676

0.4731

0.1388 —0.1503 —0.0109 —0.0043 —0.5895

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

—0.0367
0.0680

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0465

0.0640

indicate

'1.73

0.0475

0.0593

0.0760

I • It

59

0.3580

0.3246

0.0484

ECONII 6 Month

2.24

0.1182

significance at

0.2933

0.0734
0.1642

St

0.1406

0.0820

0.1139

0.0702

0.8181

0.2052
0.5186

0.0281

and 1% levels. r2 correcoonds tn inn—..'..

-

0.1022

$

TABLE 7a
—
REBRE3SIVE EXPECTATIONS Ill Lndeoendent variable: sIt)
Lanq Run Eaui[ibritzs PPP
F3AARO DISCOUNT 8EBRESSIONS

Direct

Regression o Expected Change: fIt) —
aluk)

a(fr)

sIt)

a +

bI(

?It) —

sIt)

I

Duisv

bI

a(wg)

aiss)

0.008?

0.0102
0.0026

0.0155
0.0019

0.0128
0.0017

0.0019
0.0066

0.0053 —1.0209
3.0046
0.0123

0.0055
0.0073

0.0112 —0.0133
0.0068
0.0367

0.0065

0.0179 —0.0665 -0.0016

0.0100 —0.0380

0.0152

0.0374

0.0244

0.0216

0.1168

—0.0062

0.0048

0.0138

0.0491

0.0443
0.0317

0.0518
0.0279

—0.0742

0.0123

0.1062
0.0233

0.0874
0.0146

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0774
0.0122

0.1107
0.0242

0.0897
0.0140

StIR Re*resgjon

Asyiptatc

se's

0.0021 —0.0147
0.0015

— sIt)

alja)

81—84

OW

OF t:blrO

r2

59

0.30

1.43

59

0.72

0.79

0.0204
0.0207

1.68

29

0.99

0.79

0.1237
0.1531

—0.0179

1.17

21

—0.66

0.36

0.0929
0.0134

0.4618
0.0074

0.0306 —0.0914
0.0050
0.0181

2.33 -

39

—5.04 U 0.32

0.0945
0.0129

0.4771
0.0835

0.0325 —0.0842
0.0048
0.0154

2.28

39

—5.17 8 0.84

.00 $

OLS 3eressions

ECOW3 Qnth
ECON 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (Bay)

Direct Regression ol Actual Change: s(t+l) — sIt)
a(uk)

StIR Regression

Asymptotic se's

a f h2(tIt)

0.0046

0.0271

sIt)

Dun',

aI4r)

aSq)

a(sw)

aIM)

81—84

—0.0479 —0.1636 —0.0529 —0.0346 —0.0144
0.0122
0.0541
0.0200
0.0184
0.0132

b2

OW

0.1001
0.0394

OF t:b20
59

2.54 1*

r2
0.07 $

01.3 Regressions
ECON 3 Month

—0.0464 -0.0153 —0.0063 —0.0051
0.0393

0.1046

0.0579

0.0465
0.3135

—0.0090

0.0889

—0.1594

0.0994
0.1561

0.0680
0.1019

0.0507
0.0900

0.5491
0.4871

—0.1037

ECONII 6 Month

—0.0252 —0.1502 —0.0854 —0.0683 —0.2474
0.1141
0.2974
0.1924
0.1693
0.9280

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

—0.0443

ECDN 6 Month

0.0834

0.0806

0.1532
0.1591

0.1241
0.0918

0.1396
0.0845

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0170
0.0610

0.0750
0.1598

0.0779
0.0922

0.1168
0.0851

Indirect

Regression: fIt) —

s(t+1) = a

+

hI 1(t)

—

2.21

59

—0.16

0.14

3.08

29

—1.20

0.59

0.0423
3.1643

2.79

24

0.26

0.27

0.4745 -0.0646 —0.0746

1.84

39

—0.74

0.30

1.96

39

—0.29

0.26

OW

OF

0.5494

0.0554

0.0863

0.0311

0.1014

0.2279 —0.0690 —0.0293
0.5517

0.0318

81—94

0.1019

sIt)
Dunv

a(uk)
StIR Regression

Asy.otot:c se's

3ootstrap

seas

a(fr)

a(wg)

aIss)

aIM)

0.0804

0.0444

0.0394

0.0219

—0.0460

0.0512
0.0621

0.0193
0.0217

0.0182
0.0195

0.1131
0.0137

0.0371
0.0458

0.0517 —0.0055

0.0118
0.0674

0.0163 —0.0597
0.0583
0.3157

0.0136
0.0558

2.14

59

0.24

0.19

0.1773 -0.1659 —0.0696 —0.0407 —0.6371
0.0623
0.1547
0.10t0 0.0892 0.4829

0.1241
0.0836

2.90

29

1.45

0.66

0.3771
1.0079

-0.0602

2.67

24

0.34

0.31

—0.0299 —0.0471 —0.0368 —0.0669 -0.1127
0.0856
0.1689
0.0974
0.0897
0.5832

0.0952 —0.0068
0.0331
0.1076

1.91

39

—0.06

0.22

0.1005 -0.0549

1.99

39

-0.51

0.19

3.0461
0.0125
0.0117

b

59

t:b=0
—1.24

r2

0.02 $

—1.00

013 Regressions
ECON LI Month

0.0396
ECON 6 Month

ECONLI a Month

0.0190

0.1053

0.1550

0.1239 0.3230
AMEX 6 Month (Day)

AMEX 6 Month (Month) -0.0596

0.0357

0.0853 0.1683

0.1297
0.2090

0.1198
0.183?

0.0117 -0.0223
0.0971

0.0897

0.2492
0.5810

0.1731

0.0335

0.1072

1 , U indicate significance at 5Z and 17. levels. r2 corresponds to approximate F test on all nnn—" nr'"'"

TABLETh
RESRE3SIVE EXPECTATIONS I! f Independent variable: ?lt
Long Run EpuiLibrius PPP
SURVEY DATA REgRESSIONS

Direct Regression of Expected Change: E Cs(tflJ —

sit)

= a + bl( lit) —

sit)

— sit]

I

Duaiv
a(uk)

a(fr)

aiwg)

aiss)

aija)

0.0141
0.0064

0.3220

0.0261

0.0564

0.0042

0.0034

0.0138

0.0533 —0.0823 —0.0260 —0.0185 1.2580
0.0162 0.0140 0.0758
0.0095
0.0233

0.0512
0.0134

0.1014 —0.1771 —0.0606 —0.0484 —0.5664

0.0153 —'3. 0605
0.0040
0.0210

StIR Regression

Asyiptatic se's

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

0.0234

0.0576

0.0376

0.0332

91—84

0.1796

0.1396 —0.2053 —0.1273 —0.1080 -0.8696

ECONII 6 Month

OW

hi

3.56 U

0.15$

2.12

59

3.83 It

0.84

0.1125
0.0318

2.55

29

3.53 *1

0.89

0.1646
0.0334

2.56

24

4.72 *1

0.94

2.85

39

—1.46

0.50

2.49

39

—1.77

0.68

OW

OF

t:b2:i)

0.0607

0.0392 0.0345

0.1093

—0.0408
0.0266

0.0721
0.0525

0.0568
0.0303

0.0421
0.0279

0.2004
0.1014

0.0397 —0.0490

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0406
0.0220

0.0733
0.0434

0.0570
0.0250

0.0449
0.0231

0.2815
0.1496

0.0453 —0.0409

flirect Regression ol Actual Change: s(t+1) —

sit)

a + b2( Tit) —

0.0103

0.0086

r2

59

0.0233
AMEX 6 Month (Day)

OF t:bI0

0.0335

0.0276

sit)
Ouny

aluk)

aCfr)

a(wg)

a(s)

aija)

81—84

—0.047! —0.1636 —0.0529 —0.0346 —0.0144

StIR Regression

0.0132

0.0394

1.3 Reqressiorts
ECON 3 Month

—0.0464 —0.0153 —0.0063 —00051

0.0541

0.0200

0.0579

0.0465
0.3135

1.0090

0.0669

0.0994 0.0680

0.0507
0.0900

0.5491
0.4871

4.1037

ECONII 6 Month

4.0252 —0.1502 —0.0854 4.0680 —0.2474
0.1141
0.2974 0.1924
0.1693
0.9280

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

—0.0443
0.0806

0.1532
0.1591

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0173
0.0810

0.0750

0.0393

—0.1594
0.0634

ECON 6 Month

Indirect Regression: E ls(t+1.)] —

0.1046

0.1561

0.1.598

sit4I)

0.1019

59

0. 1001

0.0184

0.0122

Asyiptotic se's

b2

0.07 $

2.21

59

—0.16

0.14

3.08

29

—1.20

0.59

0.0423
0.1640

2.79

24

0.26

0.27

0.0554

0.0863

0.1596
0.0845

0.4745 —0.0646 —0.0746
0.5494
0.0311
0.1014

1.04

39

—0.74

0.30

0.0918
0.0779
0.0922

0.1168
0.0851

0.2279 —0.0680 -0.0293

1.96

39

—0.29

0.26

0.1241

= a + hi TItI —

0.5517

sit)

0.0318

0.1018

I

Duny
a(uk)

2.54 **

r2

OF t:b0

r2

a(wg)

a(sw)

a{ja)

0.0532 —0.0630

0.0215
0.0201
0.0240

0.0308
0.0195
0.0204

0.0277
0.0150
0.0161

0.0829
0.0352
0.0539

0.0997 —0.0669 —0.0197 —0.0133 —0.3045

0.0602
0.0618

2.15

59

0.97

0.40

0.2161
0.0962

3.54

29

2.25 1

0.79

0.5427

ECCNII 6 Month.

0.1647 —0.1351 1.0411 4.0400 —0.6212
0.2116
0.1862
1.0205
0.1255 0.3270

0.1223
0.1003

2.94

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

0.0035 1.0811 —0.0673 -0.1176 4.1940
0. 1047
0.0964
0.6267
0. 1815
0.0920

0.0256

2.13

39

0.22

0.29

2.01

39

1.18

0.31

SUR Regression
Asyiptotic se's
Bootstrap se's

0.0146
0.0146

0.0490
0.0723

81—84

b

OW

a(fr)

59

2.35 II

0.05

1.54

01.5 Regressions

ECON 3 Month

0.0439

0.1167

0.0747

0.0646

0.2608 -'3.2765 4.1297 4.0992 —1.1155

ECON 6 Month

0.0706

0.1739

0.1135

0.1002

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0228 4.0019 4.0210 —0.0718
0.0872

* ,

It indicate

0.3499

0.1721

0.0993

0.0916

0.0536
0.5939

0.1043
0.0355

0.58

0. 1156

0.1133 —0.0197
0.0342
0.1096

significance at St and IZ levels. $r2 corresponds to approxi.ate F test on all non—intercept paraeters.

TABLE 8a
PPP EXPECTATIONS I Indenendent variable: EVII_7?tj
FORWARD DISCOUNT RE6RESSIONS

Direct Regression of Expected Change: fit) —

sIt)

r

a

+

bli

EI7T_1T*]

duny
a

SUR Rearessian
Asyiptotic se's

1981-04

hI

DW

OF

t:bl=0

46

7.85

r2

0.0072
0.0012

048I3
0.0613

0.0035
0.0011

1.2173
0.1376

0.97

46

8.85 U 0.62

0.0084
0.0034

1.2862
0.2053

1.06

22

6.26 5*

0.62

0.0077

1.1504

1.46

18

6.35 *1

0.67

0.74

U

OLS Regressions

ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month

0.0031

AMEX 6 Month (day)

0. 1812

0.0024
0.0030

0.0167
0.0030

0.6925
0.1061

1.94

22

6.53 St

AMEX 6 Month (Month) 0.0030
0.0029

0.0161
0.0049

0.6710
0.1037

1.93

22

6.47 1* 0.7334

Direct Regression of Actual Change: sittI? —

sit]

= a

+

h2(

El ITTf!J

duny

a

SUR Regression
Asyiptotic se's

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

ECONI! 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (dayl

1981—04

—0.0230
0.0073

0.9510

1. 1964

—0.0639

2.43 *1

2.43

46

1.26

0.01

22

2.06

0.12

—0.0405
0.0(34

1.1259
0.7858

1.96

18

1.43

0.05

1.3614

1.88

22

2.45 *

0.42

1.86

22

2.38 1

0.40

—0.1015
0.0255

Indirect Rtgressian: fIt) —

0.0263 0.5559

s(t+1)

a +

1.2819
0.5381

bCE! ii—iV')
duny

a
—

___________________—

1981—04

b

OW

OF t:b0

r2

0.0299
0.0106
0.0128

0.0089

0.0265
0.0074

0.0210
0.9596

2.31

46

0.02

0.00

0.0723

0.0834
0.6043

2.66

22

0.14

0.00

0. 0099

0.0482

0.0245

1.88

18

0.03

0.00

2.04

22

t.19

0.43

2.03

22

—1.05

0.42

0.02

0.02

0.3611

—0.0529
0.0163

0.1247 —0.6903

AMEX 6 Month (Month) -0.0449
0.0158

0.1132 -0.5894
0.0267
0.5639

U indicate significance at 5% and IX levels.

46

0.5308
0.3572

0.0147
AMEX 6 Month (day)

46

2.78

0.0151

ECONII 6 Month

r2

1.2030
0.5826

AMEX 6 Month (Month) 0.0473

ECON 6 Month

OF t:62=0

0. 0095

—0.1036

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

DW

1.3136
0.5416

0.0559
0.0156

SUR Regression
Asyiptotic se's
Bootstrap se's

b2

—0.0254
0.0104

0.0276

0.5825

r2 corresponds to approxiiate F test an all non—interceat oaraipfpr.

TABLE Oh
PPP EXPECTATIONS / Indenendent variable: E(7r.7r*)

SURVEY DATA REGRESSIONS

Direct Regression of Expected Change: E ts(t+1)1 —

—

s(t)

a + bit EE7rir*]

duisy

a

SUR Regression
Asysptotic se's

1981—04

0.0245

OW

0.0018

1.1155
0.2546

0.0237

1.2417

OF

t:bIrO

r2

46

4.33 **

1.96

46

4.67 U 0.31

1.4251
0.2780

1.69

22

5.13 U

0.52

1.2658
0.2323

1.71

18

5.45 **

0.o

0.031? 0.3797

1.60

22

2.75 **

0.62

1.70

22

2.34 1

0.66

OW

OF

0 05

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

0.0020
ECCN 6 Month

0.2657

0.0454

0.0046
ECONI! 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (day)

0.0403
0.0040
0.0085
0.0039

AMEX 6 Month (MonthI 0.0076
0.0041

Direct Regression of Actual Change: sIft!) —

s(t)

0.0065

0.1383

0.0393
0.0069

0.3426
0.1463

r a + b2( E[7t—If I

daisy

a

1981—84

b2

SLIR Regression

—0.0254

Asy.ptotic

0.0104

1.3136
0.5416

-0.0230
0.0073

1.1964
0.9510

—0.0639
0.0095
—0.0405
0.0134

se's

t:b2:O

r2

46

2.43 1

2.43

46

1.26

0.01

1.2030
0.5826

2.78

22

2.06

0.12

1.1259
0.7858

1.96

18

1.43

0.05

1.28

22

2.45 1

0.42

1.86

22

2.38 *

0.40

OW

OF

OLS Regressions

ECON3Month
ECON 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (day)

AMEX

0.0559
0.0156

—0.1086

1.3614

0.0263

0.5559

6 Month (Month) 0.0473

—0.1015
0.0255

1.2819

0.0151
indirect Regression: E Cs(t+1)] —

s(t+1)

0.5381

a + hI E(7T—7T I

a

duny
1981—04

b

0.0502
0.0117
0.0150

0.3572
0.6022
0.3767

0.0467
0.0082

0.0454

ECON 6 Month

0.1093
0.0108

ECONII 6 Month

SUR

Regression

Asyiptotic se's
Bootstrap se's

46

t:b=0

rZ

0.59
0.95

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

•

2.18

46

0.04

0.00

0.2221
0.6574

2.27

22

0.34

0.00

0.0808
0.0146

0.139?
0.8527

1.86

18

0.16

0.00

—0.0473
0.0157

0.1406 —0.9817

2.06

22

—1.75

0.52

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0396
0.0146

0.1409 —0.9394

1.93

22

—1.80

0.56

AMEX 6 Month (day)

* .

*1

indicate sionificanre at Si and IX leveR.

1.0662

0.0265

0.0248

0.5594

0.5227

r2 carresoonds to aooroxiiate F test on all non—interceot paraseters.

TABLE 9a

REGRESSIVE INFLATION ADJUSTED EXPECTATIONS I Independent variable: 5(t)—sit)
FORWARD DISCOUNT REGRESSIONS
Direct Regression oi Expected Change: 4(t) —

——
SUR ReQression
AsysptotLc se's

sit) — E

[1T—7r'

a + bL( sIt) —

s(t)

dusty
a

1981:04

0.0070

bI

OW

OF

t:bl:0

rZ

46

—5.77 U

0.86

46

—2.22 1

0.08

—0.0227
0.0191

0.80

22

—1.15

0.01

0,0177
0.0047

—0.0489

1.01

18

—2.71 St

0.25

0.0067
0.0033

0.0136 —0.0087

1.79

22

—0.38

0.10

1.83

22

—0.39

0.12

OW

OF

t:b2rO

46

2.39

2.42

46

—0.02

0.00

2.92

22

—0.44

0.00

1.94

18

—0.16

0.00

--0.0011

—0.0078
0.0014

ECCW3 Month

0.0062
0.0016

—0.0121
0.0055

ECON 6 Month

0.0120
0.0049

EONII 6 Month

OLS Reoressians

AMEX 6 Month (day)

0.0180

0.0070

AMEX 6 Month (Month) 0.0059
0.0033

Direct Regression

ai Actual Change:

0.0145 —0.0089
0.0070

s(t+1) —

sit) — E

C 7r—Wj

a
SUR Regression
Asysptotic se's

0.0232

a +

0.0229

b2( sit) —
dusty

sit)

1981-fl

b2

—0.0260
0.0115

—0.0125
0.0052

—0.0223

—0.0032

0.0113

0.0367

—0.0600

—0.0240

0.0136

0.0551

—0.0373

—0.0149

rZ

*

OLS Regressions
EC0N

3 Month

EC0N 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month

0.0226
AMEX 6 Month (day)

0.0911

0.0535
0.0146

—0.0928 —0.0663
0.0310
0.1035

1.60

22

—0.64

0.39

AMEX 6 Month (Month) 0.0449
0.0142

—0.0931 —0.0279
0.0305
0.0996

1.91

22

0.22

0.37

Indirect Regression: f(t) — s(t+1) = a + b C s(t) — sit))
dusty
a

1981-04

h

OW

OF t:b0

r2

SUR Regression

Asyutotic se's
Bootstrap se's
OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

SEE INDIRECT REGRESSION IN TABLE 7A

ECON 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month
AMEX 6 Month {day)

AMEX 6 Month (Month)

* , IS indicate siqnificance at 5% and 1% levels.

rZ corresponds to approxisate F test on all non—intercept paraseters.

TABLE Yb

REGRESSIVE INFuTIg jU

gSEHA5

I Independent variable: ru—siti

Direct Regression of Expected Change: E (s(ttt)] — sit) — E (7111*1 = a + bIt 1t) — sit)
dusty
a
1981—04
bI
STiR Regression

0.0237

Asymptotic

0.0025

se's

015 Regressions

-

ECON 3 Month

0.0003

0.0180
0.0339
0.0060

ECONII 6 Month

0.0130
0.0065

AMEX 6 Month

AMEX

day)

2.54 1E

0.10

0.0611
0.0245

1.10

22

2.50 Xl

0.19

0.0384
0.0264

1.54

IS

1.46

0.06

22

0.21

0.20

0.0279
0.0114

0.0189
0.0311

1.36

22

0.51

0.29

b2

DE

bb2=0

—0.0125

46

—2.39 $

2.42

46

—0.08

0.00

2.92

22

—0.44

0.00

1.94

18

—0.16

0.00

duny
1981—fl

—0.0260

0.0115

sit)
r2

0.0052

—0.0223

—0.0032

0.0387

—0.0600

—0.0240

0.0551

-

—0.0373

—0.0149

0.0226

6 Month (day)

46

1.29

0.0136
ECDNII 6 Month

1.65

0.0076
0.0356

0.0113
ECON 6 Month

0.0259
0.0102

0.0231

a

01.5 Regressions
EC0N 3 Month

0.15

0.0107

Regression of Actual Change: s(t+1) — sit) — E tirir' = a + b2( itt) —

Asymptotic se's

46

r2

0.0050

6 Month (Month) 0.0142

StIR Regression

t:bl:0

0.0150

0.0053

Direct

DF

0.0020

0.0030
ECON 6 Month

OW

0.0911

0.0535
0.0146

—0.0928 —0.0663
0. 0310
0.1035

1.60

22

—0.64

0.39

MEl 6 Month (Month) 0.04-49

—0.0931 —0.0279
0.0305 0.0996

1.91

22

—0.28

0.37

DW

OF

AMEX

0.0142

1direct

Regression: E (slt+l)1 —

s(t+1) = a + b I

a
SLJR

sTt)

— sit) I

dumsy
1981—04

b

t:b=0

r2

Regression

Asymptotic se's
Bootstrap se's
01.5 Regressions
ECON 3 Month

SEE INDIRECT REGRESSION IN TABLE 71

ECOII 6 Month

ECONII 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (day)
AMEX 6 Month (Month)

*

,

1* indicate siqnificance at St and

12

levels.

r2 corresponds to

approximate F test on

all

non—intercept parameters.

TABLE IOa
TESTS OF EXCESSIVE SPECULaTION I Independent variable: fit) —
FORWARD DISCOUNT REGRESSIONS

—

Direct Regression of Actual Change: s(ttl) —

SUR

sit)

a + b2( fit) —

s(t)

sit)
Ouny

a(uk)

Regression

Asyaptotic se's

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

aCsw)

a(ig)

a(ja)

81—84

-0.0409 -0.0299 -0.0189 -0.0171 -0.0066
0.0119

—0.0404

0.0146
ECON 6 Month

a(fr)

—0.0090

0.0209

0.0173

0.0159

0.0199

b2

0.5721

—0.0325 —0.0165 -0.0137 —0.0030

—0.0344

0.0188

0.60

0.58

—2.7917

2.79

24

—2.57 II

0.42

1.59

39

—1.09

0.31

1.76

39

—1.17

0.28

0.0212
0.0308

0.0722
0.0255

0.1250
0.0347

0.0891 —0.0711 —0.8491

AMEX 6 Month (Month) —0.0074
0.0246

0.0118
0.0308

0.0667
0.0255

0.190

0.0890 —0.0629 —0.9163

0.0345

0.0316 0.0233

Indirect Regression: f(t) —

0.14

29

0.0242

0.0024

1.03

2.82

0.0294
0.0678
0.0377

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

59

0.4646
0.7759

0.0316
0.0688
0.0430

0.0239

2.20

.00 $

—0.0725 —0.0621 -0.0688 —0.0478
0.0295
0.0343

—0.0372

0.31

1.1065

-0.1507
0.0377

ECONII 6 Month

59

r2

0.0203

0.0311 0.0269

0.0227

t:b20

0.1801

0.0152

0.0197

OF

DII

s(t1)

a + b( fit) —

0.0315

1.0874

0.0229

0.7766

0.7936

sit)
Duny

SUR Reqressian
Asyaptotic se's
Bootstrap se's

OLS Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

a(fr)

a(wq)

a(sw)

aija)

0.0409
0.0119
0.0115

0.0299
0.0173
0.0176

0.0189
0.0159
0.0171

0.0171
0.0199
0.0219

0.0066
0.0152
0.0176

0.8199
0.5721
0.8652

0.0404
0.0146

0.0325
0.0197

0.0165
0.0188

0.0137
0.0227

0.0038
0.0203

1.0344
1.1065

2.20

59

0.93

0.20

0.0890 0.0725

0.0621
0.0268

0.0683
0.0316

0.0478
0.0294

0.5354
0.7759

2.82

29

0.69

0.64

0.0372 0.1507 —0.0295 —0.0688 —0.0678

3.7917
1.0874

2.79

24

3.49 1*

0.54

0.0209

ECONII 6 Month

OF t;b0

a(uk)

0.0238

0.0311

0.0377

0.0343

0.0430

81—04

0.0377

b

DII

59

1.43

r2
0.03 $

0.95

0.0711
0.0229

1.8491
0.7766

1.59

39

2.38 1*

0.32

0.0315

AMEX 6 Month (Month) 0.0074 1.0118 —0.0667 1.1190 1.0890
0.0246
0.0308 0.0255 0.0345
0.0314

0.0629
0.0233

1.9163
0.7836

1.76

39

2.45 1*

0.30

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

—0.0024 —0.0212 —0.0722 —0.1250• —0.0891
0.0242

I ,

*1

0.0308 0.0255

0.0347

indicate significance at SZ and it levels. $

r2

corresponds to approxiiate F test on all non—intercept para.eters.

TABLE lOb
TESTS OF EXCESSIVE SPECULATION I
SURVEY DATA REGRESSIONS

Direct Regression

al Atua1 Change: s(t+1) —
a(uk)

SUR

Regression

Asyiptotic se's

OLE Regressions
ECON 3 Month

6 Month

ECONIL ó Month

b2( E Cs(t1)1 — sit)
Duny
a(sw)
a(ja)
8114
a +

a(fr)

a(wg)

—0.0303 —0.0251

0.001!
0.0161

0.0032
0.0177

0.0123
0.0134

—0.5211
0.2773

0.0286
0.0205

0.0299
0.0202

0.0376
0.0196

-1.3193
0.4503

—0.0746 —0.0730 —0.0139 —0.0186
0.0224
0.0227
0.0354
0.0342

0.0017
0.0348

—0.5470

—0.0295 —0.0632

0.0123

0.0163

—0.0148 —0.0142
0.0161

ECOM

sit)

Independent variable: E(s(ttl)l—s(t)

0.0148

b2

OW

OF

t:b2:0

59

—1.88

0.05 $

2.34

59

—2.93 1*

0.25

2.72

29

—1.30

0.60

0.4193

r2

0.0199

0.0276

0.0450

24

0.0263

0.0505

—1.28

0.0481

0.31

0.0491

—0.8734
0.6840

2.87

0.0315
0.0101
0.0220

0.0352
0.0263

0.069!
0.0229

0.1033
0.0263

0.0825 —0.0599 —0.7557

1.53

39

—1.64

0.34

AMEX 6 Month (Month) 0.0030
0.0226

0.0295

0.059!

0.0966

0.0774 —0.0590 —0.4932

0.0270

0.0239

1.88

0.0272

0.0285

39

—0.88

0.27

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

Indirect Regression: E (s(t+1)J

- s(t1)

0.0272

a + bCE

Cs(t+1)l -

a(wg)

a(sw)

0.0244

0.0295

0.4598

0.5630

sIt)
Ouny

a(uk)
SUR

Regression

Asyptotic se's
Bootstrap se's
OLE Regressions
ECON 3 Month

ECON 6 Month

ECONI! 6 Month

AMEX 6 Month (Day)

a(ja)

81—84

b

0.0303
0.0123
0.0120

0.0251 —0.001!

0.0134
0.0159

0.2773
0.3386

0.0148

0.0142 —0.0286 -0.0299 —0.0376
0.0148
0.0205 0.0202 0.0196

2.3193

0.0161

0.0746
0.0224

0.0730
0.0227

0.0295
0.0315

0.0263

0.0163
0.0159

0.016!
0.0178

—0.0032 —0.0123
0.0177
0.0195

0.0139

0.0186 —0.0017

0.0354

0.0342

0.0481

1.5470
0.4193

0.0599

1.7557

0.0244

0.4598

6 Month (Month) —0.0030 —0.0285 —0.0591 —0.0966 —0.0774

0.0590

1.4932

0.0285

0.5630

0 0226

0.0270

U 4n.i4r+ c;.,ni:; r.nr. ,e cv '—.4 1

0.0223
0.0239

0.0263
0.0272

0.0285

._

59

t:b:0

r2

5.49 4*
4.49 *4

2.34

59

5.15 *1

0.53

2.72

29

3.69 4*

0.83

24

2.74 *4

0.68

1.53

39

3.82 *4

0.48

1.88

39

2.65 41

0.42

1.8734
0.6840

0.0491

0.0272

0.0263

OF

0.4503

0.0632 —0.0199 —0.0276 —0.0450
0.0505

OW

1.521!

0.0348

—0.0101 —0.0352 —0.0691 —0.1033 —0.0825
0.0220

AMEX

a(fr)

-

-

