                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      LIQUIDITY MERGERS

                                           Heitor Almeida
                                          Murillo Campello
                                           Dirk Hackbarth

                                        Working Paper 16724
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16724


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




We thank Todd Gormley (AFA discussant), Charles Hadlock, Jerry Hoberg, Hernan Ortiz-Molina,
Gordon Phillips, Michael Schill (EFA discussant), Erik Theissen, and an anonymous referee for their
detailed comments and suggestions. Comments from audiences at the 2010 AFA Meetings, the 2010
EFA Meetings, ESMTBerlin, Michigan State University, MIT, Simon Fraser University, University
of British Columbia, University of Mannheim, University of Michigan, University of Utah, and Vienna
University are also appreciated. Lifeng Gu and Fabrício D’Almeida provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello, and Dirk Hackbarth. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity Mergers
Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello, and Dirk Hackbarth
NBER Working Paper No. 16724
January 2011
JEL No. G31,G32,G33,G34

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the interplay between corporate liquidity and asset reallocation opportunities. Our model
shows that financially distressed firms are acquired by liquid firms in their industries even when there
are no operational synergies associated with the merger. We call these transactions “liquidity mergers,”
since their main purpose is to reallocate liquidity to firms that might be otherwise inefficiently terminated.
We show that liquidity mergers are more likely to occur when industry-level asset specificity is high
(i.e., industry-specific rents are high) and firm-level asset specificity is low (industry counterparts
can efficiently operate distressed firms’ assets). We also provide a detailed analysis of firms’ liquidity
policies as a function of real asset reallocation, examining the trade-offs between cash and lines of
credit. The model makes a number of predictions that have not been examined in the literature. Using
a large sample of mergers, we verify the model’s prediction that liquidity-driven acquisitions are more
likely to occur in industries in which assets are industry-specific, but transferable across industry rival
firms. We also verify the prediction that firms are more likely to use credit lines (relative to cash) when
they operate in industries in which liquidity mergers are more frequent.


Heitor Almeida                                        Dirk Hackbarth
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign            University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive, 4037 BIF                      515 East Gregory Drive, 4035 BIF
Champaign, IL, 61820                                  1206 S. Sixth Street
and NBER                                              Champaign, IL 61820
halmeida@illinois.edu                                 dhackbar@uiuc.edu

Murillo Campello
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
4039 BIF
515 East Gregory Drive, MC- 520
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
campello@illinois.edu
1.       Introduction

Existing research argues investment funding is a key determinant of corporate liquidity policies (see,
e.g., Opler et al. (1999), Graham and Harvey (2001), Almeida et al. (2004), and Denis and Sibilikov
(2010)). Given that acquisitions are one of the most important forms of investment, one would expect
that the benefits and costs of asset reallocation would be an important driver of liquidity. However,
this notion has been largely overlooked by the literature on corporate liquidity.
       In this paper, we propose and develop a theoretical link between corporate liquidity policies and
asset reallocation opportunities. Our model explains why a distressed firm might be acquired by a
liquid firm in its industry even when there are no true operational synergies between the firms.1 We
call this type of acquisition a liquidity merger. The model adds to our understanding of liquidity man-
agement by showing how credit lines might dominate alternatives such as cash and ex-post financing
in the funding of acquisitions. In particular, it shows that credit lines can be a particularly attractive
source of liquidity for high net worth, profitable firms.
       The model’s basic argument is as follows. Consider a firm that finds it diﬃcult to raise credit
because it cannot pledge its cash flows to investors. Limited pledgeability can arise from many
sources, including moral hazard, asymmetric information, or private control benefits. In the model,
firm insiders derive a non-pledgeable rent from their ability to manage assets that are industry-specific.
If the firm is hit by a liquidity shock that is larger than its pledgeable value, the firm might not be able
to raise the extra capital it needs even if continuation would be eﬃcient. One option is to liquidate
the distressed firm’s assets at the value that can be captured by industry outsiders (“sell for scrap”).
But if other industry players are able to operate the industry-specific assets (“putting those assets to
uses they were designed for”), an acquisition by a healthy industry rival may dominate liquidation.2
The problem with that alternative is that the acquirer itself may end up facing a similar pledgeability
problem. In particular, outside investors (including those of the acquirer) might be unwilling to finance
the merger since they can only capture the pledgeable portion of the gains associated with the deal.
       How can the industry acquirer overcome this financing problem? To do this, the acquirer needs
a source of funding that can be used at its discretion. The situation resembles the ex-ante liquidity
insurance problem of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997, 1998). In the Holmstrom-Tirole framework, the
firm cannot wait to borrow after a large liquidity shock is realized because at that point external
   1
     By “lack of true operational synergies” we mean that a merger between the firms would not increase their combined
value in the absence of financial distress. We do not imply that mergers do not generate operational synergies, but
simply that they might occur even in the absence of such synergies. See Maksimovic and Phillips (2001) for evidence
on productivity gains arising from mergers.
   2
     Consistent with this notion, Ortiz-Molina and Phillips (2009) find that inside liquidity (provided by buyers inside
the industry) reduces a firm’s cost of capital by more than outside liquidity (provided by firms outside the industry).




                                                           1
investors would be unwilling to provide funds. Instead, the firm needs to contract its financing ex-
ante. The optimal liquidity policy can be implemented either in terms of cash (the firm borrows
more than its ex-ante needs) or with an irrevocable line of credit. A similar logic follows through
in the financing of a liquidity merger. The industry acquirer can overcome investors’ unwillingness
to finance the merger by accessing a discretionary form of financing that does not require investors’
ex-post approval. Liquidity mergers thus emerge as a link between firm financial policies and asset
reallocation opportunities in an industry.3
       Putting our theory in perspective, we model the link between mergers and liquidity policy by em-
bedding the Holmstrom and Tirole (1997, 1998) liquidity demand model in an industry equilibrium
framework that draws on Shleifer and Vishny (1992). Previous research suggests that a practical
problem with lines of credit is that they may become unavailable precisely when the firm most needs
them. However, the industry acquirer is most likely to demand liquidity for an acquisition in states
in which it does not suﬀer a negative liquidity shock of its own. Hence covenants that link line of
credit availability to the firm’s cash flow performance need not restrict the availability of financing to
acquirers. We use this insight to show that lines of credit might dominate cash in financing liquidity-
driven mergers, even when those credit facilities are revocable. In order to use cash to finance future
acquisitions, the acquirer would need to carry large balances from the current period to all future
states of the world. In the presence of a liquidity premium, this policy is costly. Given that cash
flow-based covenants do not restrict the availability of merger financing under the credit line, cash
becomes less desirable as the demand for merger financing increases.4 The model analysis shows how
merger activity may influence whether firms use cash or credit lines in their liquidity management.
The analysis is novel, among other reasons, because it helps reconcile the observed positive correlation
between a firm’s profitability and its use of credit lines in lieu of cash for liquidity management (see
Sufi (2009) and Campello et al. (2010)).
       Our model has several implications that have not yet been examined in the literature. First, it
predicts that liquidity mergers should be more frequent in industries with high asset specificity, but
among firms whose assets are not too firm-specific. We identify these industries empirically based on
two observations. First, we conjecture that industry-specificity is likely to be greater for assets such
as machinery and equipment than for land and buildings. Accordingly, we use the ratio of machinery
and equipment to total firm assets as a proxy for industry asset specificity (“machinery intensity”).
Second, we conjecture that firm-specificity should be inversely related to the degree of activity in
   3
     Industry peers are unique liquidity providers in the Holmstrom-Tirole setup because unlike industry outsiders (e.g.,
buyout groups) their management can capture non-pledgeable income associated with the assets of distressed targets.
   4
     As we discuss below, the credit line reduces liquidity premia since it does not require the firm (nor the lender) to
carry liquidity across time.



                                                           2
asset resale market in a firm’s industry – the higher the use of second-hand capital amongst firms
in an industry, the less firm-specific the capital. To construct a measure of “capital salability” within
an industry, we hand collect data for used and new capital acquisitions from the Bureau of Census’
Economic Census. These data allow us to gauge asset salability through the ratio of used to total (i.e.,
used plus new) fixed capital expenditures by firms in an industry (cf. Almeida and Campello (2007)).
Combining those two observations, we construct our desired measure as the product of “machinery
intensity” and “capital salability.” We call this composite proxy Transferable Assets.
    We then investigate if the ratio of liquidity mergers to the total number of mergers in an industry
is related to asset specificity (Transferable Assets). Using a sample of 1,097 same-industry mergers
drawn from the SDC database between 1980 and 2006, we identify deals as potential liquidity mergers
as those in which the target is arguably close to financial distress. Specifically, we attempt to isolate
targets that have lower interest coverage than the average target, but at the same time have high
profitability (to alleviate concerns that the target firm may be economically distressed). Our tests
include cross-industry regressions that control for characteristics such as industry-wide measures of
financial distress, concentration, and capacity utilization. Consistent with our theory, we find evi-
dence that the likelihood of liquidity mergers is higher when assets are both highly industry-specific
and easily redeployable amongst industry rivals.5
    In addition to our baseline test, we also examine the likelihood of same-industry acquisitions of
distressed targets in the aftermath of a liquidity shock. To do this, we examine the collapse of the junk
bond market in the late 1980s. A number of developments taking place in 1989 eﬀectively meant that
junk-bond issuers lost access to liquidity coming from the corporate bond market – they experienced
an exogenous shock to the supply of credit (see also Lemmon and Roberts (2010)). We study the
patterns of liquidity-driven acquisitions involving the firms that were aﬀected by this pointed liquidity
shock. These additional tests confirm our model’s prediction that, when faced with liquidity shocks,
firms may engage in merger deals in which their assets are transferred towards other firms in their
same industry depending on the level of asset specificity.
    The second model implication that we examine is that firms are more likely to use credit lines for
liquidity management if industry asset-specificity is high, but firm asset-specificity is low (i.e., when
Transferable Assets is high). We use two alternative data sources to test this implication. Our first
sample consists of a large data set of loan initiations drawn from the LPC-DealScan over the 1987—2008
period. The LPC-DealScan data have two potential drawbacks, nonetheless. First, they are largely
based on syndicated loans, thus biased towards large deals (consequently large firms). Second, they do
   5
     We also find that the fraction of liquidity-driven deals in our sample of intra-industry mergers is significantly higher
than the fraction of liquidity-driven deals in a sample of inter-industry mergers. This finding supports our contention
that industry firms are natural suppliers of liquidity for distressed rivals.



                                                             3
not reveal the extent to which existing lines have been used (drawdowns). To overcome these issues,
we also use an alternative sample that contains detailed information on the credit lines initiated and
used by a random sample of 300 firms between 1996 and 2003. These data are drawn from Sufi (2009).
       We measure the use of credit lines in corporate liquidity management by computing the ratio of
available credit lines to available credit lines plus cash holdings. Our panel regressions show that firms
are more likely to use credit lines in their liquidity management (relative to cash holdings) if they
operate in industries with specific but transferable assets. This result is statistically and economically
significant. For example, when using Sufi’s (2009) sample we find that a one-standard deviation in-
crease in Transferable Assets increases the ratio of credit lines to total liquidity by 0.10, approximately
20% of the mean value of this ratio. This result is consistent with the model’s implication that lines
of credit are an attractive way to finance growth opportunities such as liquidity-driven acquisitions.6
       Existing survey evidence suggests that lines of credit are not only used for liquidity management,
but also to fund real operations (see Campello et al. (2010)). CFOs also indicate that credit lines are
used to finance growth opportunities (such as acquisitions), while cash is used to withstand negative
liquidity shocks (Lins et al. (2010)). To our knowledge, this is the first paper that theoretically recon-
ciles real-world managers’ view that cash and lines of credit are used for diﬀerent purposes. A recent
paper by Gabudean (2007) analyzes the interplay among rivals’ cash policies in a Shleifer-Vishny
industry equilibrium, but it does not examine liquidity mergers nor the trade-oﬀ between cash and
credit lines. Asvanunt et al. (2007) show that cash holdings may be dominated by an adequately de-
signed line of credit policy. Our paper, however, is the first to model the role of alternative liquidity
instruments in the financing of acquisitions.7
       Recent empirical papers examine the eﬀect of excess cash on acquisitions (e.g., Harford (1999),
Dittmar and Mahrt-Smith (2007), and Harford et al. (2008)). While their evidence also motivates
our analysis, we focus on the opposite direction of causality. Namely, we model how the anticipation
of acquisition opportunities aﬀects corporate liquidity policy. In this sense, our paper is closer to
Harford et al. (2009), who look at how deviations from target leverage aﬀect whether acquisitions are
financed with debt or equity. The key diﬀerence is that we focus on liquidity policy variables rather
than leverage ratios. Our paper is also related to previous studies that analyze conglomerate mergers
as a way of dealing with the target’s inability to raise external funds (e.g., Hubbard and Palia (1999),
Fluck and Lynch (1999), Inderst and Mueller (2003)).8 One distinguishing feature of our merger
   6
     We further discuss aggregate statistics and anecdotal evidence supporting our model’s intuition that lines of credit
are frequently used in the real-world to finance liquidity mergers.
   7
     Maksimovic (1990) shows that credit lines can boost a firm’s competitive position in an imperfectly competitive
industry, but the author does not analyze the trade-oﬀ between cash and credit lines.
   8
     Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) consider an alternative neoclassical model of conglomerate mergers that rely on
productivity gains rather than financing frictions.



                                                           4
model is that it pertains to within-industry acquisitions, as opposed to diversifying mergers. On a
more theoretical level, we note that in prior models mergers help mitigate the friction that generates
the target’s financial distress and increase the target’s external financing capacity.9 However, it is not
the case that the acquirer directly supplies liquidity to the target as in our model, nor there is a clear
role for the acquirer’s liquidity policy.
      The model we propose is novel in showing that acquirers from inside the industry are unique
in turning around distressed assets. In particular, managers of rival firms are special in that their
expertise allows them to extract asset-specific benefits from assets commonly used in their industry
(“transferable assets”). Those agents may both gainfully operate distressed assets in the industry and
bring to the table the funds needed to remedy liquidity shocks; funds that are made available immedi-
ately by virtue of pre-committed financing arrangements. In this way, credit line-financed rivals have
the necessary liquidity and ability to turn around distressed firms – they are unique in implementing
a liquidity merger. Our model and empirics contribute to the literature by characterizing a situation
in which liquidity constraints are resolved by a well-characterized combination of financial contracting
and human capital expertise.
      Finally, while the link between liquidity mergers and credit lines underlies our analysis, we stress
that a central contribution of our work is to demonstrate the more general idea that credit lines are
an eﬀective way to transfer liquidity across states. Our point about credit lines is that they are a
particularly eﬀective way to finance investment opportunities that arrive in good states of the world,
and for which the firm needs internal liquidity. While a “liquidity merger” strikes us as an interesting,
practical example of such investments, it is certainly not the only one. Notably, however, it would be
more diﬃcult to test the model’s predictions by looking at general investment items, such as capital
expenditures. This is so because it is diﬃcult to empirically isolate capital expenses that satisfy the
model’s conditions for a credit line to be an eﬀective liquidity management tool (e.g., they need to
arrive in good states of the world and strictly require internal liquidity). Similarly, the key economic
insight behind the liquidity merger story is the advantage that the industry acquirer has in liquidity
provision to distressed rivals. Whether the acquirer can supply liquidity to distressed firms depends
on whether the acquirer has enough committed liquidity to draw on, and not on whether the liquidity
comes strictly from credit lines.
      In the next section we develop the benchmark model of liquidity demand and liquidity mergers.
We do so under a security-design framework in which firms choose their optimal liquidity demand (at
first) without any implementation constraints. The implementation of optimal liquidity using cash
and credit lines is discussed in Section 3. Section 4 introduces a number of extensions to the basic
  9
      Stein (2003) calls this argument the “more money eﬀect.”



                                                          5
model. Section 5 discusses the model’s main empirical implications. The model’s predictions are
tested in Section 6. Section 7 concludes the paper. All proofs are placed in the Appendix.


2.      A model of liquidity mergers and liquidity demand

We start from Holmstrom and Tirole’s (1997, 1998) model of corporate liquidity demand, and embed
the firm’s liquidity optimization problem in an industry equilibrium that follows Shleifer and Vishny
(1992). While these two theoretical pieces are well known, their insights have not been brought up
together as a way to rationalize firm liquidity policy as a function of merger activity.

2.1.     Basic framework

Consider an industry with two firms, which we call H and L.10 There are three dates, and no discount-
ing. Both firms have an investment opportunity of fixed size I at date 0. The firms diﬀer according to
their date-0 wealth, A. Firm H is a high wealth firm, so that AH > AL . The investment opportunity
also requires an additional investment at date 1, of uncertain size. This additional investment repre-
sents the firms’ liquidity need at date 1. We assume that the date 1 investment can be either equal to
ρ, with probability λ, or 0, with probability (1−λ). For now, we take that the investment need is i.i.d.
across firms, that is, the probability that firm H draws ρ is independent of whether firm L draws ρ or
0. We refer to states using probabilities. So, for example, state λ2 is the state in which both firms have
date 1 investment needs. For convention, we let λ(1 − λ) be the state in which only firm H has a liq-
uidity need for investment, and (1−λ)λ be the state in which only firm L has a date 1 liquidity need.11
      A firm will only continue its date 0 investment until date 2 if it can meet the date 1 liquidity need.
If the firm continues, the investment produces a date-2 cash flow R which obtains with probability
p. With probability 1 − p the investment produces nothing. The probability of success depends on
the input of specific human capital by the firms’ managers. If the managers exert high eﬀort, the
probability of success is equal to pG . If eﬀort is low, the probability of success is lower, equal to pB ;
however, managers consume a private benefit equal to B. Because of the private benefit, managers
must keep a high enough stake in the project to induce eﬀort. We assume that the investment is
negative NPV if the managers do not exert eﬀort, implying the following incentive constraint:

                                         pG RM   ≥ pB RM + B, or                                         (1)
                                                    B
                                           RM    ≥     ,
                                                   ∆p
 10
    In Section 4 we consider an extension in which there are many firms of each type.
 11
    In Section 4 we consider, among other extensions, positively correlated investment needs and continuously
distributed liquidity shocks.




                                                      6
where RM is the managers’ compensation and ∆p = pG −pB . This moral hazard problem implies that
the firms’ cash flows cannot be pledged in their entirety to outside investors. Following Holmstrom
and Tirole, we define:
                                                        B
                                        ρ0 ≡ pG (R −       ) < ρ1 ≡ pG R.                                        (2)
                                                        ∆p
The parameter ρ0 represents the investment’s pledgeable income, and ρ1 its total expected payoﬀ.
Using moral hazard to generate limited pledgeability greatly improves the model’s tractability. How-
ever, we stress that this interpretation does not need to be taken literally. For example, our model’s
central results would carry through if limited pledgeability was generated by information frictions
between firm insiders and outside investors.
       If the firm cannot meet the liquidity need, it is liquidated generating an exogenous payoﬀ that
does not rely on industry-specific managerial human capital (and thus is fully pledgeable to outside
investors). We let this liquidation value be equal to τ < I. In the current model, liquidation should be
interpreted as the value of the firm’s assets to an “outsider,” that is, an investor who does not possess
industry-specific human capital. The higher the τ , the lower is the industry-specificity of the firm’s
assets. We assume that the project is positive NPV, even if it needs to be liquidated in state (1 − λ):

                                          U = (1 − λ)ρ1 + λτ − I > 0.                                            (3)

       In lieu of liquidation, a firm that cannot meet its liquidity need can try to sell its assets to another
firm in the industry. Since managers of other industry firms have industry-specific human capital,
they may be able to generate higher value from the assets. However, because human capital may have
a firm-specific component, industry managers are not perfect substitutes for each other. We assume
that an industry manager can produce a cash flow R − pδG by operating the assets of another industry
firm.12 The parameter δ captures the extent to which industry assets are firm-specific. For simplicity,
we assume that the buyer of the assets always makes a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to the distressed seller,
meaning that the transaction price is always equal to the seller’s outside option (τ ).13

                                            Figure 1 About Here

       Figure 1 shows the model’s time line and summarizes the sequence of actions from the perspective
of firm H. The figure also includes the realizations of liquidity shocks aﬀecting firm L to show how
the actions of firm H depend on whether firm L is in distress. To simplify the tree, we assume that
firm H will only bid for firm L in the state in which firm H does not have to finance its own liquidity
shock (i.e., state (1 − λ)). As we show below, this is a natural outcome of the model. In addition, the
  12
     The probability of success and the private benefit are assumed to be the same as in the original firm. Thus, the
asset generates date-1 pledgeable income equal to ρ0 − δ if it is reallocated across firms.
  13
     In Section 4 we discuss the more general case in which the seller also has some bargaining power.


                                                         7
tree incorporates the fact that managers must exert high eﬀort on the equilibrium path and hence
the probability of success at date 2 is always equal to pG .

2.1.1.   Assumptions about pledgeability and net worth

We make the following assumptions about the model parameters:

                                             ρ0 < ρ < ρ1 − τ .                                      (4)

Given that a liquidity shock occurs, the net benefit of continuation is ρ1 − τ . This assumption means
that it is optimal for the firms to withstand the liquidity shock, but that date-1 pledgeable income
is not suﬃcient to finance the shock. The model becomes trivial if this assumption does not hold, in
that firms will generally not need liquidity insurance (if ρ0 ≥ ρ), or that it will never be optimal to
survive a liquidity shock or to bid for the other industry firm (if ρ ≥ ρ1 − τ ).
   We make the following assumption about AL :

                                  ρ0 − λρ < I − AL ≤ (1 − λ)ρ0 + λτ .                               (5)

This implies that firm L does not have enough pledgeable income to be able to meet the liquidity need
ρ in state λ. However, if firm L is liquidated in state λ, it generates total expected date 0 pledgeable
income of (1−λ)ρ0 +λτ , which by (5) is larger than I −AL . This assumption allows us to focus on the
most interesting case in which firm L invests at date 0 and may become a target for firm H at date 1.
   In this three-period model, the firm’s “wealth level” A is a quantity that summarizes the firm’s re-
cent history, in particular the cumulative eﬀects of past cash flow innovations. Assumption 5 captures
the possibility that some industry firms may have, at some point in time, low enough accumulated
wealth that they cannot fund future liquidity shocks on their own. Despite having low liquidity,
firms of type L retain profitable investment opportunities. Specifically, condition 4 says that firm L’s
assets produce greater value under continuation (ρ1 − ρ) than liquidation (τ ). Thus, firm L faces the
potential of financial distress if a liquidity shock hits at date 1.
   We make the following assumption about AH :

            ρ0 − 2λρ − λ [τ − (ρ0 − δ)] < I − AH ≤ ρ0 − λρ − (1 − λ)λ [ρ + τ − (ρ0 − δ)] .          (6)

This assumption ensures that firm H has enough pledgeable income to withstand the liquidity shock
and also bid for firm L in the case firm L is in distress. However, pledgeable income is enough to
finance H’s bid only in the event that H itself does not have a liquidity need in date 1. The role of
this assumption will become clearer below. It captures the idea that firm H will be most likely to bid
for L if its internal liquidity is high, which will happen in the case that H does not suﬀer a liquidity
shock. Clearly, if firm H never has enough pledgeable income to to bid for firm L there will be no
interactions among firms in the model.

                                                     8
2.1.2.      External financing and liquidity insurance

Firms raise funds from external investors to finance the date-0 investment I, the date-1 investment
ρ (when it is required), and also the bid for other industry firms that might become distressed.
Throughout, we make the usual assumption that contracts are structured such that investors break
even from the perspective of date 0.
       In order to characterize the best possible financial contract that firms can get, we first take a
security-design approach. Specifically, we assume that firms can write state-contingent contracts with
external investors that specify the amount of payments that are made in each state of the world at
date 1 and date 2. In Section 3, we will implement this optimal contract using real-world securities
(such as cash and credit lines). This solution method helps highlight the trade-oﬀ between cash and
credit lines by comparing them against a benchmark of perfect state-contingent contracts.
       In addition to date-1 payments, the optimal date-0 contract specifies the amount of external fi-
nance that firms raise at date 0, and the promised payment in case of success at date 2 (which happens
with probability pG ). We denote the contractual amounts by (K0 , K1,s , K2,s ), where s denotes the
state of nature that realizes at date 1 (for example, λ(1 − λ)).14
       These contractual amounts must satisfy feasibility and pledgeability constraints. For each firm
j we must have that K0 ≥ I − Aj , so that firms have enough funds to start their projects. The
constraints that K1,s must meet depend on the investment strategy that firms wish to implement at
date 1. For example, in order for firms to withstand the liquidity shock in state λ it must be the
case that K1,λ ≥ ρ. For a firm to be able to bid for the other firm in state (1 − λ)λ, we must have
K1,(1−λ)λ ≥ ρ + τ , so that the acquirer can cover the target’s liquidity shock and liquidation option.
The date-2 promised payments must obey the pledgeability constraints. In states in which a firm
                                                                                            B
continues but does not acquire other assets, we must have −K2,s ≤ R −                       ∆p   (or −pG K2,s ≤ ρ0 ). If
a firm acquires the other one in state (1 − λ)λ, we must have −pG K2,(1−λ)λ ≤ 2ρ0 − δ. Finally, the
payments (K0 , K1,s , K2,s ) must be set such that investors break even from the perspective of date 0.

2.2.      Equilibria

In equilibrium, firms choose their optimal investment and financing policies taking into account the
optimal actions of the other firm. The model generates two diﬀerent equilibria, depending on whether
a liquidity merger is profitable or not. The liquidity merger is not profitable if:

                                                     ρ1 − δ < ρ + τ .                                                    (7)
  14
    Since firms produce zero cash flows in case of failure at date 2, the realization of uncertainty at date 2 is irrelevant.
Firms promise payments out of date-2 cash flows, which are made only in the case of success.




                                                             9
Firm H can generate a date-1 expected payoﬀ of ρ1 − δ by operating the assets of firm L. However,
the merger requires firm H to cover L’s liquidity shock and compensate L’s investors, which involves
an investment of ρ + τ . By the same logic, the liquidity merger is profitable if:15

                                                   ρ1 − δ ≥ ρ + τ .                                                    (8)

    We prove the following proposition in Appendix A:

Proposition 1 Under state-contingent contracting, the model generates the following equilibria:

    • If condition 7 holds, then the model’s unique equilibrium is one in which firm L is liquidated in
      state λ, and continues its project otherwise. Firm H always continues, and there is no liquidity
      merger. These equilibrium strategies can be supported by the following state-contingent financial
                                                                                                               ρ0
      policies. For firm L, K0L = I − AL , −K1,λ
                                             L = τ , KL                  L
                                                      1,(1−λ) = 0, and −K2,(1−λ) ≤                             pG ,   such
      that investors break even at date 0. For firm H,             K0H   = I − AH ,    H
                                                                                      K1,λ   = ρ,    H
                                                                                                    K1,(1−λ)   = 0, and
                ρ0
      −K2 ≤     pG ,   such that investors break even at date 0.
    • If condition 8 holds, the model’s unique equilibrium involves a liquidity merger in state (1 − λ)λ,
      in which firm H acquires firm L. Firm L is liquidated in state λ2 , is acquired by firm H in state
      (1 − λ)λ, and continues its project otherwise. Firm H always continues its project. Firm L’s
      policy is identical to the one above. Firm H’s policy is K0H = I−AH , K1,λ
                                                                             H = ρ, K H
                                                                                     1,(1−λ)λ = ρ+τ ,
       H              H                  2ρ0 −δ         H            H       ∗               ρ0
      K1,(1−λ)2 = 0,−K2,(1−λ)λ ≤           pG ,   and −K2,(1−λ)2 = −K2,λ = −K2 ≤             pG ,   such that investors
      break even at date 0.

    It is interesting to discuss this result focusing on firm L first. By condition 5, firm L does not
have enough pledgeable income to withstand the liquidity shock when it occurs at date 1. In addition,
the assumption that firm H (the potential acquirer) has all the bargaining power in the event of a
merger ensures that firm L’s payoﬀ is independent of firm H’s policies (firm L’s payoﬀ is always equal
to τ in state λ). Thus, firm L’s policy is unchanged across the diﬀerent equilibria. It simply entails
borrowing enough funds to start the project, and then using pledgeable future cash flows to repay
external investors.
    Firm H’s optimal policies, in turn, will depend on the level of industry- and firm-specificity. The
equilibrium with no liquidity merger is more likely to hold when industry specificity is low (τ is high),
or firm specificity is high (δ is low). In this equilibrium, firm H’s optimal investment policy is to
   15
      Under this condition, firm L’s fundamental value (conditional on the liquidity shock) is ρ1 − δ − ρ. The assumption
that firm H can make a take-it-or-leave it oﬀer to firm L ensures that H can purchase firm L at a price (τ ) that is
lower than the fundamental value. As we discuss later (see Section 4.5), the key assumption for the model’s logic to
go through is that firm L’s price is lower than the fundamental value, though firm L can also capture part of the gains
from the liquidity merger.


                                                           10
start its own project at date 0 and reinvest ρ in state λ at date 1 (so that it continues until the final
date). In order to support this policy, firm H borrows suﬃcient funds to start the project at date 0
(K0H = I − AH ) and receives an additional payment of ρ from external investors in state λ (K1,λ
                                                                                             H = ρ).

It promises a date-2 payment K2 (in both states), so that investors break even.
   If condition 8 holds, it becomes optimal for firm H to bid for firm L in state (1−λ)λ, provided that
it has enough liquidity in that state. In addition, firm H must have enough liquidity to withstand its
                                                                H = ρ and K H
own liquidity shock in state λ. This equilibrium requires that K1,λ        1,(1−λ)λ = ρ + τ . Notice
also that since H is acquiring L, as long as ρ0 − δ > 0 its pledgeable income will increase in state
(1−λ)λ. Thus, it can repay up to 2ρ0 −δ in that state. The assumption in equation 6 guarantees that H
can finance both its own liquidity shock and the liquidity merger. Finally, equation 6 also implies that
H cannot finance the liquidity merger in state λ2 (when it needs to finance its own liquidity shock).
   For future reference, the date-0 expected payoﬀs in the equilibrium with no liquidity merger are:

                                   N
                                  UH    = (1 − λ)ρ1 + λ(ρ1 − ρ) − I                                  (9)
                                   UL = (1 − λ)ρ1 + λτ − I.

                            N and U are positive, so both firms invest at date 0.
By conditions 3 and 4 both UH      L

   The date-0 expected payoﬀs in the liquidity merger equilibrium are:

                   M
                  UH     = (1 − λ)2 ρ1 + (1 − λ)λ(2ρ1 − ρ − δ − τ ) + λ(ρ1 − ρ) − I                 (10)
                   UL = (1 − λ)ρ1 + λτ − I.

Firm H’s expected payoﬀ is higher in equation 10 than in equation 9. This happens because H
captures the gains from the merger. At the same time, L’s expected payoﬀ does not change.
   It is important to stress that our model implies that industry counterparts are in a unique position
to acquire and operate distressed assets because they can capture non-pledgeable income associated
with those assets (non-pledgeable income is represented by ρ1 − δ − ρ0 in the model above). Other
pure-liquidity providers would not be able to extract the same private gains from the assets. Having a
buyout group acquiring the firm and re-hiring the manager would change the players, but not solve the
problem since the maximum payoﬀ of the acquisition for the buyout group in that case would be equal
to ρ0 (the firm’s pledgeable income under the incumbent management, which is lower than the required
investment ρ + τ ). A buyout group is similar to other liquidity providers in that they, too, would need
to give the incumbent manager of the distressed firm a share of the surplus that pays for his private
benefits (to keep incentives in line). Those benefits are associated with unpledgeable expertise. The
only providers of liquidity that can take over distressed assets and extract asset-specific benefits are
the managers of other similar firms. Our model is unique in characterizing this motivation for mergers.

                                                   11
   Naturally, in order for a liquidity merger to be feasible, the acquirer (firm H) must be able to
implement the state-contingent financial policy that is suggested by Proposition 1. We examine this
issue in turn.

2.3.   Main features of the optimal financial policy

Before implementing the financial policies that support each of the above equilibria, it is worth dis-
cussing their main features. In particular, while firm L’s financial policy is simple (it involves only
raising funds to finance the initial investment), firm H’s financial policy involves state-contingent
transfers from external investors to fund the liquidity shock and the bid for firm L.
   The key economic feature of these transfers is that they must involve some degree of pre-commitment
from external investors. Investors will generally not find it optimal to provide suﬃcient date-1 financ-
ing for the firm after the liquidity need is realized. In order to insure it has enough liquidity, firm H
must gain access to a source of funds that does not require ex-post approval from external investors
in good states of the world.
   To see this, consider first the equilibrium with no liquidity mergers. The optimal policy in Propo-
                                                            H = ρ. Notice that this infusion of cash
sition 1 involves a liquidity infusion in state λ equal to K1,λ
is greater than the firm’s pledgeable income in state λ, which is equal to ρ0 (by condition 4). Thus,
the firm will only be able to withstand the liquidity shock if it can access a pre-contracted amount
of financing greater than or equal to ρ. This financing can come, for example, from cash holdings
(which the firm puts aside in date 0 and retains until date 1). Or it can come from a credit line. In
either case, this liquidity injection generates a loss of ρ − ρ0 for external investors. To compensate
external investors for this loss, the optimal contract includes a net positive payment from the firm
to investors in state (1 − λ), i.e., the state with no liquidity shock. If that state obtains, the firm
                                    H
receives zero transfers at date 1, K1,(1−λ) = 0, but repays a positive amount to investors in date 2,
 H
K2,(1−λ) = K2 . In other words, the optimal contract specifies a transfer of financing capacity from
state (1 − λ), where it is not needed, to state λ, where it is crucial.
   A similar intuition holds for the liquidity merger equilibrium. The optimal policy involves liquid-
                        H = ρ and K H
ity transfers equal to K1,λ        1,(1−λ)λ = ρ + τ . As in the other equilibrium, the firm needs
pre-committed financing in state λ to finance its own liquidity shock, since ρ > ρ0 . In state (1 − λ)λ,
the pledgeable income generated by the acquisition of firm L is equal to ρ0 − δ. Clearly, this is lower
than the investment that firm H needs to make in that state, which is equal to ρ + τ . However, notice
that firm H also has pledgeable income equal to ρ0 in state (1 − λ)λ, which it can use to fund the
acquisition of firm L as well. This means that H needs pre-committed financing to acquire L when:

                                            2ρ0 − δ < ρ + τ .                                       (11)

                                                   12
This is a suﬃcient condition for firm H to need pre-committed financing.16 If this inequality holds,
the firm will need to transfer financing capacity into state (1 − λ)λ. As in the analysis above, firm
H compensates external investors for the provision of pre-committed financing by making payments
in states in which such financing is not needed. In particular, in the liquidity merger equilibrium the
firm can pledge the cash flows that are produced in state (1 − λ)2 , in which firm H never needs any
                                                                                              H
liquidity (since neither firm is in distress). The optimal contract achieves this by letting K1,(1−λ)2 = 0

     H
and K2,(1−λ)     ∗
            2 = K2 .

       Finally, notice that a financial contract that provides pre-committed financing is a liquidity in-
surance mechanism for the firm. Essentially, the firm buys liquidity insurance (infusions of liquidity
that generate ex-post losses for external investors), by paying an “insurance premium” in the states
of the world in which liquidity infusions are not needed. This liquidity insurance intuition will also
be useful to understand some of the features of the implementation that we discuss below.


3.       Implementation of the optimal financing policy

In Section 2 we assumed that the firms can perfectly contract on state-contingent financing, subject
only to investor break-even and pledgeability constraints. In this section, we study the implementation
of the equilibrium policies described above with real-world financial instruments.
       As the discussion in Section 2.3 indicates, the optimal financing policy must involve some form
of pre-committed financing, or liquidity insurance. In the real world, there are two main instruments
that firms use to insure their liquidity, namely, cash holdings and bank credit lines. Provided that
cash holdings are under the control of the firm, cash is the simplest form of pre-committed financing.
Credit lines can also play the role of pre-committed financing, provided that they can be made irrev-
ocable (that is, the firm can draw on the credit line even when the bank is not properly compensated
for the risk of the loan).
       Other financing mechanisms, while important for the firm, may not satisfy this pre-committed
feature of the optimal contract. For example, a “debt capacity” strategy of carrying low debt into
the future in the expectation that additional debt can be issued in the event of a liquidity shock may
fail, because debt capacity will dry up precisely in times when the liquidity shock hits. For similar
reasons, post-liquidity-shock equity issuance may fail to provide enough liquidity for the firm.
  16
      As we show in more detail below, whether this condition is also necessary depends on the details of the financial
policy that implements the optimal contract characterized in this section. In particular, condition 11 is necessary only
in the (extreme) case in which firm H is allowed to fully dilute the claims by date-0 external investors. For example,
if firm H enters date 1 with some debt in its capital structure (issued at date 0), then condition 11 presumes that the
firm can issue date-1 debt that is senior to the date-0 debt. Since this is unlikely to be true in reality, firm H is likely
to require pre-committed financing even when 2ρ0 − δ > ρ + τ .




                                                            13
3.1.    Buying liquidity insurance: Cash and credit lines

Our main goal is to propose a trade-oﬀ between cash and credit lines and to show how this trade-oﬀ
depends on the particular industry equilibrium predicted by the model. Before we do so, it is useful
to understand intuitively how the firm can use cash and credit lines to replicate the financial policies
specified in Proposition 1. Full implementation details will be provided in Section 3.2.
   Besides cash and credit lines, to implement the optimal policy the firm will need to issue standard
securities such as debt and equity. For concreteness, we will assume that the firm issues debt, even
though the results are unchanged if we allow the firm to issue equity as well. In addition, we assume
that if the firm issues debt at date 0, this debt is senior to any additional debt that the firm issues at
date 1. While this is a realistic assumption, we also note that the results do not change if we allow
the firm to violate priority at date 1.
   We let D0 represent the face value of the debt that firm H issues at date 0, and D1,s represent
the face value of debt that firm H issues in state s at date 1. In case of success, the firm repays debt
in date 2. For future reference, let D0∗ represent the amount of date 0 debt that firm H needs to issue
to be able to start its own project at date 0:

                                            pG D0∗ = I − AH .                                        (12)

   To implement the optimal policy using cash, the firm borrows more than D0∗ (call this amount of
debt D0C ) and retains the extra funds in the balance sheet. The firm can then use cash to finance the
date 1 liquidity shock and the bid for the other industry firm. Recall that external investors may be
unwilling to contribute cash at date 1 due to limited pledgeability. Thus, the firm must be given the
right to use cash balances at date 1, without requiring investor approval. Finally, the firm uses its
excess liquidity (in states in which cash balances are not required at date 1) to ensure that external
investors break even from the point of view of date 0.
   To implement the optimal policy using a credit line, the firm does not need to borrow more than
D0∗ at the initial date. Instead, it enters a contract with date-0 investors of the following form. It
commits to make a payment equal to x at date 1 in exchange for the right to borrow an amount w
that is lower than a pre-specified amount equal to wmax , in case additional liquidity is needed at date
1. Provided that the date-0 investor cannot revoke the contract at date 1, this contract may allow the
firm to borrow more than its pledgeable income at date 1. The firm compensates the date-0 investor
for this right, by paying the “commitment fee” x in the states in which it does not need additional
liquidity. Such a contract closely resembles a bank-provided credit line, which typically requires the
firm to pay a fee to keep the line open in exchange for the right to borrow up to a pre-specified amount
(the size of the credit facility).

                                                   14
3.2.      The trade-oﬀ between cash and credit lines

To clarify the trade-oﬀ between cash and credit lines, we start by assuming that the firm can only
use one of the instruments in isolation. In Section 4.1 we allow the firm to use both instruments and
show when the firm can benefit from using cash and lines of credit simultaneously.

3.2.1.      Cash policy

As the discussion in Section 3.1 suggests, cash implementation requires the firm to carry cash balances
across time. Existing evidence suggests that carrying cash is costly for the firm, for example because
of the existence of a liquidity premium. Consistent with this argument, most theoretical papers on
cash policy assume a (deadweight) cost of carrying cash across time (see, e.g., Kim et al. (1998) and
Almeida et al. (2009)). In our model, we capture the cost of carrying cash by assuming that the firm
loses a fraction ξ of every dollar of cash that is carried across dates. For example, if the firm saves C
dollars at date 0, then only (1 − ξ) C is available to finance investments at date 1.
      To see how the cash implementation works, consider first the equilibrium without the liquidity
merger. That is, assume that condition 7 holds. In this case, the optimal financial policy in state λ
                                       H = ρ, which allows firm H to finance the liquidity shock. To
involves a transfer from investors of K1,λ
implement this policy using cash, notice that for a given amount of debt D0C issued at date 0, and
given the seniority assumption, the firm has additional debt capacity equal to ρ0 − pG D0c at date 1.
To survive the liquidity shock in state λ, the firm must thus save the following amount of cash:

                                             (1 − ξ) C + ρ0 − pG D0C = ρ.                                         (13)

      The firm raises the cash at date 0 by borrowing I − AH + C, and returns cash to investors at date
1 in state (1 − λ). Because of the cost of carrying cash, the firm can only return (1 − ξ)C to investors
in that state. Finally, the firm repays D0C in case of success at date 2. The date-0 investor break-even
constraint becomes:
                                     pG D0C + (1 − λ)(1 − ξ)C = I − AH + C.                                       (14)

Finally, the pledgeability constraint requires that pG D0C ≤ ρ0 .
      As we show in Appendix B, if ξ = 0 we obtain the same solution as in Proposition 1. As ξ
increases, cash implementation may no longer be feasible.17 Even if cash implementation is feasible,
the cost of carrying cash implies a reduction in the firm’s payoﬀ. In the appendix, we derive an exact
solution for the optimal amount of cash C that the firm needs to hold if it does not need to finance
the merger and the condition under which holding this cash level is feasible.
 17
      That is, we may not find a value D0C that satisfies both equation 14 and the condition that pG D0C ≤ ρ0 .



                                                            15
   Let us consider now the liquidity merger equilibrium. The crucial change in the optimal financial
policy of Proposition 1 is that firm H must also finance the bid for firm L in state (1 − λ)λ, that is,
 H
K1,(1−λ)λ = ρ + τ . If we let C M denote the amount of cash that firm must hold in the liquidity merger
equilibrium and D0M the associated date-0 debt issuance, financing the liquidity merger equilibrium
with cash requires firm H to finance both its own liquidity shock and also the bid for firm L.
   In the appendix, we show that as long as the firm requires some amount of pre-committed financing
to fund the liquidity merger, it must save more cash in the liquidity merger equilibrium (C M > C). As
discussed above (equation 11), firm H may not need pre-committed financing to finance the acquisition
of firm L since it can use both its pledgeable income and the pledgeable income from the acquisition
to finance the bid (a total of 2ρ0 − δ). In addition to the bid, the firm needs to repay date-0 debt.
Therefore it will need pre-committed financing as long as:

                                       2ρ0 − δ − pG D0C < ρ + τ ,                                    (15)

where D0C is the amount of debt that allows the firm to carry cash balances equal to C (the minimum
amount required to fund the liquidity shock). If condition 15 holds, the firm will need to use cash
holdings to finance the liquidity merger and will return less cash to investors in state (1−λ). Investors
will then require additional compensation to finance the firm at date 0 (that is, D0M > D0C ). Accord-
ingly, the firm must save additional cash to survive the liquidity shock in state λ. In equilibrium, we
must then have C M > C as well.
   We summarize the results of this section in the following proposition (see proof in Appendix B):

Proposition 2 Let C represent the optimal cash balance in the case in which condition 7 holds, such
that the liquidity merger is not profitable, and C M represent the optimal cash balance when 8 holds,
such that the liquidity merger is profitable. It follows that C M ≥ C, with strict inequality if condition
15 holds. In addition, let ξ max                                                           max
                             NM be the maximum cost of cash such that C is feasible, and ξ M   the
maximum cost that allows C M to be feasible. It follows that ξ max    max
                                                               NM ≥ ξ M , with strict inequality if
condition 15 holds. Finally, firm H’s payoﬀ is:

                                            NC    N
                                           UH  = UH − ξC,                                            (16)

in the equilibrium with no liquidity mergers if ξ ≤ ξ max       NC             max
                                                      NM , and UH = 0 if ξ > ξ NM . In the equilibrium
with liquidity mergers, the firm’s payoﬀ is:

                                           MC    M
                                          UH  = UH − ξC M                                            (17)

if ξ ≤ ξ max      MC = 0 if ξ > ξ max . U N and U M are given, respectively, by equations 9 and 10.
         M , and UH               M      H       H



                                                   16
3.2.2.    Lines of credit

The advantage of a credit line relative to cash is that it does not require the firm to hoard internal
liquidity. Under credit line implementation, the firm raises pre-committed financing only in the states
in which such financing is needed, conditional on the realization of the liquidity need. Thus, the credit
line economizes on the liquidity cost ξ. For the firm, the cost of opening the credit line is that the firm
must compensate the bank by making payments in states of the world in which the credit line is not
used. As shown by Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) and Tirole (2006), the credit line can be structured
as an “actuarially fair” contract, such that the expected payments from the firm to the bank are equal
to zero. The main reason for this result is that credit line contracts allow the bank to operate as a “liq-
uidity pool” that uses the payments coming from liquid firms to fund credit line drawdowns from firms
that need additional liquidity.18 In particular, since the bank can fund credit line drawdowns using
payments from liquid firms, the bank does not need to carry liquid funds in its balance sheet over time.
In the appendix, we show that under the assumptions of our model, a financial intermediary such as a
bank can indeed pool liquidity in an eﬃcient way, and provide credit lines at an actuarially fair cost.19
    The line of credit implementation relies on a commitment by the external investor (e.g., the bank)
who provides the line to the firm. Existing empirical evidence, however, suggests that credit lines
are not perfectly irrevocable. Sufi (2009) finds that if firms’ cash flows deteriorate, the firm’s access
to credit lines is restricted through loan covenants. This result suggests that the firm might not be
able to rely on credit lines to provide liquidity insurance in bad states of the world. In terms of our
model, line of credit implementation is most likely to create problems in state λ, in which firm H is
financially distressed. We capture this feature of credit lines by assuming that the outside investor
denies financing in state λ with a probability equal to q ≤ 1.
    While we take the probability q to be exogenous in the solution below, in the appendix we show
that q can be endogenized in a framework in which the probability of the date 1’s liquidity shock is
aﬀected by managerial eﬀort (see Appendix D). In this framework, line of credit revocability gives
incentives for the manager to try to avoid the occurrence of the liquidity shock.
    To illustrate the credit line implementation, we proceed as above by analyzing the case of no
liquidity mergers. Under credit line implementation, the firm does not need to borrow more than
the minimum required to start the project at date 0 (call this debt level D0LC ). If the credit line is
  18
     Acharya et al. (2010) show that exposure to aggregate liquidity risk places a limit on this pooling of liquidity
needs, and increases the cost of credit lines for firms with high aggregate risk exposure. They show that aggregate risk
may be an additional reason why firms use cash instead of credit lines to manage liquidity.
  19
     In order to show this point (which is predicated on the existence of many firms that pool liquidity through the
bank), we use an extension in which there are many firms of both types H and L. We note that the result is independent
of the specific fraction of firms that is of each type.




                                                          17
revoked in state λ the firm is liquidated, and thus the date-0 investor break-even constraint gives:

                                        (1 − λq)pG D0LC + λqτ = I − AH .                                             (18)

       We denote the maximum size of the line in this equilibrium by wmax , and the commitment fee
that the firm pays to the external investor by x. For the firm to survive the liquidity shock in state
λ, the credit line must obey:
                                             wmax + ρ0 − pG D0LC ≥ ρ.                                                (19)

This equation incorporates the firm’s ability to issue new debt at date 1 up to the firm’s date-1
pledgeable income (ρ0 − pG D0LC ). In state (1 − λ), the firm does not use the credit line and pays the
commitment fee x. The commitment fee is set such that the investor breaks even, given the amount
by which the credit line is expected to be used (wmax ):20

                                             λ(1 − q)wmax = (1 − λ)x.                                                (20)

The credit line is feasible as long as the firm has enough pledgeable income to pay the commitment
fee (x ≤ ρ0 − pG D0LC ), which gives:

                                    I − AH + λ(1 − q)ρ ≤ (1 − λq)ρ0 + λqτ .                                          (21)

Equation 21 is implied by condition 6. That is, it is always feasible to use a line of credit to withstand
the liquidity shock. Intuitively, the revocability of the line in state λ increases pledgeability, since the
external investor does not benefit from continuation in that state. The main cost of the credit line
comes from its revocability in state L. The firm’s payoﬀ becomes:

                               NLC
                              UH   = (1 − λ)ρ1 + λ(1 − q)(ρ1 − ρ) + λqτ − I                                          (22)
                                           N
                                        = UH − λq(ρ1 − ρ − τ )

       N is given by equation 9. The term λq(ρ − ρ − τ ) represents the expected loss from the
where UH                                      1
revocability of the credit line.
       Financing the liquidity merger with the credit line adds one constraint to the problem. In state
(1 − λ)λ, firm H must have enough liquidity to finance the bid for firm L. This requires:

                                         LC
                                        wmax + 2ρ0 − pG D0LC − δ ≥ ρ + τ                                             (23)

                                                                   LC that is large enough to ensure
       As we show in the appendix, the firm chooses a credit line wmax
that it has enough liquidity to finance both its own liquidity shock and also the liquidity merger. The
  20
     Notice that this particular formulation assumes that the credit line is paid only in state (1 − λ). This implies that
the interest rate on the drawn portion of the credit line is zero. We note, however, that this formulation is not unique.
It is straightforward (though notationally more cumbersome) to have a positive interest rate on the credit line.


                                                           18
firm finances the credit line by paying the commitment fee in the state in which the credit line is not
used (state (1 − λ)2 ). As in the no-merger equilibrium, the main cost of the credit line is that it can
be revoked in state λ. The firm’s expected payoﬀ becomes:


                                     MLC    M
                                    UH   = UH − λq(ρ1 − ρ − τ ),                                      (24)
       M is given by equation 10.
where UH
   We summarize the results on the credit line implementation in the following proposition (see proof
in Appendix C):

Proposition 3 It is always feasible to use a revocable line of credit to implement ex-ante liquidity
insurance. The amount by which firm H’s payoﬀ is reduced (the expected loss from the revocability of
the credit line, λq(ρ1 − ρ − τ )), is the same both when condition 7 holds, such that the liquidity merger
is not profitable, and when 8 holds, such that the liquidity merger is profitable.

3.2.3.   Choosing between cash and lines of credit

The firm’s choice between cash and credit lines depends on the relative size of the parameters q and ξ.
The main cost of the credit line is the possibility that the line might be revoked in the bad state of the
world, which happens with probability q. While cash holdings can avoid this problem, they require
internal liquidity hoarding whose cost is captured by the parameter ξ. Starting with the equilibrium
with no liquidity mergers, we can show the following intuitive result (see proof in Appendix E):

Proposition 4 Suppose condition 7 holds, such that the liquidity merger is not profitable. There
                                       0
exists a function qNM (ξ), satisfying qN M (ξ) ≥ 0 and qNM (0) = 0, such that if q > qNM (ξ), the firm
prefers cash to lines of credit, and if q < qNM (ξ), the firm prefers lines of credit to cash.

   Figure 2 depicts the function qNM (ξ), and the associated regions in which the firm prefers cash
or credit lines.
                                        Figure 2 About Here

   We can now state one of the main results of the paper (see proof in Appendix F):

Proposition 5 Suppose condition 8 holds, such that the liquidity merger is profitable. There exists a
                             0 (ξ) ≥ 0 and q (0) = 0, such that: (i) if q > q (ξ), the firm prefers cash
function qM (ξ), satisfying qM              M                                M

to lines of credit and if q < qM (ξ), the firm prefers lines of credit to cash; and (ii) qM (ξ) ≥ qNM (ξ).
In other words, the firm is more likely to use lines of credit in the liquidity merger equilibrium.




                                                    19
       Figure 2 depicts qM (ξ), showing that the region under which cash dominates the credit line. This
region shrinks as we move from the equilibrium with no mergers to the equilibrium with mergers. In
Figure 2, the triangle marked as E depicts the parameter region in which the firm would choose cash if
it does not need to finance a liquidity merger, but a line of credit if there is a need to finance the merger.
       This result shows that firms are more likely to use lines of credit in the liquidity-merger equilibrium.
The intuition can be stated as follows. The cost of implementing the optimal liquidity policy with cash
holdings is higher in the equilibrium with liquidity mergers, since firm H must carry more cash in that
equilibrium (C M > C). The higher required cash balance reduces the firm’s payoﬀ and tightens the
feasibility constraint. In contrast, the cost of using a line of credit is the same in the two equilibria,
given that the expected loss from the revocability of the credit line is the same (Proposition 3).
Intuitively, since the increase in liquidity needs is concentrated in good states of nature (those in which
the firm needs to finance a liquidity merger), the revocability of the credit line does not play a role.21
This makes the line of credit a preferred liquidity instrument in the liquidity merger equilibrium.


4.       Extensions

In this section we discuss the role of some of the assumptions that we have made for model tractability.
In some cases, our motivation is to discuss the robustness of the model’s results. In others, extending
the analysis motivates additional implications discussed in Section 5.

4.1.      Combining cash and lines of credit

The analysis above assumes that the firm can use either cash or credit lines to implement ex-ante
liquidity insurance, but not both. Can the firm benefit from having both cash and a credit line at
the same time?
       The first point to note is that such a policy can only benefit the firm in the liquidity merger equi-
librium. Suppose condition 7 holds, such that the liquidity merger is not profitable. If q < qNM (ξ),
the firm prefers lines of credit to cash, despite the excessive liquidation in state λ. However, it is not
profitable for the firm to use cash to decrease the expected loss from revocability, since this would
require the firm to hold an amount of cash equal to C (the same amount that it needs to hold if it
chooses only cash to implement liquidity insurance). Similarly, if q > qNM (ξ), the firm uses cash and
there is no additional benefit to opening a credit line since the firm is never liquidated in state λ.
       If, in contrast, the firm must finance both the liquidity shock and the merger, then there can be a
role for a simultaneous cash/credit line policy. For example, consider the region in which q < qM (ξ),
  21
     In addition, the firm (and the bank, in equilibrium, as show in Appendix I), has enough pledgeable income to fund
this increase in credit line demand without increasing the cost of the line.



                                                         20
such that the firm prefers lines of credit to cash. If it is feasible for the firm to save enough cash to
finance the liquidity shock in state λ, then it might be optimal for the firm to have both cash and a
credit line. We analyze this case in Appendix G. Importantly, we show that allowing for the possibility
of a joint policy does not change the conclusion that the firm is more likely to use lines of credit in the
liquidity merger equilibrium. This implication could become ambiguous if the joint policy reduced
the parameter region in which the firm uses credit lines in the liquidity merger equilibrium, relative
to the equilibrium with no mergers (the region in which q < qNM (ξ)). At the same time, we show
that the joint policy cannot be optimal if q < qN M (ξ), even in the equilibrium with liquidity mergers.

4.2.   Continuum of liquidity shocks

We assumed for simplicity that the liquidity shock had a binomial distribution with mass at ρ and
0. In this case, the model’s logic requires firm L not to have any liquidity insurance. If firm L had
enough liquidity to pay for ρ, there would be no liquidity mergers. And if L cannot pay for ρ, there
is no point in saving any liquidity.
   We note that this stark solution is due to the specific binomial assumption that we used. For
example, we could alternatively assume that the liquidity shock ρ is distributed in a range [0, ρmax ].
In this case, a firm’s optimal liquidity policy states the maximum level of the shock that it can with-
stand. That is, a firm i saves enough liquidity to withstand shocks below a certain cutoﬀ ρi , where
i = L, H (see Tirole (2006)). The optimal solution would then have ρL ≤ ρH , given H’s higher wealth
AH . Thus, firm H would be able to withstand a greater range of liquidity shocks, and firm L would
also save some liquidity in equilibrium.
   Importantly, it would still be the case that firm H would be the natural acquirer in a liquidity
merger equilibrium. Its higher initial wealth makes it easier for H to save enough liquidity to bid for
L. Notice also that, since ρL ≤ ρH , firm L is more likely to be financially distressed in equilibrium,
increasing the benefit of liquidity hoarding for firm H. Finally if firm L is to save liquidity, its priority
would be to survive its liquidity shock rather than being able to bid for the other firm (which yields
a lower payoﬀ due to firm specificity).
   This analysis suggests the following conjecture. Since firm L is unlikely to save liquidity for a fu-
ture bid, relatively to firm H it is less likely to demand a line of credit (which is particularly beneficial
for the financing of the merger). While the model above also delivers this implication, it may seem
trivial since firm L does not demand any liquidity (including cash). The analysis here suggests that
if firm L is to demand liquidity, its main goal would be to finance its liquidity shock rather than an
acquisition. Relative to firm H, firm L would be less likely to demand a credit line.




                                                     21
4.3.      Correlation between liquidity shocks

We assumed that the liquidity shocks were uncorrelated across the two firms in the industry. This
assumption raises the incidence of liquidity mergers in the model, since it increases the probability of
the state in which only one of the industry firms has a liquidity shock. If both firms suﬀer a liquidity
shock, then the liquidity merger is less likely since the industry acquirer becomes more financially
constrained.22 However, we note that the model is qualitatively identical if the correlation is positive,
as long as the correlation is less than one. Nothing changes in the model if liquidity mergers are not
profitable, since in this case there is no interaction among firms. If liquidity mergers are profitable,
they are still most likely to happen (1) in the states of the world in which only some industry firms
are financially distressed, (2) among firms with industry but not firm specific assets, and (3) to be
financed by lines of credit.
       In addition, recall that we assumed that firm H did not have enough pledgeable income to bid
for firm L if both firms are hit with liquidity shocks. If this assumption is relaxed, liquidity mergers
would happen even in states of the world in which the entire industry suﬀers a liquidity shock. One
interesting possibility is that in this case the role for joint cash and credit line policies (as discussed
in Section 4.1) should increase, since firm H needs to finance both its own liquidity shock and the
bid for firm L. We conclude that allowing for a positive correlation between liquidity shocks would
make liquidity mergers less common, and possibly more costly to finance. But the main conclusions
of the model would remain the same.

4.4.      Aggregate shocks to pledgeability

We assumed that pledgeability of future cash flows (captured by the parameter ρ0 ) is unchanged
across diﬀerent states of the world in date 1. However, if a firm enters financial distress in times in
which aggregate liquidity is low, it might be more diﬃcult for the firm to raise external financing.
This eﬀect would be at play, for example, if there was an aggregate shock that reduced ρ0 while at
the same time increasing the liquidity shock ρ for all industry firms.
       A correlation between ρ and ρ0 may increase the role for liquidity mergers and liquidity insur-
ance. Notice that the firm’s internal liquidity sources (such as cash holdings and outstanding lines of
credit) are not necessarily aﬀected by the pledgeability shock, since they oﬀer pre-committed sources
of financing. It is interesting to note that there is debate about whether banks renege on their loan
commitments. In the real world, virtually all credit lines have a covenant that gives the bank the right
to revoke the credit facility (the “materially adverse conditions”). Thakor (2005), however, provides
  22
    See Pulvino (1998) for evidence that financial constraints increase the likelihood of asset sales to industry outsiders,
particularly in market downturns when industry insiders are less likely to be viable acquirers.



                                                            22
a theory explaining why banks avoid evoking these clauses too often. By most accounts, the recent
financial crisis is seen as an episode where pledgeability was negatively shocked. At the same time, the
existing evidence suggests that banks have largely honored their pre-crisis lines of credit agreements
(see Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010) and Campello et al. (2010)).
   Thus, the advantage of a liquid industry firm over an outsider can increase in times of aggregate
liquidity shocks. This analysis suggests that if the correlation among industry firms’ liquidity shocks
is caused by an aggregate shock that also aﬀects pledgeability, then the negative eﬀect of correla-
tion on liquidity mergers is mitigated. While within-industry correlation hinders liquidity mergers,
economy-wide liquidity shocks can increase the incidence of liquidity mergers.

4.5.   Bargaining power

We assumed that in the event of a merger, the acquirer (firm H) makes a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to
firm L and thus captures the entire rent from the liquidity merger. Clearly, the model’s logic requires
that firm H has some bargaining power in the event of a merger, or else firm H will not have incentives
to alter its liquidity policy in the anticipation of a future acquisition opportunity. However, as long
as firm H retains some bargaining power the model is qualitatively identical.
   Given the model’s assumptions, firm L would not have incentives to change its liquidity policy
in the event that it captures a fraction of the rents. Since this reduces the costs of financial distress
for firm L, its incentives to manage liquidity are even lower in this case. If firm L also has an active
liquidity management policy (see, e.g., Section 4.2), then more interesting interactions can arise. For
example, L’s incentives to save cash to withstand the liquidity shock would generally decrease as it
captures a greater fraction of the rent. This eﬀect can also change H’s liquidity policy, since it aﬀects
the probability that firm L is distressed and that a liquidity merger might occur. Our model’s main
conclusions, however, would still carry through.

4.6.   Multi-firm setting

The industry in our benchmark model is composed of one firm of each type (L and H). In this sim-
plified structure, firm H can acquire firm L whenever H has enough liquidity, and L faces a liquidity
shock (state (1 − λ)λ). One concern is whether the model’s results generalize to a multi-firm setting,
in which the probability of a liquidity merger can depend on the number of potential targets and
acquirers. This section extends our analysis to an industry with multiple firms of both types.
   We assume that the fraction of high wealth firms (H firms) in the population is given by the
parameter μ. We maintain the model’s assumptions about pledgeability and net worth (assumptions
4, 5, and 6). Under the assumption of idiosyncratic liquidity shocks, there will now be μ(1 − λ) firms



                                                   23
of type H that do not have a liquidity shock (the potential acquirers), and (1 − μ)λ firms of type L
that have a liquidity shock and need a liquidity infusion.
   We assume that the number of potential acquirers is significantly greater than the number of
distressed firms that require a liquidity infusion. Specifically, we have:

                                           (1 − μ) < μ(1 − λ).                                         (25)

This condition captures the notion that the probability of true financial distress is likely to be low, and
thus the number of potential targets should not be too high. Notice that this condition will be obeyed
when μ (the fraction of firms of type H) is large, and/or λ (the probability of a liquidity shock) is small.
   We also assume that firms that are in need for a liquidity infusion (there are (1 − μ)λ of those) are
randomly assigned to the μ(1 − λ) potential acquirers. Accordingly, the probability that a potential
                                                            (1−μ)
acquirer finds a liquidity merger opportunity is given by   μ(1−λ) λ.   Recall that in the two-firm version,
if firm H does not have to finance a liquidity shock (state 1 − λ), the probability of a liquidity merger
is equal to λ (the probability that firm L has a liquidity shock). Thus, by condition 25, the probability
of a liquidity merger will go down in the multiple-firm version of the model.
   Finally, we assume that firms of type H continue to capture the entire rent from liquidity mergers.
This may seem a strong assumption given that there is an excess demand for liquidity-driven acquisi-
tions. However, notice that any equilibrium of the model will require firms of type H to capture some
of the rents from mergers. In order to see this point, suppose that there was an equilibrium in which
L firms captured all the rents (because there are too many H firms bidding for them). In this case, H
firms would not have the ex-ante incentive to build the liquidity that is required to finance liquidity
mergers. But if those firms do not have liquidity, they cannot compete for mergers, decreasing the
competition for targets. Thus, an equilibrium with no rent for acquirers cannot exist. As long as H
firms continue to capture some of the rents, the model would be qualitatively identical (as we discuss
in Section 4.5). This last assumption is used to facilitate the model’s solution (it does not alter the
model’s economic intuition).
   Under this set of assumptions, the solution is essentially identical to that described in our base
model, with the key diﬀerence being that from the perspective of each firm of type H, the probability
                                                          (1−μ)                              0
of a liquidity merger decreases from (1 − λ)λ to (1 − λ)λ μ(1−λ) . Indeed, if we define λ as:

                                            0     (1 − μ)
                                           λ ≡λ            < λ,                                        (26)
                                                  μ(1 − λ)
                                                                                                          0
the analysis of the model is identical to that presented above, if we replace the parameter λ with λ .
   In terms of the model’s results, the main diﬀerence is that credit lines become less desirable relative
to cash holdings in this multi-firm setting. The intuition for this result (which we show in Appendix

                                                    24
H) is as follows. First, given that the probability of a liquidity merger goes down, the amount of
cash that the firm needs to save to fulfill its liquidity needs decreases. Second, while the demand
for the credit line also goes down, this decline does not benefit the firm as much as the decline in
cash holdings. The main cost of credit lines is that they may be revoked in the bad state of nature.
However, this cost is independent of the probability of a liquidity merger (which happens when firm
H is in a good state of nature). It follows that firms are more likely to choose cash over credit lines
in the model with multiple firms, because the probability of a liquidity-driven acquisition declines.
     Finally, notice that despite the decline in the desirability of credit lines, the model’s predictions
are qualitatively unaﬀected by the probability of liquidity mergers (as we also show in the appendix).
In particular, it is still the case that credit lines are more likely to be used in industries in which
liquidity mergers are more prevalent.


5.     Model implications

Our model yields multiple implications. Some of these implications are supported by the available
empirical evidence. Others have not yet been documented and are tested later in the paper. This
section revisits the model, highlighting and recasting the most interesting testable hypotheses coming
out of the analysis.
     For ease of reference, we list the main implications of our model:

Implication 1 Liquidity mergers are more likely to occur in industries with high asset specificity, but
among firms whose assets are not too firm-specific.

     This result follows directly from Proposition 1. Notice that this result is independent of how the
liquidity merger is financed (ex-post issuance, cash, or lines of credit). The key economic insight
that drives this result is that the industry acquirer has an advantage in liquidity provision to the
distressed firm because of industry specificity. If the acquirer has enough liquidity to draw on, the
merger becomes feasible.
     How to identify a “liquidity merger” in the data? The model suggests that it is a merger that might
not necessarily happen in the absence of liquidity shocks, but is due to distress in one of the firms in
an industry and the advantage another firm has in managing industry-specific assets. Thus, mergers
and acquisitions of a distressed target by another firm in the same industry are potential candidates.
Clearly, the liquidity merger can only happen if firm-level asset specificity is not too high. In the next
section, we experiment with an identification exercise of this type in order to guide our empirical work.
     Given that the purpose of liquidity reallocation in our model is to overcome the inability of the
target to raise external funding, one might wonder why we are focusing specifically on financially


                                                    25
distressed targets, as opposed to targets that are financially constrained in a broader sense.23 The
answer is that a target that is constrained but not distressed does not necessarily face the choice
between liquidation and asset sale that we model in the paper. Such a target also has the option
to withstand a liquidity shock by investing less than what it would be optimal in the absence of the
shock, and waiting for the access to external capital to improve. Given that asset reallocations impose
costs due to firm specificity, this option should be attractive for a constrained target.
       Another key result of the model comes from Proposition 5:

Implication 2 If industry asset specificity is high and firm asset specificity is low, then firms are
more likely to use lines of credit in their liquidity management.

       This result follows from the insight that the line of credit is a particularly attractive way of fi-
nancing growth opportunities that arrive in good states of nature, but that may require liquidity
insurance. A liquidity-driven acquisition is an example of such an investment.24
       Section 4 also suggests the following implication:

Implication 3 Liquidity mergers are more likely to occur when there is low correlation between the
liquidity needs of firms in the industry.

       Naturally, measuring this correlation in the data can be challenging. One option is to use a firm’s
observed external financing needs (e.g., investments minus internal funds) as a proxy for firm-level
liquidity needs (see Acharya et al. (2007) for an empirical proxy). Clearly, the correlation that matters
for the model’s results is that among firms in the same industry.
       The implications above work mostly at the level of the industry. In addition, the model has the
following firm-level implication:

Implication 4 Within an industry, “deep-pocket” firms are more likely to use lines of credit in their
liquidity management.

       In the model, the firm with high initial wealth (firm H) is more likely to use credit lines than firm L,
the firm with low initial wealth. As we discuss in Section 4.2, if firm L is to demand liquidity insurance,
its main priority is to finance its own liquidity needs, rather than bids for other industry firms. Thus,
relatively to firm H, firm L is less likely to demand credit lines (and more likely to use cash).
       In order to operationalize this result, notice that the firm’s initial wealth A can be broadly in-
terpreted as the stock of internal funds that the firm can draw on to decrease its external financing
needs. Empirically, A should be correlated with variables such as the firm’s profitability and its stock
  23
    See Almeida et al. (2009) for a discussion of the diﬀerences between financial distress and financial constraints.
  24
    This implication does not imply that liquidity mergers are financed exclusively through credit lines. In the model,
the firm also issues debt to finance liquidity mergers, and may also use cash jointly with credit lines (see Section 4.1).
The point is that credit lines are more likely to be used in industries in which liquidity mergers are more prevalent.


                                                           26
of retained earnings. Thus, this result can help explain the empirical observation that profitable firms
are more likely to use credit lines in their liquidity management (as reported in Sufi (2009)).25 In
addition, we note that one should be careful when using stock variables (such as retained earnings
and net worth) to proxy for A, since these stock variables are partly the result of the firm’s optimal
policies. For example, Sufi finds that net worth (defined as book equity minus cash scaled by assets
minus cash) is negatively correlated with the use of credit lines. One simple explanation for this
correlation is that firms that use credit lines will also have higher debt (given that credit line debt is
recorded as debt in COMPUSTAT) and thus lower book equity.


6.       Empirical evidence

This section reports tests that focus on the industry-level implications of our model. In particular,
we examine the model’s predictions related to liquidity-driven acquisitions and to the use of lines of
credit that back acquisitions. We first describe the sample construction of mergers and lines of credit.
Then, we introduce our proxies for firm asset specificity, industry asset specificity, liquidity mergers,
and line of credit usage. Finally, we document the incidence of liquidity mergers across industries,
the relation between firm/industry asset specificity and liquidity mergers, and the relation between
firm/industry asset specificity and the use of lines of credit in corporate liquidity management.

6.1.      Data description

Our sample of mergers and acquisitions is drawn from the Securities Data Company’s (SDC) U.S.
Mergers and Acquisitions Database. We obtain accounting and financial data on acquirers and targets
from COMPUSTAT. We gather data on domestic mergers and acquisitions with announcement dates
between January 1, 1980 and December 31, 2006. Our sample selection process follows the literature
requiring that: (1) the transaction is completed; (2) the number of days between the announcement
and completion dates is between 0 and 1,000; (3) the target is a firm with accounting data on COM-
PUSTAT or SDC during the time of the takeover; (4) the deal value is greater than $1 million; (5)
the acquiring firm controls less than 50% of the shares of the target firm before the announcement;
(6) the acquiring firm ends up with all the shares of the acquired firm; and (7) the acquirer and the
target operate in the same industry, defined by 3-digit SIC codes. Due to the need to construct our
proxy for liquidity mergers, we drop all targets that have missing data on interest coverage or negative
interest coverage. The latter cutoﬀ is due to the fact that such targets are likely to be in economic,
rather than financial distress. We end up with a sample of 1,097 transactions.
 25
      See also the empirical results below, in particular Tables 7 and 8.




                                                             27
       We use two alternative sources to construct our line of credit data. Our first sample (which we
call LPC Sample) is drawn from LPC-DealScan. These data allow us to construct a large sample of
credit line initiations, observing the purpose of each facility. As we explain below, when using these
data we keep in the sample only those credit lines which are likely to be used to finance investment
and we drop credit agreements that do not correspond to the credit lines characterized by our theory
(for example, those that are used as back ups to commercial paper). We note, however, that the
LPC-DealScan data have two potential drawbacks. First, they are mostly based on syndicated loans,
thus potentially biased towards large deals and consequently towards large firms. Second, they do not
allow us to measure line of drawdowns (the fraction of existing lines that has been used in the past).
To overcome these issues, we also study an alternative sample that contains detailed information on
the credit lines initiated and used by a random sample of 300 COMPUSTAT firms between 1996
and 2003. These data are provided by Amir Sufi on his website and were used on Sufi (2009). We
denote these data Random Sample. Using these data reduces the sample size for our tests and does
not allow us to measure the purpose of the credit line. We regard these two samples as providing
complementary information on the usage of credit lines for the purposes of this paper.
       To construct the LPC Sample, we start from a sample of loans in LPC-DealScan in the period of
1987 to 2008 for which we can obtain the firm identifier gvkey (which we later use to match to COM-
PUSTAT).26 We drop utilities, quasi-public, and financial firms from the sample. We consider only
short-term and long-term credit lines, which are defined as those that have the LPC field “loantype”
equal to “364-day facility,” “revolver/line < 1 yr,” “revolver/line >= 1 yr,” or “revolver/line.” In
our tests, we keep only the credit lines which are likely to be used for the financing of future invest-
ments, namely those whose purpose is labeled “acquisition line,” “capital expenditures,” “corporate
purposes,” or “takeover.”
       Our unit of observation for the LPC Sample is a firm-quarter. In some cases, the same firm has
more than one credit line initiation in the same quarter. In these cases, we sum the facility amounts
(the total available credit in each line) for each firm-quarter and average the other variables using the
facility amount as weights. We let AcqLCi,t denote the total value of future investment- (acquisition-)
related credit lines initiated in quarter t by firm i, and let M aturityi,t denote the average maturity
of these lines (in quarters).27
       To construct the Random Sample, we start from the “random sample” used in Sufi (2009), which
contains 1,908 firm-years (300 firms) between 1996 and 2003. Sufi’s data set includes information on
  26
     We use several procedures to obtain gvkeys, including a file provided by Michael Roberts, which was used in Chava
and Roberts (2008), firm tickers (which are available from LPC), and manual matching using firm names.
  27
     The fraction of credit lines that can potentially be used for capital expenditures and acquisitions is significant. Out
of 18,050 unique lines of credit initiated between 1987 and 2008, 9,710 fit LPC’s investment/acquisitions definition.



                                                            28
the total credit line facilities available to firm j in year t (denoted Total Line j,t ), and the amount of
credit in these lines that is still available to firm j in year t (Unused Line j,t ). We use this information
to construct our proxies for credit line usage (described below).

6.2.     Proxy variables
6.2.1.     Identifying liquidity mergers

To identify liquidity-driven acquisitions, we need to stratify the sample according to a measure of
financial (not economic) distress. Following Asquith et al. (1984) and Andrade and Kaplan (1998),
we employ interest coverage ratios as a measure of financial distress.28 To identify transactions in
which a plausibly economically viable target is close to financial distress, we require that the target
firm has (1) an interest coverage ratio below the median interest coverage ratio in COMPUSTAT
for our sample period, and (2) profitability above the median profitability in COMPUSTAT. We call
this classification scheme “Definition A.” This basic definition identifies targets that are likely to
be financially but not economically distressed, while maintaining a large enough sample of potential
liquidity mergers. However, this classification likely captures targets that are not truly distressed.
To refine this definition, we also consider a classification scheme that requires the target to have (1)
interest coverage ratio in the bottom tercile of COMPUSTAT, and (2) profitability above the median
COMPUSTAT profitability (“Definition B”).
      Table 1 reports the number of liquidity-driven and other horizontal deals in our sample by year.
Out of 1,097 control transactions, 260 deals (or about 23.7% of the sample) are classified as potential
liquidity mergers based on below median interest coverage and above median profitability. Under
the second classification scheme, we identify 136 deals (or about 12.4% of the sample). The overall
number of deals in our data set does not increase monotonically through time; for example, it declines
in the early 1990s and in the early 2000s. The fraction of liquidity mergers also varies over time (and
across industries). Finally, we note that the cyclicality of merger events (mergers waves) and hence
the availability of SDC data makes it diﬃcult to identify suﬃciently many liquidity mergers in some
of the industries of our sample of manufacturers. Using Definition A (B) for financial distress, we can
identify liquidity mergers in 85 (64) industries at the 3-digit SIC level. To reinforce the results form
these two identification schemes, have also computed the fraction of targets with a below investment
grade credit rating in our sample. For the deals classified as liquidity merger using Definition A
 28
    We compute interest coverage ratio as COMPUSTAT’s oibdp divided by xint. If COMPUSTAT data are not
available, we use the corresponding data from SDC.




                                                     29
(Definition B) where the target has a credit rating, 81% (93%) are rated below investment grade.29

                                              Table 1 About Here

    Table 2 reports basic summary statistics (mean and medians) for empirical proxies related to deal,
acquiring-, and target-firm characteristics in our sample based on our primary classification scheme.
We tabulate characteristics for both liquidity- and non-liquidity-type mergers. Panel A collects sta-
tistics for deal characteristics. It shows that liquidity mergers tend to have a similar transaction value
as non-liquidity mergers in absolute terms. Relative to book assets, liquidity-driven acquisitions are,
however, valued significantly lower than non-liquidity-driven acquisitions. Liquidity mergers also take
longer to complete. According to the statistics in Panel B, acquirers in liquidity mergers tend to be
smaller (about two thirds of the size), to hold less cash, to hold more fixed assets, and to be slightly
more profitable than acquirers in non-liquidity mergers. On the flip side, Panel C shows that targets in
liquidity mergers tend to be larger, hold much less cash, and operate more fixed assets than other tar-
gets. Notice in particular that the average profitability of target firms is higher for liquidity mergers,
indicating that the average target in a liquidity merger is not in economic distress. As in prior studies,
acquiring firms are generally larger than target firms and tend to have a higher Q than target firms.

                                              Table 2 About Here

    We measure the incidence of liquidity mergers in an industry using the ratio of liquidity mergers
to the total number of horizontal mergers in that industry. We call this variable Liquidity Mergers.
This variable is summarized in Table 3 below together with the other industry variables.30

6.2.2.    Specificity measures and other industry characteristics

A key element of our theory relates the degree to which assets are firm- and industry-specific. The
literature does not oﬀer an empirical counterpart for this element of our model, but we are able to
operationalize a proxy that summarizes the relation we want to capture. Our empirical implementa-
tion is based on two observations. First, we conjecture that industry-specificity is likely to be greater
for assets such as machinery and equipment than for buildings and land. Accordingly, we define
“machinery intensity,” the ratio of machinery and equipment (COMPUSTAT’s ppenme) to total firm
assets (at), as a proxy for industry asset specificity.31 Second, we conjecture that firm-specificity
  29
     In untabulated results, we have also experimented with replacing profitability by equity analyst earnings forecasts.
This alternative classification scheme also supports the main results reported in the paper.
  30
     Under Definition A, the correlation of the components of Transferable Assets is 0.06 (p-value 0.49). The low
correlation suggests that the two components capture diﬀerent aspects of asset transferability.
  31
     We have verified that our results are robust to the use of alternative definitions for machinery intensity. For
instance, in untabulated tests we scale ppenme by ppent (i.e., property, plant, and equipment instead of total assets).
We also use a proxy given by 1 — (ppneb + ppneli)/at, where the items in parentheses correspond to buildings and land,
respectively. We decided in favor of our measure of asset industry-specificity because it maximizes the sample size.


                                                           30
should be inversely related to the degree of activity in asset resale market in a firm’s industry: the
higher the use of second-hand capital amongst diﬀerent firms in an industry, the less firm-specific is
the capital. To construct a measure of “capital salability” within an industry, we hand-collect data
for used and new capital acquisitions from the Bureau of Census’ Economic Census. These data are
compiled by the Bureau once every 5 years from 1967 to 1997 and allow us to gauge asset salability
by computing the ratio of used to total (i.e., used plus new) fixed depreciable capital expenditures by
firms in an industry. The approach follows that of Almeida and Campello (2007).
      Combining those two observations, we construct our desired proxy as the product of “machine
intensity” and “capital salability” proxies. Simply put, we multiply the amount of hard assets needed
to operate in an industry by the salability of those assets. As the Bureau of Census’ data end in 1997,
we create a time-invariant variable by averaging across firms and time within 3-digit SIC industries.32
We call this composite proxy Transferable Assets. We similarly construct proxies for other industry
characteristics that we use as controls in our empirical tests. Industry Concentration is defined as the
3-digit SIC sales-based industry’s Herfindahl index. Industry Interest Coverage is defined as the 3-
digit SIC-level average firm coverage ratio. Industry Capacity Utilization is the 3-digit SIC industry’s
capacity utilization (available from the Federal Reserve’s Statistical Release G.17 ), and Industry Q
is the 3-digit SIC-level average firm Q. In some cases, these industry-level variables contain extreme
observations. To avoid biases due to outliers, these control variables are also winsorized at the 5%
level. The industry-level variables are summarized in Table 3.

                                              Table 3 About Here

6.2.3.      Line of credit usage and other firm-level data

We follow Sufi (2009) in the definitions of the variables that we use for our credit line tests. Using
COMPUSTAT fields, we denote by Assets the diﬀerence between total assets (at) and cash (che).
Tangibility is equal to ppent scaled by Assets. Size is defined as the log of Assets. Q is defined as
a cash-adjusted, market-to-book asset ratio, (Assets + prcc_fc×sho — ceq)/Assets. NetWorth is de-
fined as (ceq — che)/Assets. Profitability is the ratio of EBITDA over Assets. Age is measured as the
diﬀerence between the current year and the first year in which the firm appeared in COMPUSTAT.
Industry sales volatility (IndSaleVol ) is the (3-digit SIC) industry median value of the within-year
standard deviation of quarterly changes in firm sales (saleq minus its lagged value) scaled by the
average asset value in the year. Profit volatility (ProfitVol ) is the firm-level standard deviation of
annual changes in the level of EBITDA, calculated using four lags, and scaled by average assets in
the lagged period. We winsorize the COMPUSTAT variables symmetrically at the 5% level.
 32
      This index is multiplied by 100 to make magnitudes more comparable to the other industry proxies reported below.


                                                          31
   When using the Random Sample, we measure the fraction of total corporate liquidity that is
provided by credit lines for firm i in year t using both total and unused credit lines:

                                                              T otal Linei,t
                              Total LC-to-Cash i,t =                              ,                (27)
                                                         T otal Linei,t + Cashi,t

and
                                                             U nused Linei,t
                            Unused LC-to-Cash i,t =                                .               (28)
                                                         U nused Linei,t + Cashi,t
As discussed by Sufi, while some firms may have higher demand for total liquidity due to better
investment opportunities, these LC-to-Cash ratios should isolate the relative usage of lines of credit
versus cash in corporate liquidity management.
   When using the LPC Sample, we construct a proxy for line of credit usage in the following way. For
each firm-quarter, we measure credit line availability at date t by summing all existing (investment-
purpose) credit lines that have not yet matured. This calculation assumes that lines of credit remain
open until they mature. Specifically, we define our measure of line of credit availability for each
firm-quarter (j, s) as:
                                               X
                          T otal Acq LCj,s =         Acq LCj,t Γ(M aturityj,t ≥ s − t),            (29)
                                               t≤s

where Γ(.) represents the indicator function, and the variables Acq LC and M aturity are defined
above. We convert these firm-quarter measures into firm-year measures by computing the average
value of T otal Acq LC in each year. We then measure the fraction of corporate liquidity that is
provided by investment-related lines of credit for firm j in quarter s using the following variable:

                                                            T otal Acq LCj,t
                             Acq LC-to-Cash j,t =                                 .                (30)
                                                       T otal Acq LCj,t + Cashj,t

This ratio is closely related to the Total LC-to-Cash ratio of equation 27, with the important diﬀerence
that it includes only credit lines that are used for investment purposes.
   Table 4 reports summary statistics on firm-level variables for both samples. Panel A describes the
statistics for the LPC Sample. Panel B describes the Random Sample. The distribution for most of the
variables is very similar across the two samples. The main diﬀerence between the two samples is that
the LPC-DealScan data is biased towards large firms. For example, median assets are equal to 255
million in the LPC Sample and 116 million in the Random Sample. Consistent with this diﬀerence,
firms in the LPC Sample are also older, have lower Qs, and lower income volatility. The measure of line
of credit availability in the LPC Sample (Acq LC-to-Cash) is lower than the corresponding measures
in the Random Sample (Total LC-to-Cash and Unused LC-to-Cash). For example, the average value
of Acq LC-to-Cash in the LPC Sample is 0.22, while the average value of Total LC-to-Cash is 0.51.


                                                        32
This diﬀerence reflects the fact that the Acq LC-to-Cash measure includes only investment-related
credit lines, and also the possibility that LPC-DealScan may fail to report some credit lines.

                                         Table 4 About Here

   As described above, we use standard proxies for financial distress to identify targets that may be
liquidity constrained (targets of liquidity mergers). However, we can use the financial data described
in Table 4 to provide additional evidence that targets in the mergers that we identify as liquidity
mergers are short in liquid funds.
   We do this by examining the gap between investment plans and available funds for target firms
prior to the liquidity merger. It is diﬃcult to operationalize this financing gap measure since observed
data on investment spending by target firms (presumably financially constrained) will not tell us what
their “unconstrained” plans would look like. As a proxy for those plans, however, we can look at the
investment spending of industry players that are likely to be financially unconstrained according to
various criteria used in the literature (see, e.g., Almeida et al. (2004)). We do this by looking at the
ratio of investment expenditures to total assets of same (3-digit SIC) industry firms that are large
(top quartile of asset size distribution) and have rated bonds; we call this construct TargetInvestment.
We also compute the amount of liquidity in firms’ balance sheets by looking at the sum of their cash
holdings, total lines of credit, and cash flows (defined as earnings before extraordinary items plus
depreciation) scaled by gross assets; we call this measure ImmediateLiquidity. We then compute the
diﬀerence between ImmediateLiquidity and TargetInvestment, which we call LiquiditySurplus. No-
tably, because large, unconstrained firms are often more established and in later phases of a firm’s
lifecycle, it is likely that our measure of unmet financial needs will underestimate the real financial
needs (or deficits) of targets in a liquidity merger. In addition, notice that the variable Liquidity-
Surplus is expected to be positive for all firms, since it captures the diﬀerence between stock (cash and
credit lines) and flow variables (capital expenditures). Finally, recall that the credit line variable in the
LPC-Deal Scan sample includes all credit lines (both drawn and undrawn), which is another reason
why LiquiditySurplus may overstate the amount of excess liquidity available to firms in our sample.
   We then compare LiquiditySurplus from targets in liquidity mergers (as identified by Definition A
in Table 1), with the mean and median sample values, using the same sample described above in Table
4. We find that the median value of LiquiditySurplus for liquidity merger targets is equivalent to 6%
of their assets. In contrast, the median value of LiquiditySurplus for the overall sample is substantially
larger (14% of assets). A comparison of means delivers the same conclusion (12% for liquidity merger
targets versus 18% for the average firm). Keeping in mind that these are very crude measures of
unmet liquidity needs that are almost certainly overstating the amount of excess liquidity available to


                                                     33
our sample firms, they suggest that targets in liquidity mergers are indeed short on liquidity relative
to the typical firm in our sample.

6.3.   The use of lines of credit in merger deals

Before we test our theory, we discuss the relevance of credit lines in terms of their size and in terms
of their use in mergers in the real world. Research on lines of credit is still limited, but recent papers
show that the proportion of lines to total assets is quite significant. Evidence in papers like Sufi
(2009) and Campello et al. (2010) shows that the ratio of credit lines over total assets hovers around
20-25% in the US. Of this amount, the average firm draws about 30-35%. The suggestion one gets
from these numbers is that firms have access to fairly large pools of liquidity that they may use in case
valuable opportunities emerge (including a merger). The average transaction value of liquidity-driven
acquisitions in our sample is $671 million, as shown in Table 2, while the average book value of the
acquiring firm’s assets is $4.4 billion. To the extent that these acquirers have a ratio of credit lines
over total assets in the 20-25% range, they have, on average, around US$ 1 billion in lines of credit.
These figures suggest that lines of credit can be a sizable source of funding in acquisitions, a fraction
of which are of the liquidity merger type.
   We also look for evidence on whether funds under credit lines are used for acquiring other firms’
assets. LPC-Dealscan provides information on the purpose of credit lines at origination. In the analy-
sis below, we focus on the set of line facilities that are likely to be used for acquisitions. Specifically,
this set includes lines whose purpose is listed as “acquisition line,” “takeover,” “capital expenditures,”
or “corporate purposes.” These lines comprise approximately 50% of all credit lines available in LPC-
Dealscan (both in numbers and in value). Naturally, it is possible that some of the credit lines listed
under “capital expenditures” and “corporate purposes” may not be used towards acquisitions. How-
ever, we observe that even the set of credit lines that is specifically listed as being acquisition-related
is quite sizable. Specifically, these lines comprise approximately 10% of all lines available in LPC-
DealScan, both in terms of numbers and in terms of total value. This amounts to approximately $ 80
million per firm-year, or 12% of the size of the annual average dollar amount of liquidity-driven ac-
quisitions in our sample ($671 million). The funds under credit lines that are reserved for acquisitions
in general and hence available for potential liquidity mergers in particular seem significant.
   To make our point more concretely, we look at the details of financing arrangements used in recent
merger deals. There were multiple deals illustrating our paper’s results and we found a deal from our
sample: Western Refining Inc.’s acquisition of Giant Industries Inc. in 2007. The deal was closed at
$1.22 billion in cash in addition to the assumption of $275 million outstanding debt. The transaction
was financed in part with $250 million cash and a $500 million credit line facility. The target of


                                                    34
this deal, Giant Industries, also experienced financial distress before the transaction as its capacity
to service debt was strained and resulted in problems with refining operations. Yet another example
is the merger between Cineplex Odeon Corp. and Sony Corp.’s Loews in 1998. The transaction
amounted to over $1 billion in value and was fully financed by lines of credit. At that time Cineplex
had breached its debt covenants several times and was in serious need of access to capital to improve.
Finally, one example of a cash-financed liquidity merger is the acquisition of Sagent Technology Inc.
by Group 1 Software Inc. in 2003.
   Importantly, we note that the model does not predict that all of the funds used in liquidity-
driven acquisitions should come from credit lines; these facilities should just be sizeable enough to
make a diﬀerence in the odds that a liquidity merger takes place. Likewise, our model is not meant to
completely map out the demand for credit lines by firms. Ample evidence suggests that there are other
firm-specific needs motivating the use of credit lines by firms. One important observation, however, is
that while firms carry relatively large nominal stocks of credit lines (about 20% of assets), relatively
smaller margins may be really used at any point in time. Given the relatively large size of liquidity
mergers that we document, one could argue that those mergers may move an important margin of the
observed demand for lines. Admittedly, however, ours is just one piece of the story about lines of credit.

6.4.   Liquidity mergers and asset specificity

We start by investigating whether the incidence of liquidity mergers is related to asset specificity
in a way that is consistent with our model’s prediction. The dependent variable in our analysis is
the ratio of liquidity mergers to the total number of mergers in the industry (the variable Liquidity
Mergers). According to our model, liquidity mergers are more likely to arise in industries with high
asset-specificity (high machinery intensity), but among firms whose assets are not too firm-specific
(high capital salability). Therefore, the model predicts a positive relation between Liquidity Mergers
and Transferable Assets at the industry level. Our tests control for other industry characteristics
that could aﬀect this relation in the data. Adding Industry Concentration addresses the alterna-
tive explanation that liquidity mergers are simply due to a higher incidence of horizontal mergers in
more concentrated industries (e.g., Hackbarth and Miao (2009)). Similarly, including industry-wide
measures of financial distress, measured by Industry Interest Coverage addresses the concern that liq-
uidity mergers are by and large consolidating mergers in distressed industries. Another explanation
of mergers is that they are due to technological industry shocks and excess industry capacity (e.g.,
Mitchell and Mulherin (1996), Andrade and Staﬀord (2004), and Harford et al. (2008)). We thus also
control for Industry Capacity Utilization. Finally, we add Industry Q to the empirical specification




                                                   35
to control for overall industry prospects. The empirical model that we estimate has the form:

         Liquidity Mergersj = a + b1 Transferable Assetsj + b2 Industry Concentrationj                               (31)
                                  +b3 Industry Interest Coveragej + b4 Industry Capacity Utilizationj
                                  +b5 Industry Qj +       j,


where the index j denotes a 3-digit SIC industry. The model is estimated via OLS, but since the
dependent variable is censored between zero and one we also perform Tobit estimations.
       Table 5 reports coeﬃcient estimates for a set of regressions in which control variables are pro-
gressively introduced. Consistent with the model, those estimates suggest that the eﬀect of our
asset-specificity composite on the fraction of liquidity-driven acquisitions is positive and significant.
The estimates in column (1) of Panel A, for example, imply that a one-standard deviation change in
Transferable Assets (=0.299) leads to a 0.042 (= 0.141 × 0.299) increase in the fraction of liquidity
mergers in the industry, which is 20.7% of the sample average of liquidity mergers. The economic and
statistical significance of the coeﬃcient on Transferable Assets is similarly strong when we use the
definition of liquidity merger that conditions on both bottom tercile of interest coverage and above
median profitability (Panel B).
       Column (2) estimates indicate that market power gains in concentrated industries do not explain
the incidence of liquidity mergers. The industry-wide distress proxy included in the model under
column (3) does not weaken the reliably positive relation between Liquidity Mergers and Transfer-
able Assets. Results in columns (4) and (5) show that industry capacity utilization and Q do not
aﬀect the economic or statistical significance of the baseline result of column (1). Next, column (6)
combines all industry-wide proxies we consider. The result from this estimation renders a somewhat
stronger positive relation between Liquidity Mergers and Transferable Assets under both classification
schemes. To verify the robustness of our baseline findings using OLS, we re-estimate the model with
all variables using a median regression in column (7).33 Column (8) points to similar findings using
a Tobit specification.34
                                              Table 5 About Here

       Table 5 shows that liquidity mergers are more frequent in industries in which assets are more
transferable. It does that by comparing the frequency of liquidity-driven to non-liquidity-driven
  33
     In untabulated tests, we have also dropped one observation at a time and re-estimated the model with all variables 83
(63) times in case of Definition A (Definition B). These experiments reveal, for example, that the estimated coeﬃcient on
Transferable Assets in case of Definition A ranges from 0.132 to 0.192, with its t-statistics being between 2.43 and 3.68.
  34
     As an additional robustness check, we redo our tests excluding firms with a lot of R&D activity (given that it is
plausibly more diﬃcult to measure asset transferability in these industries). In particular, we redo our tests excluding
industries ranked in the top deciles of the COMPUSTAT-based industry rankings for all distress definitions. All results
are robust to this change in sample definition.


                                                           36
acquisitions in diﬀerent industries. An alternative way to provide evidence on the prediction that
liquidity mergers are related to asset specificity is to compare inter- versus intra-industry mergers.
The logic in the model would suggest that a financially distressed target is more likely to be acquired
by another firm in its industry (given that same-industry firms are the natural providers of liquidity).
To put this in other terms, intra-industry mergers are more likely to be driven by liquidity motives,
when compared to inter-industry mergers.
   To verify whether this is the case, we define inter-industry mergers as deals between firms from
two completely diﬀerent industries; i.e., diﬀerent 2-Digit SIC industries. Using otherwise the same
procedures as those listed above, we obtain a sample of 1,281 inter-industry acquisitions in our time
period. We find that, in this sample, only 104 (or 8.1%) of firms that were acquired by industry
outsiders were financially distressed according to Definition A (alternatively, 68 (5.3%) if we use De-
finition B). Notably, these fractions are significantly lower than the ones for intra-industry liquidity
mergers (23.7% according to Definition A and 12.4% according Definition B in Table 1). These results
are consistent with the logic our model.

6.5.   Mergers and asset specificity following a liquidity shock

An alternative way to test our model is to look at merger deals that take place following shocks to
liquidity, focusing on the impact of asset specificity on those deals. The challenge is to empirically
identify a liquidity shock that is not related to the profitability of investment prospects (or underlying
asset values). The shock should be such that there is enough cross-sectional variation left regarding
firms’ ability to engage in acquisitions (as such, an aggregate decline in demand or credit contraction
may not work). In addition, the shock should aﬀect enough manufacturing industries, which are
required for our measure of industry-but-not-firm asset specificity (Transferable Assets).
   The collapse of the junk bond markets in the late 1980s eﬀectively meant that junk-bond issuers
lost access to liquidity coming from bonds (they experienced an exogenous shock to the supply of
credit). This happened because of events that were orthogonal to the profitability of their invest-
ment. In particular, new regulatory standards introduced in 1989 precluded financial institutions
such as Savings & Loans to acquire junk bonds. In the later part of that same year, Drexel-Burnham-
Lambert, a major operator in the junk bond market arena, was threatened with a RICO indictment
by the SEC. Complications from suspicions about criminal activity at DBL eventually led the firm
to file for bankruptcy in February 1990. The combination of these events led to the collapse of the
junk bond markets (as documented in Lemmon and Roberts (2010)). This shock aﬀected firms across
many diﬀerent industries, with diﬀerent firms within the same industry being diﬀerentially aﬀected.
   To substantiate our baseline results, we study the patterns of mergers and acquisitions involv-


                                                   37
ing the firms that were aﬀected by the junk bond market collapse. Our investigation starts from
the set of bond issuers listed as “below-investment grade” according to Standard & Poor’s long-term
credit rating. As defined by S&P, firms rated BBB— or higher are defined as “investment-grade;” firms
rated BB+ or lower are defined as “below-investment-grade” (or “speculative-grade” or “junk”); firms
without an S&P rating are excluded from the analysis. Following Lemmon and Roberts (2010), our
sample begins with all firm-year observations in annual COMPUSTAT database between 1986 and
1993. This yields a balanced time frame around the series of events leading to the demise of the junk
market, as well as a reasonably large sample of firms potentially aﬀected by this shock. We find 509
manufacturers listed as junk-bond issuers in our COMPUSTAT dataset. Of this set, we find that 52
firms eventually become targets fitting the description of “financially but not economically distressed”
(under Definition A) at the time of the control transaction.
       We use this sample to provide additional evidence on the predictions of the model. First, we look
at the acquirers’ profiles. We find that 32 (or 62%) of those targets were acquired by firms in the
same 3-Digit SIC industry.35 This number seems high, but in the absence of a benchmark it is hard to
ascertain its significance. We construct multiple benchmarks by computing the rate of same-industry
acquisitions in two diﬀerent settings: (1) target firms that are junk-bond issuers outside of the 1989
crisis window; and (2) target firms that are non-junk-bond issuers during the 1989 crisis window.
These checks are interesting in that they work similarly to “falsification tests” for our identification
strategy. They give us a sense of the propensity for liquidity mergers to take place following a liquidity
shock relative to the baseline when the liquidity shock did not take place (test (1) is a placebo test),
and relative to counterfactuals that were not aﬀected by the liquidity shock when it happened (test
(2) concerns firms that were active in 1989, but that were not directly aﬀected by the shock). As a
complement, we also compute the overall sample average of same-industry mergers under Definition
A (the unconditional probability of a liquidity merger). This latter number might be seen as a more
general comparison benchmark.
       The estimates are as follows. During normal times (outside of the 1989 episode), the rate of same-
industry acquisitions of junk-bond issuers that become targets under Definition A is 37%. The propor-
tion of non-junk-bond issuers under Definition A that are eventually acquired by same-industry players
following the 1989 episode is 28%. Finally, the overall, unconditional ratio of targets under Definition
A that are acquired by same-industry players is 43%. While these ratios of liquidity mergers are high
(as expected), we find that an acute liquidity event increases those ratios even further. That is, the
liquidity merger phenomenon is particularly accentuated in settings where liquidity shocks are sharp.
       As an additional check of our story, we use data from the junk-bond collapse era to re-estimate
  35
    A much smaller number of 14 was acquired by firms in completely diﬀerent lines of business; i.e., diﬀerent 2-Digit
SIC industries.


                                                         38
the regressions from Table 5 (which examine the relation between Liquidity Mergers and Transferable
Assets). The results are reported in Table 6. Consistent with the intuition that experimenting with
the salient liquidity shock of the late 1980s might strengthen our model’s identification, we find eco-
nomically larger eﬀects with comparable statistical significance levels despite of the smaller sample.
In particular, the coeﬃcient estimates for Transferable Assets often more than doubles relative to the
baseline estimation results in Table 5. Most of the other (control) variables have coeﬃcient estimates
of similar magnitudes.36
                                             Table 6 About Here

       While the tests of this section pertain to a smaller set of data, they followed a diﬀerent, unique
identification strategy. These tests substantiate our model’s prediction that, when faced with liquidity
shocks, firms may engage in merger deals in which their assets are transferred towards other firms in
their same industry depending on the level of asset specificity.

6.6.      Lines of credit and asset specificity

Another implication of our model is that firms are more likely to use credit lines if industry asset-
specificity is high, but firm asset-specificity is low. We test this implication by relating our three
alternative credit line variables (those in equations 27, 28, and 30) to the composite proxy for industry-
not-firm specificity that we constructed, Transferable Assets. We also include in the empirical model
the main determinants of credit line usage suggested by Sufi (2009), in addition to the industry
variables that we use in the tests of Section 6.4:

          LC-to-Cashi,t = α + β 1 Transferable Assetsj + β 2 ln(Age)i,t + β 3 (Profitability)i,t−1                (32)
                               +β 4 Size i,t−1 + β 5 Qi,t−1 + β 6 N etW orthi,t−1 + β 7 IndSalV olj,t
                               +β 8 ProfitV oli,t + β 9 Industry Concentrationj
                               +β 10 IndustryInterest Coveragej +β 11 Industry Capacity Utilizationj
                               +β 12 Industry Qj +     i,t ,


where the index j denotes a 3-digit SIC industry, the index i denotes a firm, and the index t denotes
a year. Our model predicts that the coeﬃcient β 1 should be positive. Since the dependent variable is
censored between zero and one, we also perform Tobit estimations. Because several of the variables
are measured at the industry-level, we cluster standard deviations by 3-digit SIC industry whenever
the industry variables are included in the regression. In other cases, the standard errors are clustered
at the firm level.
  36
    We further check whether the results in Table 6 change with the inclusion of coverage ratio and leverage as control
variables. We do this to minimize concerns that other correlated financial eﬀects (and not asset transferability) might
drive our findings. Our results remain unchanged (tables available upon request).


                                                           39
       We start by providing some descriptive evidence that shows that the variable Transferable Assets
is positively correlated with line of credit usage in liquidity management, as predicted our model.
This pattern is shown visually in Figure 3, which uses the LPC Sample and depicts the average usage
of credit lines as measured by Acq LC-to-Cash against Transferable Assets, by 3-digit SIC industry.37
The figure shows that investment-related line of credit usage is more prevalent in industries with
transferable assets.
                                            Figure 3 About Here

       In Table 7 we provide the results of estimating equation 32 for the LPC Sample. We start in column
(1) by running a specification that is closely related to that in Sufi’s (2009) Table 3.38 In particular,
the coeﬃcients on profitability, size, net worth, and Q are virtually identical to those in Sufi (although
the coeﬃcient on profitability is not significant in column (1)). These coeﬃcients indicate that large,
low Q, and low net worth firms are more likely to use investment-related credit lines in liquidity
management, relative to cash holdings. In column (2), we run a simple regression of Acq LC-to-
Cash on Transferable Assets. Consistent with Figure 3, the correlation between Acq LC-to-Cash and
Transferable Assets is positive and significant. Without controlling for other variables, the coeﬃcient
on Transferable Assets is 0.17, significant at a 1% level. Transferable Assets remains significant after
including all firm-level controls (column (3)); the coeﬃcient drops to 0.09, but remains statistically
significant. Column (4) shows that firms in industries with high capacity utilization, low interest
coverage, and high concentration are more likely to use credit lines relative to cash. In addition,
Transferable Assets remains statistically significant and similar in economic magnitude after including
all of these industry controls together with firm-level variables. Finally, column (5) shows the results
of using a Tobit specification. All of the coeﬃcients are consistent with those in the previous columns.

                                             Table 7 About Here

       The relation between Acq LC-to-Cash and Transferable Assets that we estimate in Table 7 also ap-
pears to be economically significant. For example, the OLS coeﬃcient on columns (3) and (4) (which
is approximately equal to 0.09) implies that one-standard-deviation increase in Transferable Assets
(which is equal to 0.30 according to Table 3) increases Acq LC-to-Cash by 0.027, or approximately
13% of the mean value of Acq LC-to-Cash (which is 0.21 in Table 4).
       One potential concern with these results is that they are based on LPC-DealScan measures of line
of credit availability, which are biased towards larger firms. Another limitation of these data is that
  37
     To construct the measure of line of credit usage at the industry level, we compute the average value of Acq
LC-to-Cash for each 3-digit SIC industry over the entire sample period. We require a 3-digit SIC industry to have more
than 5 firms to appear in the figure.
  38
     In this regression, we follow Sufi and also include 1-digit SIC industry dummies. Naturally, we do not include
industry dummies in the specifications which contain time-invariant industry variables (those in the other columns).


                                                         40
they tend to overestimate the amount of credit available to firms (since we cannot measure credit
line drawdowns). To show that the results are not driven by these issues, we experiment with our
Random Sample, which addresses both of these problems. The results are presented in Table 8.

                                               Table 8 About Here

      In the first four columns of Table 8, we use the variable Total LC-to-Cash , which includes both
used and unused portions of firms’ credit lines. Column (1) replicates the results in column (3) of
Sufi’s (2009) Table 3. The coeﬃcients indicate that profitable, large, low net worth, low Q, seasonal,
and less volatile firms are more likely to use credit lines in corporate liquidity management.39 In
column (2) we relate Total LC-to-Cash to Transferable Assets, without controlling for other variables.
Consistent with previous results, this column suggests that firms use more credit lines to manage
liquidity when they belong to industries with firm-specific, but transferable assets. Column (3) shows
that this relation continues to hold after controlling for firm-level variables. Finally, column (4) in-
cludes industry variables and shows that the relation between Total LC-to-Cash and Transferable
Assets continues to hold.
      Similarly to Table 7, the results in columns (1) to (5) in Table 8 do not address the potential
overestimation of the amount of credit available to firms at a point in time, since they use total, as
opposed to unused credit lines. To this end, columns (6) to (10) in Table 8 use Unused LC-to-Cash
and show that this measurement issue does not aﬀect the patterns previously reported. In particu-
lar, Unused LC-to-Cash and Transferable Assets continue to be positively related, before and after
including firm- and industry-level controls.40 Finally, we note that the economic magnitude of the
correlation between Transferable Assets and credit line usage in this sample is also sizeable. For
example, using the coeﬃcients in columns (4) and (9) to measure this correlation, we find that a one-
standard-deviation change in Transferable Assets increases Total LC-to-Cash by 0.10, and Unused
LC-to-Cash by 0.08. These magnitudes represent 20% and 18% of their respective sample averages
(see Table 4). These results are consistent with the predictions of our theoretical model.


7.       Concluding remarks

While mergers and asset acquisitions are some of the most important types of corporate investment, we
know relatively little about the way firm financial policies are aﬀected by those transactions. Likewise,
we know little about how real asset allocations across firms are aﬀected by corporate financial policies.
Our paper sheds light on these issues by modeling the interaction between corporate liquidity and
 39
      Note that the positive relation between profitability and LC-to-Cash is consistent with Implication 4 of the theory.
 40
      Column (5) replicates the results in column (5) of Table 3 in Sufi (2009).



                                                            41
asset reallocation opportunities. The model embeds the Holmstrom and Tirole’s (1997, 1998) liquidity
demand theory in an industry equilibrium framework that draws on Shleifer and Vishny (1992).
   Our model implies that financially distressed firms might be acquired by other firms in the same
industry, even when there are no operational synergies. We call such transactions “liquidity merg-
ers.” The main purpose of these deals is to reallocate liquidity from firms that have liquidity to those
that may be ineﬃciently liquidated due to a liquidity shortfall. Analyzing firms’ optimal liquidity
policies as a function of future real asset reallocation opportunities, we find that lines of credit are a
particularly attractive way of financing liquidity-driven acquisitions. This theoretical finding is inter-
esting because it provides a rationale to the (“counterintuitive”) empirical regularity that profitable,
well-capitalized firms as the heaviest users of credit line facilities.
   Besides shedding new light on existing empirical findings, our model has several implications that
have not yet been examined. For example, our model predicts that liquidity mergers should be more
prevalent in industries with high asset specificity, but among firms whose assets are not too firm-
specific. The model also predicts that firms in these industries should be more likely to use lines of
credit, generating an equilibrium relation between line of credit usage and the incidence of liquidity
mergers. We put together a comprehensive data set to explore our model’s empirical implications and
find evidence that supports those implications. Our empirical tests are, by design, quite basic and
meant to motivate future research on the link between mergers and corporate financial policies, with
an emphasis on the management of liquid instruments such as cash and lines of credit.




                                                     42
References
Acharya, V., Almeida, H., Campello, M., 2007. Is cash negative debt? A hedging perspective on
    corporate financial policies. Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 515-554.
Acharya, V., Almeida, H., Campello, M., 2010. Aggregate risk and the choice between cash and
    credit lines. Working Paper, NYU and University of Illinois.
Almeida, H., Campello, M., 2007. Financial constraints, asset tangibility and corporate investment.
   Review of Financial Studies 20, 1429-1460.
Almeida, H., Campello, M., Weisbach, M., 2004. The cash flow sensitivity of cash. Journal of Finance
   59, 1777-1804.
Almeida, H., Campello, M., Weisbach, M., 2009. Corporate financial and investment policies when
   future financing is not frictionless. Journal of Corporate Finance, forthcoming.
Andrade, G., Kaplan, S., 1998. How costly is financial (not economic) distress? Evidence from
   highly leveraged transactions that became distressed. Journal of Finance 53, 1443-1493.
Andrade, G., Staﬀord, E., 2004. Investigating the economic role of mergers. Journal of Corporate
   Finance 10, 1-36.
Asquith, P., Gertner, R., Scharfstein, D., 1994. Anatomy of financial distress: an examination of
    junk-bond issuers. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 625-658.
Asvanunt, A., Broadie, M., Sundaresan, S., 2007. Managing corporate liquidity: welfare and pricing
    implications. Working Paper, Columbia University.
Campello, M., Giambona, E., Graham, J., Harvey, C., 2010. Liquidity management and corporate
   investment during a financial crisis. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Denis, D., Sibilikov, V., 2010. Financial constraints, investment, and the value of cash holdings.
    Review of Financial Studies 23, 247-269.
Dittmar, A., Mahrt-Smith, J., 2007. Corporate governance and the value of cash holdings. Journal
    of Financial Economics 83, 599-634.
Fluck, Z., Lynch, A., 1999. Why do firms merge and then divest? A theory of financial synergy.
    Journal of Business 72, 319-46.
Gabudean, R., 2007. Strategic interaction and the co-determination of firms’ financial policies.
   Working Paper, NYU.
Graham, J., Harvey, C., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: evidence from the field.
    Journal of Financial Economics, 60, 187-243.
Hackbarth, D., Miao, J., 2009. The dynamics of mergers and acquisitions in oligopolistic industries.
    Working Paper, Boston University.
Harford, J., 1999. Corporate cash reserves and acquisitions. Journal of Finance 54, 1969-1997
Harford, J., Klasa, S., Walcott, N., 2009. Do firms have leverage targets? Evidence from acquisitions.
    Journal of Financial Economics 93, 1-14.
Harford, J., Mansi, S., Maxwell, W., 2008. Corporate governance and firm cash holdings. Journal of
    Financial Economics 87, 535-555.
Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1997. Financial intermediation, loanable funds and the real sector. Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.



                                                 43
Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1998. Private and public supply of liquidity. Journal of Political Economy
    106, 1-40.
Hubbard, G., Palia, D., 1999. A re-examination of the conglomerate merger wave in the 1960s: an
   internal capital market view. Journal of Finance 54, 1131-1152.
Inderst, R., Mueller, H., 2003. Internal vs. external financing: an optimal contracting approach.
    Journal of Finance 58, 1033-1062.
Ivashina, V., Scharfstein, D., 2010. Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008. Journal of
     Financial Economics 97, 319-338
Kim, C., Mauer, D., Sherman, A., 1998. The determinants of corporate liquidity: theory and
   evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33, 335-359.
Lemmon, M., Roberts, M., 2010. The response of corporate financing and investment to changes in
   the supply of credit. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 555-587.
Lins, K., Servaes, H., Tufano, P., 2010. What drives corporate liquidity? An international survey of
     strategic cash and lines of credit. Journal of Financial Economics 98, 160-176.
Maksimovic, V., 1990. Product market imperfections and loan commitments. Journal of Finance 45,
   1641-1653.
Maksimovic, V., Phillips, G., 2001. The market for corporate assets: who engages in mergers and
   asset sales and are there eﬃciency gains? Journal of Finance 56, 2019-2065.
Maksimovic, V., Phillips, G., 2002. Do conglomerate firms allocate resources ineﬃciently across
   industries? Theory and Evidence. Journal of Finance 57, 721-767.
Mitchell, M., Mulherin, J., 1996. The impact of industry shocks on takeover and restructuring
    activity. Journal of Financial Economics 4, 193-229.
Opler, T., Pinkowitz, L., Stulz, R., Williamson, R., 1999. The determinants and implications of
    corporate cash holdings. Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3-46.
Ortiz-Molina, H., Phillips, G., 2009. Asset liquidity and the cost of capital. Working Paper, Univer-
    sity of British Columbia and University of Maryland.
Pulvino, T., 1998. Do asset fire sales exist? An empirical investigation of commercial aircraft
    transactions. Journal of Finance 53, 939-978.
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1992. Liquidation values and debt capacity: a market equilibrium approach.
     Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1365.
Stein, J., 2003. Agency, information, and corporate investment. In: Constantinides, G., Harris, M.,
     Stulz, R., (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam,
     pp. 109-163.
Sufi, A., 2009. Bank lines of credit in corporate finance: an empirical analysis. Review of Financial
     Studies 22, 1057-1088.
Thakor, A., 2005. Do loan commitments cause overlending? Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
   37, 1067-1099.
Tirole, J., 2006. The Theory of Corporate Finance. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.




                                                44
                                                                                       Realization of Liquidity Shocks           Acquisition/Continuation Decisions              Cash Flows
                                                                                                                                                                          pG     2R - δ / pG

                                                                                                                                           H continues and acquires L

                                                                                                                                  ρ                                     1 - pG    0
                                                                                                                             λ

                                                                                                                                                                         pG       R
                                                                                                             0 Firm L                       H continues and does not
                                                                                              1-λ                                           acquire L
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                         1-λ                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                        1 - pG




45
                                                                                   Firm H

                                                                                                                                                                        pG        R
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                               λ                        1-λ
                                                                                                         ρ                                           H continues
                                                                                                              Firm L
                                                                                                                                                                       1 - pG     0




     Fig. 1. Time line and sequence of actions from the perspective of firm H.
                                                                                                                         λ        ρ
                                                                                                                                                    H is liquidated
                                                                                                                                                    and payoff is τ
                                                                                            Date 0                      Date 1                                               Date 2




                                                                                 Figure 1 – Timeline and sequence of actions from the perspective of firm H.
 q(ξ)

                                 qM(ξ)
     1

                Cash
                                                   qNM(ξ)
                                E



     q’                              Credit Line




         0      ξ’’       ξ’                                          ξ Mmax       ξ NM
                                                                                     max
                                                                                                     ξ

Fig. 2. The choice between cash and credit lines. This figure depicts the functions qN M (ξ) and qM (ξ)
from Propositions 4 and 5. These functions are such that, for a pair (q, ξ) such that q > q(ξ), firm H
   Figure 2 – The Choice between Cash and Credit Lines.
chooses cash rather than credit lines to implement the optimal liquidity policy. Similarly, for q < q(ξ),
firm H prefers credit lines to cash. The function qN M (ξ) depicts this threshold for the equilibrium
without a liquidity merger, while the function qM (ξ) depicts this threshold for the equilibrium with
liquidity mergers. The region E is the region in which firm H chooses cash if liquidity mergers are
not profitable, but chooses a credit line if the liquidity merger becomes profitable.




                                                   46
                       .5        .4
           A c q L C -to -C as h
                   .3  .2
                       .1




                                      0   .5                         1                      1.5
                                               Transferable Assets


Fig. 3. Line of credit availability and transferable assets. The figure depicts the relationship between
line of credit availability and our composite proxy for industry, and not firm specificity (T ransf erable
Assets). On the y-axis, we depict the ratio of total credit lines divided by total credit lines plus cash
balances (the variable Acq LC-to-Cash in equation 32 in the text). On the x-axis, we depict the
variable T ransf erable Assets. The data represent 3-digit SIC industry averages over our entire
sample period (1987—2008), for industries with five or more firms.




                                                    47
Table 1
Sample distribution by announcement year
The sample contains all domestic mergers and acquisitions with announcement dates between January 1, 1980 and
December 31, 2006 (see text for further details). A liquidity merger is defined as a merger or acquisition in which
the target has interest coverage below the sample median and profitability above the sample median in COMPUSTAT
(Definition A) or as a merger or acquisition in which the target has interest coverage below the sample 33rd percentile and
profitability above the sample median in COMPUSTAT (Definition B). Interest coverage is computed as COMPUSTAT’s
oibdp divided by xint and profitability is the ratio of oibdp over at. If COMPUSTAT data are not available, we use the
corresponding data items from SDC.




         Announcement          Liquidity Merger (Def. A)         Liquidity Merger (Def. B)        All Mergers
             Year                 Yes            No                 Yes            No

               1980                  2              8                 0             10                10
               1981                 10             14                 6             18                24
               1982                  7             20                 4             23                27
               1983                  7             15                 4             18                22
               1984                  9             15                 3             21                24
               1985                 11             17                 6             22                28
               1986                 10             33                 3             40                43
               1987                 11             28                 5             34                39
               1988                 15             39                10             44                54
               1989                 14             30                 5             39                44
               1990                 10             18                 8             20                28
               1991                  6             20                 4             22                26
               1992                  6             17                 3             20                23
               1993                  7             24                 5             26                31
               1994                 10             31                 4             37                41
               1995                 12             28                 3             37                40
               1996                  8             35                 7             36                43
               1997                  7             56                 5             58                63
               1998                 15             62                 6             71                77
               1999                 17             66                 6             77                83
               2000                 16             62                 8             70                78
               2001                 12             39                 7             44                51
               2002                  9             19                 2             26                28
               2003                 11             28                10             29                39
               2004                  6             28                 5             29                34
               2005                  3             40                 3             40                43
               2006                  9             45                 4             50                54

              Total                260            837               136            961               1,097




                                                            48
Table 2
Summary statistics for control transactions
This table reports means and medians for empirical proxies related to deal, acquiring-, and target-firm characteristics.
The sample contains all domestic mergers and acquisitions with announcement dates between January 1, 1980 and
December 31, 2006 (see text for further details). A liquidity merger is defined as a merger or acquisition in which the
target has interest coverage below the sample median and profitability above the sample median in COMPUSTAT.
Transaction Value ($ million) is the total value of consideration paid by the acquirer, excluding fees and expenses.
Assets is defined as total book value of assets. Days To Completion is measured as the number of calendar days between
the announcement and eﬀective dates. Cash includes cash and marketable securities. EBIT equals cash flow minus
depreciation. Return On Assets is defined as cash flow scaled by assets. PPE is property, plant, and equipment.




                                                                  Liquidity Merger
                                                                   Yes        No          All
                                                                 Mean        Mean        Mean
                                                                [Median] [Median]       [Median]

                         Panel A: Deal Characteristics
                         Transaction Value (TV )                 670.58     784.82       770.52
                                                                [125.25]    [97.90]     [100.60]
                         TV/Assets                                1.08         2.36        2.17
                                                                 [0.66]      [1.19]      [1.13]
                         Days To Completion                      146.28     118.63       122.09
                                                                  [121]       [102]       [106]

                         Panel B: Acquirer Characteristics
                         Assets                                  4,380.8     6,248.9     6,120.0
                                                                [1,155.5]   [1,125.0]   [1,117.8]
                         Cash/Assets (%)                           9.98       14.82       14.30
                                                                  [3.70]      [8.15]      [7.66]
                         EBIT/Assets (%)                           9.65        7.07        7.37
                                                                  [9.37]      [9.55]      [9.57]
                         Return On Assets (%)                     13.28       11.05       11.31
                                                                 [12.89]     [13.52]     [13.51]
                         PPE/Assets (%)                           28.66       23.49       24.04
                                                                 [26.17]     [20.10]     [20.52]
                         Q                                         1.54        2.39        2.31
                                                                  [1.33]      [1.72]      [1.65]

                         Panel C: Target Characteristics
                         Assets                                  801.69     619.92       646.23
                                                                [234.45]    [89.21]      [100.8]
                         Cash/Assets (%)                           5.58      17.72        15.82
                                                                  [2.02]     [9.49]       [6.46]
                         EBIT/Assets (%)                           9.70       2.91         3.99
                                                                  [8.40]     [6.08]       [7.24]
                         Return On Assets (%)                     14.99       7.87         9.04
                                                                 [13.50]    [11.04]      [11.99]
                         PPE/Assets (%)                           30.14      26.42        27.30
                                                                 [29.10]    [23.44]      [24.61]
                         Q                                         1.35       1.99         1.84
                                                                  [1.19]     [1.40]       [1.33]




                                                           49
Table 3
Summary statistics for industry-level variables
This table reports summary statistics for time-invariant proxies of industry characteristics during the 1980—2006 period.
A liquidity merger is defined as a merger or acquisition in which the target has interest coverage below the sample
median and profitability above the sample median in COMPUSTAT (Definition A) or as a merger or acquisition in
which the target has interest coverage below the sample 33rd percentile and profitability above the sample median in
COMPUSTAT (Definition B). Liquidity Mergers is defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s ratio of liquidity mergers to
the total number of horizontal mergers in that industry between January 1, 1980 and December 31, 2006 (see text for
further details). Transferable Assets is defined as machine intensity (ppenme/at) multiplied by 100 times the ratio of
used divided by used plus new capital, from the Bureau of Census’ Economic Census. Industry Concentration is defined
as the 3-digit SIC industry’s Herfindahl index (based on sales). Industry Interest Coverage is defined as the 3-digit
SIC industry’s average interest coverage. Industry Capacity Utilization is defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s capacity
utilization, which is available from the Federal Reserve’s Statistical Release G.17. Industry Q is defined as the 3-digit
SIC industry’s average Q. All variables are time-invariant industry-level averages and winsorized at the 5% level.



                                        Mean        Median        Std. Dev.     25th Pct.    75th Pct.     Obs.

      Panel A: Def. A
      Liquidity Mergers                 0.204         0.167         0.125        0.104        0.273         85
      Transferable Assets               0.397         0.326         0.299        0.183        0.486         85
      Industry Concentration            0.011         0.008         0.008        0.005        0.012         85
      Industry Interest Coverage        28.11         23.16         21.11        14.53        36.92         85
      Industry Capacity Utilization     0.788         0.782         0.028        0.765        0.808         83
      Industry Q                        3.306         1.832         3.393        1.375        3.206         85

      Panel B: Def. B
      Liquidity Mergers                 0.142         0.111        0.096          0.071       0.200         64
      Transferable Assets               0.405         0.357        0.307          0.191       0.483         64
      Industry Concentration            0.010         0.007        0.009          0.005       0.010         64
      Industry Interest Coverage        27.685       22.778        21.763        14.053       36.897        64
      Industry Capacity Utilization     0.786         0.776        0.027          0.765       0.808         63
      Industry Q                        3.251         1.951        3.048          1.464       3.616         64




                                                           50
Table 4
Summary statistics for firm-level variables
This table reports basic summary statistics for time-variant proxies of firm characteristics during the 1987—2008 period.
Acq LC-to-Cash is defined as the fraction of corporate liquidity that is provided by investment-related lines of credit.
Assets are firm assets net of cash, measured in millions of dollars. Tangibility is PPE over assets. Q is defined as a cash-
adjusted, market-to-book assets ratio. NetWorth is the book value of equity minus cash over total assets. Profitability is
the ratio of EBITDA over net assets. Industry sales volatility (IndSaleVol ) is the (3-digit SIC) industry median value of
the within-year standard deviation of quarterly changes in firm sales, scaled by the average quarterly gross asset value
in the year. ProfitVol is the firm-level standard deviation of annual changes in the level of EBITDA, calculated using
four lags, and scaled by average gross assets in the lagged period. Firm Age is measured as the diﬀerence between the
current year and the first year in which the firm appeared in COMPUSTAT. Unused LC-to-Cash and Total LC-to-Cash
measure the fraction of total corporate liquidity that is provided by credit lines using unused and total credit lines.



                                             Mean         Median        Std. Dev.     25th Pct.     75th Pct.     Obs.

 LPC Sample (LPC-DealScan):
 Acq LC-to-Cash                               0.215         0.000        0.354          0.000        0.394        22,333
 Tangibility                                  0.310         0.281        0.176          0.175        0.414        20,955
 Assets                                      2392.38       255.19       12841.67        53.71       1081.43       20,968
 Q                                            1.985         1.498        1.302          1.130        2.267        19,231
 NetWorth                                     0.360         0.393        0.268          0.228        0.550        20,955
 Profitability                                0.134         0.141        0.122          0.086        0.202        20,913
 IndSalVol                                    0.038         0.033        0.023          0.025        0.043        22,589
 ProfitVol                                    0.066         0.049        0.052          0.027        0.089        22,593
 Age                                          19.435       14.000        15.525         7.000        31.000       22,593

 Random Sample (Sufi (2009) sample):
 Unused LC-to-Cash                            0.450         0.455         0.373         0.000        0.822        1,906
 Total LC-to-Cash                             0.512         0.569         0.388         0.000        0.900        1,908
 Tangibility                                  0.332         0.275         0.230         0.146        0.481        1,908
 Assets                                      1441.41       116.41        7682.26        23.98        522.20       1,908
 Q                                            2.787         1.524         3.185         1.069        2.726        1,905
 NetWorth                                     0.426         0.453         0.300         0.284        0.633        1,905
 Profitability                                0.015         0.126         0.413         0.040        0.198        1,908
 IndSalVol                                    0.043         0.036         0.026         0.024        0.051        1,908
 ProfitVol                                    0.089         0.061         0.078         0.028        0.126        1,908
 Age                                          16.04         10.00         13.40          6.00         23.00       1,908




                                                            51
Table 5
Liquidity mergers and transferable assets
The dependent variable Liquidity Mergers is the fraction of liquidity mergers by 3-digit SIC industry as a fraction of the
total number of mergers in that industry between January 1, 1980 and December 31, 2006 (see text for further details).
A liquidity merger is defined as a merger or acquisition in which the target has interest coverage below the sample median
and profitability above the sample median in COMPUSTAT (Panel A) or as a merger or acquisition in which the target
has interest coverage below the sample 33rd percentile and profitability above the sample median in COMPUSTAT
(Panel B). Interest coverage is computed as oibdp divided by xint. If COMPUSTAT data are not available, we use the
corresponding data items from SDC. Transferable Assets is defined as machine intensity (ppenme/at ), multiplied by
100 times the ratio of used divided by used plus new capital, from the Bureau of Census’ Economic Census. Industry
Concentration is defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s Herfindahl index (based on sale). Industry Interest Coverage is
defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s average interest coverage. Industry Capacity Utilization is defined as the 3-digit
SIC industry’s capacity utilization, which is available from the Federal Reserve’s Statistical Release G.17. Industry Q is
defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s average Q. All variables are time-invariant industry-level averages and winsorized
at the 5% level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, and t-statistics based on
robust standard errors are in parentheses.


                            (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)

  Panel A: Def. A
  Transferable Assets    0.141***    0.164***    0.154***    0.139***     0.129**    0.165***    0.239***     0.170***
                          (2.66)      (3.13)      (2.84)      (2.70)       (2.22)      (3.03)     (4.06)       (3.99)
  Industry Concentr.                 4.562***                                        5.087***      3.588      5.453***
                                      (3.45)                                           (3.32)     (1.62)       (3.38)
  Industry Int. Cov.                              -0.001                              -0.001*     -0.001       -0.001
                                                  (1.45)                               (1.78)     (1.02)       (1.47)
  Industry Cap. Util.                                            0.871*              1.085**       0.820      1.112**
                                                                 (1.78)                (2.21)     (1.36)       (2.50)
  Industry Q                                                              -0.008**     -0.004     -0.005       -0.004
                                                                           (2.01)      (1.07)     (1.05)       (1.14)
  Constant               0.148***    0.090***    0.165***        -0.539   0.178***    -0.730*     -0.548      -0.763**
                          (6.52)      (3.44)      (5.82)         (1.42)    (5.58)      (1.89)     (1.13)       (2.13)
  Specification            OLS         OLS         OLS            OLS       OLS         OLS       Median        Tobit
  Observations              85          85          85             83        85          83          83          83
  R2                       0.12        0.21        0.13           0.16      0.16        0.30       0.17         0.35

  Panel B: Def. B
  Transferable Assets     0.096**    0.114***    0.119***    0.101**      0.088**     0.135***   0.139***     0.140***
                           (2.36)     (2.81)      (3.24)      (2.51)       (2.08)       (4.02)    (3.20)        (4.21)
  Industry Concentr.                 4.219***                                        4.187***    4.021**      4.506***
                                      (3.28)                                            (3.07)    (2.19)        (3.53)
  Industry Int. Cov.                             -0.001**                            -0.002***    -0.001     -0.002***
                                                  (2.50)                                (3.08)    (1.18)        (3.36)
  Industry Cap. Util.                                            0.551                  0.701*     0.286      0.748**
                                                                 (1.19)                 (1.68)    (0.59)        (2.02)
  Industry Q                                                              -0.008**     -0.006*    -0.005       -0.006*
                                                                           (2.27)       (1.94)    (0.93)        (1.71)
  Constant               0.103***     0.054**    0.129***        -0.335   0.133***      -0.444    -0.163        -0.489
                          (5.68)       (2.58)     (6.00)         (0.93)    (5.63)       (1.36)    (0.42)        (1.66)
  Specification            OLS          OLS        OLS            OLS       OLS          OLS      Median        Tobit
  Observations              64           64         64             63        64           63         63           63
  R2                       0.09         0.24       0.17           0.14      0.16         0.41      0.19          0.34




                                                            52
Table 6
Liquidity mergers and transferable assets after a liquidity shock
The tests in this table are based on the set of bond issuers listed as “below-investment grade” according to Standard &
Poor’s long-term credit rating between 1986 and 1993; firms without an S&P rating are excluded from the analysis. The
dependent variable Liquidity Mergers is the fraction of liquidity mergers by 3-digit SIC industry as a fraction of the total
number of mergers in the sample for that industry after 1989 (see text for further details). A liquidity merger is defined
as a merger or acquisition in which the target has interest coverage below the sample median and profitability above the
sample median in COMPUSTAT (Panel A) or as a merger or acquisition in which the target has interest coverage below
the sample 33rd percentile and profitability above the sample median in COMPUSTAT (Panel B). Interest coverage
is computed as oibdp divided by xint. If COMPUSTAT data are not available, we use the corresponding data items
from SDC. Transferable Assets is defined as machine intensity (ppenme/at ), multiplied by 100 times the ratio of used
divided by used plus new capital, from the Bureau of Census’ Economic Census. Industry Concentration is defined
as the 3-digit SIC industry’s Herfindahl index (based on sale). Industry Interest Coverage is defined as the 3-digit
SIC industry’s average interest coverage. Industry Capacity Utilization is defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s capacity
utilization, which is available from the Federal Reserve’s Statistical Release G.17. Industry Q is defined as the 3-digit
SIC industry’s average Q. All variables are time-invariant industry-level averages and winsorized at the 5% level. *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, and t-statistics based on robust standard errors
are in parentheses.


                            (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)

  Panel A: Def. A
  Transferable Assets    0.498***    0.560***    0.487***    0.482***     0.542***     0.465**     0.740**      0.474**
                          (3.21)      (3.56)      (3.04)      (2.79)       (2.85)       (2.28)      (2.07)       (2.47)
  Industry Concentr.                 17.217**                                         25.306***    31.524**    26.529***
                                      (2.57)                                            (3.00)      (2.53)       (3.69)
  Industry Int. Cov.                               0.001                                0.003        0.004        0.003
                                                   (0.26)                               (0.86)      (0.80)       (1.17)
  Industry Cap. Util.                                          0.804                    1.266        2.621        1.339
                                                               (0.56)                   (0.81)      (1.15)       (1.10)
  Industry Q                                                               -0.019       -0.004       0.011       -0.003
                                                                           (1.42)       (0.36)      (0.52)       (0.26)
  Constant               0.402***    0.231***    0.383***      -0.228     0.451***      -0.852      -2.202       -0.940
                          (6.65)      (3.12)      (3.82)       (0.20)      (5.83)       (0.66)      (1.17)       (0.93)
  Specification            OLS         OLS         OLS          OLS         OLS          OLS        Median       Tobit
  Observations              35          35          35           34          35           34          34           34
  R2                       0.14        0.30        0.15         0.14        0.19         0.41        0.41         0.45

  Panel B: Def. B
  Transferable Assets     0.461**    0.574***     0.452**      0.442*     0.643**       0.520*      0.325**      0.554**
                           (2.35)     (3.06)       (2.23)      (1.91)      (2.62)       (2.05)       (2.53)       (2.33)
  Industry Concentr.                 14.916**                                         23.535***      28.192    24.411***
                                      (2.23)                                            (3.01)       (1.70)       (2.97)
  Industry Int. Cov.                               0.001                                0.004         0.001        0.004
                                                   (0.19)                               (0.77)       (0.09)       (1.24)
  Industry Cap. Util.                                         3.562**                  3.819**        4.866      4.030**
                                                               (2.41)                   (2.24)       (1.48)       (2.39)
  Industry Q                                                               -0.035*      -0.005       -0.017       -0.006
                                                                            (1.84)      (0.24)       (0.40)       (0.33)
  Constant               0.372***     0.202*     0.354***     -2.422*     0.430***     -2.911*       -3.632     -3.106**
                          (4.61)      (1.94)      (2.88)       (2.06)       (3.99)      (2.04)       (1.33)       (2.26)
  Specification            OLS         OLS         OLS          OLS          OLS         OLS        Median        Tobit
  Observations              26          26          26           25           26          25           25           25
  R2                       0.12        0.24        0.12         0.24         0.24        0.48         0.29         0.36




                                                            53
Table 7
Line of credit availability and transferable assets
The dependent variable is Acq LC-to-Cash, the fraction of corporate liquidity that is provided by investment-related
lines of credit. The data for lines of credit come from LPC DealScan, for the period of 1987 to 2008. Profitability is
the ratio of EBITDA over net assets. Tangibility is PPE over assets. Assets are firm assets net of cash, measured in
millions of dollars. NetWorth is the book value of equity minus cash over total assets. Q is defined as a cash-adjusted,
market-to-book assets ratio. Industry sales volatility (IndSaleVol ) is the (3-digit SIC) industry median value of the
within-year standard deviation of quarterly changes in firm sales, scaled by the average quarterly gross asset value in
the year. ProfitVol is the firm-level standard deviation of annual changes in the level of EBITDA, calculated using
four lags, and scaled by average gross assets in the lagged period. Firm Age is measured as the diﬀerence between the
current year and the first year in which the firm appeared in COMPUSTAT. Transferable Assets is defined as machine
intensity (ppenme/at) multiplied by 100 times the ratio of used divided by used plus new capital, from the Bureau of
Census’ Economic Census. Industry Concentration is defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s Herfindahl index (based on
sales). Industry Interest Coverage is defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s average interest coverage. Industry Capacity
Utilization is defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s capacity utilization, which is available from the Federal Reserve’s
Statistical Release G.17. Industry Q is defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s average Q. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, and t-statistics based on robust standard errors are in parentheses.

              Dep. Var.: Acq LC-to-Cash            (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)
              Transferable Assets                           0.165***    0.095***     0.087***      0.135**
                                                             (4.23)        (3.14)      (3.10)       (2.12)
              Profitability                       0.027                    0.0049       0.013      0.226**
                                                  (0.84)                   (0.17)      (0.38)       (2.07)
              Tangibility                         -0.039                   -0.033     -0.059*     -0.207**
                                                  (1.29)                   (1.00)      (1.89)       (2.43)
              Assets                           0.026***                 0.028***     0.027***    0.092***
                                                  (7.43)                   (6.73)      (6.71)       (9.81)
              NetWorth                         -0.100***                -0.095***   -0.093***    -0.266***
                                                  (5.63)                   (4.89)      (4.96)       (4.88)
              Q                                -0.042***                -0.038***   -0.038***    -0.094***
                                                 (14.51)                  (12.28)     (11.85)       (9.73)
              IndSalVol                           0.336                    0.382        0.237        0.242
                                                  (1.58)                   (1.50)      (0.87)       (0.36)
              ProfitVol                         -0.181**                  -0.150*      -0.108        0.108
                                                  (2.00)                   (1.79)      (1.24)       (0.43)
              Age                               -0.018**                 -0.019**    -0.019**     -0.054**
                                                  (2.33)                   (2.22)      (2.23)       (2.55)
              Industry Concentration                                                 3.171***    7.291***
                                                                                       (2.97)       (3.42)
              Industry Interest Coverage                                            -0.001***     -0.001**
                                                                                       (2.66)       (2.14)
              Industry Capacity Utilization                                           0.512**       0.848
                                                                                       (2.19)       (1.51)
              Industry Q                                                               -0.001       -0.003
                                                                                       (0.65)       (0.69)
              Constant                          0.261***    0.162***    0.218***       -0.167    -1.717***
                                                 (8.47)      (8.04)      (6.27)        (0.90)       (3.90)
              Cluster                             Firm      Industry    Industry     Industry     Industry
              Industry Dummies?                    Yes         No          No            No            No
              Year Dummies?                        Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
              Specification                       OLS         OLS         OLS           OLS         Tobit
              Observations                       19,034      22,333      19,034       18,922       18,922
              R2                                  0.10        0.07        0.10          0.11          0.07




                                                           54
Table 8
Line of credit availability and transferable assets: random sample
The dependent variables are Total LC-to-Cash and Unused LC-to-Cash, which measure the fraction of total corporate
liquidity that is provided by credit lines using total and unused credit lines respectively. The data for lines of credit are
provided by Amir Sufi, for the period of 1996 to 2003. Profitability is the ratio of EBITDA over net assets. Tangibility
is PPE over assets. Assets are firm assets net of cash, measured in millions of dollars. NetWorth is the book value of
equity minus cash over total assets. Q is defined as a cash-adjusted, market-to-book assets ratio. Industry sales volatility
(IndSaleVol ) is the (3-digit SIC) industry median value of the within-year standard deviation of quarterly changes in
firm sales, scaled by the average quarterly gross asset value in the year. ProfitVol is the firm-level standard deviation
of annual changes in the level of EBITDA, calculated using four lags, and scaled by average gross assets in the lagged
period. Firm Age is measured as the diﬀerence between the current year and the first year in which the firm appeared
in COMPUSTAT. Transferable Assets is defined as machine intensity (ppenme/at) multiplied by 100 times the ratio of
used divided by used plus new capital, from the Bureau of Census’ Economic Census. Industry Concentration is defined
as the 3-digit SIC industry’s Herfindahl index (based on sales). Industry Interest Coverage is defined as the 3-digit
SIC industry’s average interest coverage. Industry Capacity Utilization is defined as the 3-digit SIC industry’s capacity
utilization, which is available from the Federal Reserve’s Statistical Release G.17. Industry Q is defined as the 3-digit
SIC industry’s average Q. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, and t-statistics
based on robust standard errors are in parentheses.

         Panel A — Dep. Var.: Total LC-to-Cash           (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
         Transferable Assets                                        0.723***     0.318**      0.321**      0.353**
                                                                     (4.39)       (2.33)       (2.20)       (2.07)
         Profitability                                  0.078**                  0.067*      0.082***     0.266***
                                                         (2.27)                   (1.97)       (2.69)       (3.52)
         Tangibility                                     0.040                    0.104        0.097         0.173
                                                         (0.56)                   (1.17)       (1.12)       (1.43)
         Assets                                        0.047***                 0.039***    0.039***      0.052***
                                                         (5.12)                   (3.30)       (3.23)       (3.50)
         NetWorth                                      -0.097**                -0.185***    -0.173***     -0.233**
                                                         (2.30)                   (3.06)       (3.17)       (2.51)
         Q                                            -0.036***                -0.039***    -0.039***    -0.066***
                                                         (8.51)                   (8.83)       (8.64)       (7.61)
         IndSalVol                                      1.094*                    1.301        1.630*      2.314**
                                                         (1.69)                   (1.49)       (1.84)       (2.26)
         ProfitVol                                    -0.596***                  -0.550*      -0.489*       -0.338
                                                         (3.22)                   (1.85)       (1.88)       (0.90)
         Age                                            -0.039*                  -0.047*       -0.040      -0.059*
                                                         (1.85)                   (1.75)       (1.58)       (1.88)
         Industry Concentration                                                                1.229         0.459
                                                                                               (0.37)       (0.12)
         Industry Interest Coverage                                                           -0.002*     -0.002**
                                                                                               (1.88)       (2.08)
         Industry Capacity Utilization                                                         1.046         1.119
                                                                                               (1.08)       (1.00)
         Industry Q                                                                            0.001         0.002
                                                                                               (0.14)       (0.26)
         Constant                                      0.239**      0.272***    0.524***       -0.299       -0.530
                                                        (2.42)       (4.46)      (4.91)        (0.38)       (0.59)
         Cluster                                         Firm       Industry    Industry     Industry     Industry
         Industry Dummies?                                Yes          No          No            No           No
         Year Dummies?                                   Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
         Specification                                   OLS          OLS         OLS           OLS         Tobit
         Observations                                   1,905          900         900           900          900
         R2                                              0.40         0.11        0.40          0.41         0.37




                                                               55
Panel B — Dep. Var.: Unused LC-to-Cash      (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)        (10)
Transferable Assets                                  0.645***    0.260**      0.254*       0.289*
                                                      (4.13)       (2.05)      (1.91)      (1.84)
Profitability                              0.061*                  0.044      0.059**   0.252***
                                           (1.96)                  (1.48)      (2.17)      (3.55)
Tangibility                                0.025                   0.079        0.071      0.127
                                           (0.37)                  (0.90)      (0.82)      (1.01)
Assets                                   0.053***                0.047***    0.046***   0.061***
                                           (6.12)                  (3.81)      (3.68)      (4.15)
NetWorth                                   -0.054               -0.138***   -0.127***     -0.165*
                                           (1.40)                  (2.87)      (2.88)      (1.86)
Q                                        -0.029***              -0.034***   -0.034***   -0.061***
                                           (7.28)                  (9.35)      (9.07)      (7.71)
IndSalVol                                  1.042                   1.051        1.285      1.948*
                                           (1.55)                  (1.20)      (1.40)      (1.82)
ProfitVol                                -0.554***               -0.541**    -0.479**      -0.357
                                           (3.17)                  (2.01)      (2.09)      (0.99)
Age                                        -0.023                 -0.044*      -0.037      0.057*
                                           (1.13)                  (1.68)      (1.51)      (1.79)
Industry Concentration                                                          1.444      0.717
                                                                               (0.42)      (0.18)
Industry Interest Coverage                                                    -0.002*    -0.002**
                                                                               (1.85)      (2.01)
Industry Capacity Utilization                                                   0.977      1.062
                                                                               (0.97)      (0.91)
Industry Q                                                                     -0.001      0.001
                                                                               (0.01)      (0.12)
Constant                                  0.148      0.244***   0.428***       -0.330      -0.580
                                          (1.38)      (4.22)     (4.52)        (0.40)      (0.62)
Cluster                                    Firm      Industry   Industry     Industry    Industry
Industry Dummies?                           Yes         No         No            No          No
Year Dummies?                              Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Specification                              OLS         OLS        OLS           OLS        Tobit
Observations                              1,903         900        900           900        900
R2                                         0.37        0.10       0.39          0.40        0.36




                                              56
Appendix A. Proof of Proposition 1
Suppose condition 7 holds. To prove the proposed equilibrium, let us analyze what happens in each
state at date 1, given the proposed liquidity policies. Then we will show that firms do not benefit
from deviating from the optimal liquidity policies at date 0.
    In state (1 − λ)2 , both firms continue since they do not need additional liquidity. In state (1 − λ)λ,
only firm L has a liquidity shock, and it is liquidated. Firm H continues, but does not bid for L. In
state λ(1 − λ), only firm H has a liquidity shock. It can finance its liquidity shock and continues.
Finally, in state λ2 both firms have a liquidity shock. Firm H can continue, while firm L is liquidated.
    These strategies generate enough date-0 pledgeable income for investors, so that projects can start.
Consider first firm L. It makes K0L = I − AL (so that it can finance the initial investment), K1,λL = −τ
                                                                                               L
(liquidation or merger proceeds are fully pledged to external investors), and a payment K2,(1−λ) such
that investors break even from the perspective of date 0. This payment must be such that:
                                                           L
                                       I − AL = (1 − λ)pG K2,(1−λ) + λτ .                                         (33)
                                              L
Equation 5 guarantees that we can find a K2,(1−λ)                    L
                                                     such that pG K2,(1−λ) ≤ ρ0 , thereby satisfying the
pledgeability constraint.41

    Firm H’s optimal investment policy is to start its own project at date 0 and reinvest ρ in state λ
at date 1 (so that it continues until the final date). In order to support this policy, firm H borrows
suﬃcient funds to start the project at date 0 (K0H = I − AH ), and receives an additional payment of
                                        H = ρ). It promises a date-2 payment K (in both states), so
ρ from external investors in state λ (K1,λ                                         2
that investors break even. This payment is such that:

                                              I − AH + λρ = pG K2 .                                               (34)

Equation 6 guarantees that this payment satisfies the pledgeability constraint.
    Are these strategies optimal given the other firm’s strategy? By condition 4, it is eﬃcient for
both firms to withstand the liquidity shock. Firm L would benefit from saving more liquidity to
withstand its own shock, but it is constrained by its low net worth AL (condition 5). Formally, since
ρ0 − λρ < I − AL , one cannot find a date-2 payment K2L ≤ pρG0 such that I − AL + λρ = pG K2L .
    Firm H could deviate from the equilibrium strategy by bidding for firm L. However, condition 7
implies that it does not pay for firm H to deviate. H needs to pay a minimum price of τ to firm L’s
investors, and finance L’s liquidity shock, ρ. Because the maximum that it can generate out of firm
L’s assets is ρ1 − δ, bidding is not profitable for firm H. Thus, no firm benefits from deviating from
the equilibrium strategies.
    Now suppose condition 8 holds. Given the proposed financial policies, in state λ2 firm H would
benefit from bidding for the assets of firm L, but does not have enough liquidity to finance the bid.
In state (1 − λ)λ, firm H does not have a liquidity shock, and uses its liquidity ρ + τ to bid for the
assets of firm L. Given 8, the liquidity merger is eﬃcient since firm H can generate ρ1 − δ from the
assets of firm L. Firm H pays the liquidation value τ to firm L’s investors, and assumes the other
liabilities of L (the liquidity shock ρ). The outcomes in the other states are identical to those above.
    We now show that firms have suﬃcient pledgeable income to support the equilibrium strategies.
The analysis for firm L is identical to that above. Firm H must have enough liquidity to withstand
  41                                                                                   L                        L
     The financial policy is generally not unique. For example, the firm can also set K1,λ > −τ , and increase K2,(1−λ)
(as long as the pledgeability constraint is satisfied).


                                                          57
its own liquidity shock in state λ. This equilibrium requires that K1,λH = ρ, and K H
                                                                                   1,(1−λ)λ = ρ + τ .
Notice also that since firm H is acquiring firm L, as long as ρ0 − δ > 0 its pledgeable income will
increase in state (1 − λ)λ. The break-even constraint in this case is:
                                                                                H
            I − AH + λρ + (1 − λ)λ(ρ + τ ) = (1 − λ(1 − λ))pG K2∗ + λ(1 − λ)pG K2,(1−λ)λ .           (35)
                                                                            H
By equation 6, we can find a solution such that pG K2∗ ≤ ρ0 , and pG K2,(1−λ)λ      ≤ 2ρ0 − δ. Thus, firm
H can finance both its own liquidity shock, and also the liquidity merger.
    Firm L cannot deviate from the equilibrium strategy since it does not have enough pledgeable
income to withstand the liquidity shock (as above). Firm H would benefit from hoarding additional
liquidity to bid for the assets of firm L in state λ2 , but it is constrained by date-0 pledgeable income
as we show now. If firm H deviates and demands enough liquidity to bid for firm L also in state λ2 ,
it would require a transfer K1,λH = KH
                                  2      1,(1−λ)λ = ρ + τ . Thus, in order for investors to break even at
date 0 we would require:

                I − AH + λρ + (1 − λ)λ [ρ + τ − (ρ0 − δ)] + λ2 [ρ + τ − (ρ0 − δ)] ≤ ρ0               (36)

which violates 6. Thus, the proposed strategies are optimal given the pledgeability constraints.


Appendix B. Proof of Proposition 2
Let us first derive C and D0c , the optimal cash balance and debt level in the equilibrium without a
liquidity merger. Equations (13) and (14) imply that:
                                                 I − AH + ρ − ρ0
                                       C =                                                           (37)
                                                (1 − ξ)(1 − λ) − ξ
                                                ρ0 − ρ + (1 − ξ)C
                                      D0c =                                                          (38)
                                                        pG
This solution is feasible as long as pG D0c ≤ ρ0 , which implies the following constraint:
                                                λ + ξ(1 − λ)
                                     I − AH +                ρ ≤ ρ0 .                                (39)
                                                   1−ξ
Not surprisingly, this constraint becomes tighter as the cost of holding cash increases. If ξ = 0, we have
the same feasibility condition as in the security-design case (Proposition 1), which is always obeyed
by condition 6. The parameter ξ maxNM can be defined as the maximum cost of cash that is consistent
with condition 39. Finally, given that creditors break even, firm H’s payoﬀ is given by the project’s
total value minus the cost of carrying the cash balance C (equation 16), provided that ξ < ξ max  NM .
                                                                        M
    Let us move now to the equilibrium with a liquidity merger. C must fund both the liquidity
shock in state λ, and the liquidity merger. Thus, we must have:

                                     (1 − ξ) C M + ρ0 − pG D0M ≥ ρ,                                  (40)

                                (1 − ξ) C M + 2ρ0 − δ − pG D0M ≥ ρ + τ .                             (41)
    Finally, the debt level D0M must satisfy pG D0M ≤ ρ0 .
    Notice first that since (C M , D0M ) must obey the same constraints as in the equilibrium with no liq-
uidity merger, we must have C M ≥ C, and D0M ≥ D0C . If this was not the case, then C and D0C would

                                                   58
not be the optimal cash/debt combination in the equilibrium with no mergers. The firm has incen-
tives to minimize the amount of cash that it carries, and thus we know that C and D0c are the lowest
amounts of cash and debt that satisfy the constraints in the equilibrium with no liquidity merger.
    We now show that when condition 15 holds, we must have C M > C. Suppose for contradiction
that C M = C, and D0M = D0C . Since condition 15 holds, the firm needs to use some of its cash to
finance the liquidity merger. Formally, if we let y be the minimum amount of funds that the firm
needs to use in state (1 − λ)λ:
                                   y + 2ρ0 − δ − pG D0C = ρ + τ ,                               (42)
then it is clear that when condition 15 holds, y > 0. Thus, the firm returns only (1 − ξ) C − y to
date-0 investors in this state. Investors’ date-0 break-even constraint would then require:

                 pG D0C + (1 − λ)2 (1 − ξ)C + (1 − λ)λ [(1 − ξ) C − y] = I − AH + C,                  (43)

which cannot hold by equation 14 (which is equivalent to 43, for y = 0). In order for equation 43 to
hold, the amount of debt D0 must increase from D0C to D0C + ε. But then, equation 40 would require:
                                                    £       ¤
                               (1 − ξ) C + ρ0 − pG D0C + ε ≥ ρ.                                 (44)

This cannot hold, since (1 − ξ) C + ρ0 − pG D0C = ρ. Thus, the firm must save an amount of cash that
is greater than C. In equilibrium, we must then have that C M > C, and D0M > D0C . In addition, the
firm uses as little cash as possible in state (1 − λ)λ. If we let y M represent this minimum amount of
cash that the firm needs to use, then the equilibrium is defined by:

                                     y M + 2ρ0 − δ − pG D0M = ρ + τ                                   (45)

                                      (1 − ξ) C M + ρ0 − pG D0M = ρ                                   (46)
                                                       £               ¤
            pG D0M   + (1 − λ)2 (1 − ξ)C M + (1 − λ)λ (1 − ξ) C M − y M = I − AH + C M .              (47)
    This solution is feasible as long as pG D0M (ξ) ≤ ρ0 , where we expressed the optimal debt level as a
function of the cost of carrying cash. Since D0M ≥ D0C , this condition is less likely to hold for the same
cost of carrying cash ξ, and thus if we let ξ max
                                               M    denote the maximum possible cost of cash we must
have that ξ NM ≥ ξ M . The firm’s payoﬀ is reduced by ξC M , as long as ξ < ξ max
            max      max
                                                                                      M . This completes
the proof of the proposition.


Appendix C. Proof of Proposition 3
The analysis of the case without the liquidity merger is in the text. In the equilibrium with the
                           LC must satisfy equation 23, and also be suﬃcient to finance the liquidity
merger, the credit line wmax
shock in state λ (if the line is not revoked):
                                         LC
                                        wmax + ρ0 − pG D0LC ≥ ρ.                                      (48)

    Thus, in the liquidity merger equilibrium the total size of the credit line depends on the firm’s
relative need for pre-committed financing in states λ and (1 − λ)λ. If we define the amount by which
the firm expects to use the credit line in state λ as:

                                         wλ = ρ + pG D0LC − ρ0 ,                                      (49)

                                                    59
and the amount by which the firm expects to use the credit line in state (1 − λ)λ by:
                                         £                            ¤
                            w(1−λ)λ = max ρ + τ + pG D0LC − 2ρ0 + δ, 0 ,                            (50)

then the optimal size of the credit line is given by the maximum of these two values:
                                       LC
                                      wmax = max(wλ , w(1−λ)λ ).                                    (51)
                       LC ensures that the firm has enough liquidity to finance both its own liquidity
A credit line of size wmax
shock, and also the liquidity merger. Notice that while wλ is always greater than zero, w(1−λ)λ might
be equal to zero.
    As in the no-merger equilibrium, the firm finances the credit line by paying the commitment fee
in the state in which the credit line is not used (state (1 − λ)2 ):

                             λ(1 − q)wλ + (1 − λ)λw(1−λ)λ = (1 − λ)2 xM ,                           (52)

where xM (the commitment fee in the liquidity merger equilibrium) must be lower than the firm’s
pledgeable income in state (1 − λ)2 , that is, xM ≤ ρ0 − pG D0LC . This implies the following feasibility
constraint:
                I − AH + λ(1 − q)ρ + (1 − λ)λ(ρ + τ − ρ0 + δ) ≤ (1 − λq)ρ0 + λqτ .                  (53)
This inequality is implied by assumption 6, so that the credit line is always feasible. Thus, the credit
line is always feasible in both equilibria.
    As in the no-merger equilibrium, the main cost of the credit line is that it can be revoked in state
λ. The firm’s expected payoﬀ is then given by equation 24.


Appendix D. Endogenizing line of credit revocability
The analysis of line of credit implementation in Section 3.2.2 takes the probability q as an exogenous
parameter. We now show that this probability can be endogenized in a framework in which the
probability of the liquidity shock λ is partly determined by managerial actions. For that purpose, we
add another date to the model between date 0 and date 1 in which the manager must choose between
two actions. The good action produces a probability of the date-1 liquidity shock equal to λG , and
the bad action produces a probability λB > λG , but a private benefit equal to B0 for the manager.
The optimal contract must be designed to induce the good action.
     Denote the manager’s continuation utilities following the realization of the liquidity shock by Uλ
(if the firm is hit with the liquidity shock), and U1−λ (if the liquidity shock does not occur). Then,
the manager’s incentive constraint requires that:

                        (1 − λG )U1−λ + λG Uλ ≥ (1 − λB )U1−λ + λB Uλ + B0 ,                        (54)

which implies that:
                                                          B0
                                        U1−λ − Uλ ≥             .                                   (55)
                                                        λG − λB
In order to induce the manager to take the right action, the optimal credit line must ensure that the
manager’s continuation utility depends on whether the liquidity shock is realized or not. As we now
show, revoking the credit line in state λ allows the credit line to satisfy condition 55.

                                                   60
    Consider first the equilibrium without the liquidity merger. In that case, the continuation utilities
for H’s manager are:

                                   U1−λ = ρ1 − pG D0LC                                              (56)
                                     Uλ = (1 − q)(ρ1 − pG D0LC ).

At date 1, the initial investment I is sunk and thus does not need to be considered. In the line or
credit implementation of Section 3.2.2, the manager pays for the liquidity shock in state λ by raising
capital from date-1 investors and the credit line. Thus, the manager’s payoﬀ at that point is equal to
the project’s total expected payoﬀ, minus what was promised to date-0 investors. Finally, if the firm
is liquidated (with probability q), the manager receives a zero payoﬀ. We conclude that to induce
managerial behavior the probability q must satisfy:
                                                   B0
                                   q∗ =                           > 0.                              (57)
                                          λG − λB (ρ1 − pG D0LC )

Notice that the probability that the credit line is revoked is as low as possible to minimize liquidation
costs.
    The analysis is similar for the liquidity merger equilibrium. The main diﬀerence is that the
continuation utility in state (1 − λ) is higher than U1−λ due to the expected payoﬀ from the merger:
                                   M
                                  U1−λ = ρ1 − pG D0LC + λ(ρ1 − ρ0 ).                                (58)

To understand this expression, notice that the merger happens with probability λ (the probability
that L is distressed). If the merger happens, it produces total expected cash flows equal to ρ1 − δ, and
pledgeable cash flows equal to ρ0 − δ which are entirely used by the manager to finance the required
investment of ρ + τ (and in addition, the manager may use the credit line). Thus, the manager’s
expected payoﬀ from the merger is equal to λ(ρ1 − ρ0 ). The expression for U1−λ   M implies that the

expression for q is now:
                                               B0
                                            λ −λ − λ(ρ1 − ρ0 )
                                  0 < qM = G B                    < q∗ .                            (59)
                                                 ρ1 − pG D0LC
Notice that the line of credit can be revoked less often in the liquidity merger equilibrium, because the
possibility of acquiring firm L (which happens only in state (1 − λ)) improves managerial incentives.


Appendix E. Proof of Proposition 4
Cash implementation is always feasible when ξ = 0 and it is not feasible when ξ = 1 (see equation
39) so ξ max               max
         N M > 0. If ξ > ξ NM the firm cannot use cash and will prefer the credit line (recall that the
credit line is always feasible). If ξ < ξ max
                                          NM , cash implementation is feasible. If ξ = q = 0, then the
                                                                                            0
firm is indiﬀerent between cash and the credit line, so that qNM (0) = 0. Now, take a q > 0. For ξ
                                                                  0
small enough, the firm prefers cash to the credit line if q = q , because of the expected loss from the
                                   0                                N C decreases monotonically until the
revocability of the credit line, λq (ρ1 − ρ − τ ). As ξ increases, UH
                   0                   0    0
point at which λq (ρ1 − ρ − τ ) = ξ C(ξ ), such that the firm is again indiﬀerent between cash and
                                           0      0
credit lines. We can then define qNM (ξ ) = q . A similar procedure will produce the cost of cash ξ
                                                                                        0
that makes the firm indiﬀerent between cash and credit lines, for all q ≤ 1. Clearly, qNM     (ξ) ≥ 0.


                                                    61
Appendix F. Proof of Proposition 5
The proof of the existence of the function qM (ξ) is identical to the proof above. For all q ≤ 1, we take
the value of ξ that makes the firm indiﬀerent between cash and the credit line. Clearly, qM 0 (ξ) ≥ 0. To
                                             0
show that qM (ξ) ≥ qN M (ξ), take again q = q as above. The cost of cash that makes the firm indiﬀerent
                                                 00
                      0                  00                                 ∂ξC M (ξ)
can be defined as λq (ρ1 − ρ − τ ) = ξ C M (ξ ). Since C M > C, and            ∂ξ       > 0, it must be that
 00   0
ξ < ξ . Since the same point holds for all q ≤ 1, we must have that qM (ξ) ≥ qN M (ξ) (see Figure 1).


Appendix G. Combining cash and credit lines (Section 4.1)
Denote by C J the amount of cash that the firm would need to hold in such a joint policy, and by DJ
the associated promised repayment at date 2. Let the credit line be big enough such that the firm
can finance the bid for the other firm using the line. It only pays for the firm to deviate from the line
of credit-only policy if it saves enough cash to survive the liquidity shock in state λ with probability
1. Since the line of credit will not be available in some states of the world, this condition requires:

                                      (1 − ξ) C J + ρ0 − pG DJ = ρ.                                     (60)

The promised payment must in turn satisfy:

                pG DJ = I − AH + λC J + (1 − λ)ξC J + (1 − λ)λ[ρ + τ − ρ0 + δ] ≤ ρ0                     (61)

    Notice that the firm uses cash to withstand the liquidity shock, and the credit line to pay for the
liquidity merger. This means that the firm can return (1 − ξ) C J to investors in state (1 − λ). The
line of credit—cash joint policy implies the following payoﬀ:
                                               J    M
                                              UH = UH − ξC J                                            (62)

    The joint policy dominates the line of credit-only policy if it is feasible, and if the cost of carrying
cash ξC J is lower than the expected loss from revocability, λq(ρ1 − ρ − τ ). The cash balance C J is
higher than in an equilibrium with no mergers, because the firm must take into account that opening
the line of credit will cost some debt capacity for the firm in state λ. However, the required cash
balance is generally lower than C M , given that the firm does not need to save additional cash with the
specific purpose of financing the liquidity merger. Thus, it is possible that this joint policy dominates
a line of credit-only in the liquidity merger equilibrium.
    Allowing for the possibility of a joint policy does not change the conclusion that the firm is
more likely to use lines of credit in the liquidity merger equilibrium. Consider the region in which
q < qN M (ξ). For these parameter values, the firm chooses the line of credit in both equilibria.
In particular, this implies that the cost of carrying cash ξC is higher than the expected loss from
revocability, λq(ρ1 − ρ − τ ) in that region. Thus, the firm will not find it optimal to implement the
joint policy in this region, even in the equilibrium with liquidity mergers. As derived above the cost
of carrying cash in such a case is ξC J > ξC, which is necessarily larger than the expected loss from
revocability. We conclude that the joint policy can only be optimal if q > qNM (ξ), which is the region
in which cash is optimal in the equilibrium with no liquidity mergers.




                                                      62
Appendix H. Multi-firm setting
We now show that in the multi-firm setting described in Section 4.6 the probability of a liquidity
merger goes down relative to the two-firm case analyzed above. We also show that the model’s key
result continues to hold. That is, firm H is more likely to use credit lines in the liquidity merger
equilibrium.
    As we discuss in Section 4.6., the key diﬀerence in the model set up is that the probability that
an individual firm H that has high liquidity (that is, a firm H that is in state 1 − λ and does not
                                                                                                         0
need to finance a liquidity shock) will find a financially distressed target goes down from λ to λ .
Proposition 1 (which describes the equilibrium under state-contingent contracting) continues to hold.
If condition 7 holds, liquidity mergers are not profitable and all firms follow the same strategies that
are described in the proposition. If condition 8 holds, then liquidity mergers will happen. Since liq-
uidity shocks are idiosyncratic, in every state of the world there will be (1 − μ)λ firms that are in need
for a liquidity infusion, and μ(1 − λ) potential acquirers. Distressed firms are randomly allocated to
potential acquirers, who, conditional on finding a potential target, demand the same liquidity as they
needed in the benchmark model. If a potential acquirer does not find a distressed target (probability
      0
1 − λ ), it returns funds to investors such that investors break even. The date-0 expected payoﬀs
in the equilibrium with no liquidity merger are identical to those described in equation 9, while the
date-0 expected payoﬀs in the liquidity merger equilibrium are:
                   M                       0        0
                  UH    = (1 − λ)[(1 − λ )ρ1 + λ (2ρ1 − ρ − δ − τ )] + λ(ρ1 − ρ) − I                 (63)
                   UL = (1 − λ)ρ1 + λτ − I.

    The implementation of the no-liquidity merger equilibrium using cash and credit lines is identical
to that described above. In the liquidity merger equilibrium, firms of type H must now take into
                                                                         0
account the fact that the probability of a liquidity merger is equal to λ .
                                                0
    We now show that we must have C M > C , that is, the firm needs to save less cash than in the
                          0
two-firm case. If we let y represent the minimum amount of cash that the firm needs to use to help
fund the liquidity merger, then the equilibrium is defined by:
                                       0                  0
                                     y + 2ρ0 − δ − pG D0 = ρ + τ                                     (64)
                                                0             0
                                     (1 − ξ) C + ρ0 − pG D0 = ρ                                      (65)
               0                0                      0
                                                         h       0   0
                                                                       i          0
           pG D0 + (1 − λ)(1 − λ )(1 − ξ)C M + (1 − λ)λ (1 − ξ) C − y = I − AH + C .                 (66)
       0
Since λ < λ, a comparison of these equations with 45, 46, and 47 shows that equation 66 can be
                                  0
satisfied by a lower debt level (D0 < D0M ), since the firm returns more cash to the bank in expectation
 0                         0                                             0
λ < λ. In turn, since D0 < D0M , equation 65 implies that C M > C . This implies that the firm’s
payoﬀ is higher than in the benchmark case in the cash implementation solution.
    Financing the liquidity merger with the credit line is almost identical to the benchmark model.
Firm H must have enough liquidity to finance the bid for firm L, if a target shows up This requires:
                                    LC
                                   wmax + 2ρ0 − pG D0LC − δ ≥ ρ + τ ,                                (67)

which is the same as the condition above. Firm H finances the credit line by paying the commitment
                                                                         0
fee in states in which the credit line is not used (probability (1−λ)(1−λ )). This implies the following

                                                    63
feasibility constraint:
                                                  0
                 I − AH + λ(1 − q)ρ + (1 − λ)λ (ρ + τ − ρ0 + δ) ≤ (1 − λq)ρ0 + λqτ .                  (68)

This inequality is implied by condition 6, so that the credit line is always feasible. The main cost
of the credit line is that it can be revoked in state λ. The firm’s expected payoﬀ is then given by
equation 24, as in the benchmark model.
    Thus, using cash to implement the liquidity merger equilibrium increases the firm’s payoﬀ, while
using credit line results in an identical payoﬀ to that of the benchmark case. We conclude that the
firm is relatively more likely to use cash in this multi-firm extension. More formally, there exists a
function q(ξ), satisfying q0 (ξ) ≥ 0 and q(0) = 0, such that if q > q(ξ), the firm prefers cash to lines of
credit and if q < q(ξ), the firm prefers lines of credit to cash. Finally, it must be that qM (ξ) ≥ q(ξ).
In terms of Figure 2, q(ξ) will lie between qM (ξ) and qNM (ξ). Although qualified in this context, our
model’s main results continue to hold.


Appendix I. Pooling idiosyncratic risk in credit line provision
As discussed in Section 3.2.2, a key feature of the credit line is that it can be provided to the firms
at an actuarially fair cost. In order for this to be the case, a financial intermediary must be able to
fund the demand for credit line drawdowns without holding cash in the balance sheet. Since holding
cash is costly, the intermediary would then have to charge higher commitment fees to break even.
    In this section we prove that under the assumptions of our model, a financial intermediary can in-
deed provide credit lines at an actuarially fair cost. The key to this result, as explained by Holmstrom
and Tirole (1998) and Tirole (2006) is the intermediary’s ability to pool liquidity risks across firms.
    In order to show this point, consider the same set up of Section 4.6.. There are several firms of types
L and H, of total measure equal to one. The fraction of firms of type H is equal to μ. Firms of type L
do not demand liquidity. If firms of type H suﬀer a liquidity shock (state λ), they draw on the credit
line and fund the shock. If they do not suﬀer a shock (state 1 − λ), then they have a probability equal
     0
to λ to acquire a firm of type L. In that case, they make additional drawdowns on their credit line.
    Under the assumptions of the model, both types of firms have enough pledgeable income to finance
these strategies, that is:

               I − AL ≤ (1 − λ)ρ0 + λτ                                                                (69)
                                           0               0
              I − AH      ≤ (1 − λ)(1 − λ )ρ0 − (1 − λ)λ [ρ + τ − (2ρ0 − δ)] − λ(ρ − ρ0 ).
       0
Since λ < λ, it is straightforward to show that these pledgeability conditions are implied by conditions
5 and 6.
    Now, consider the financial intermediary’s pledgeability constraint. The intermediary provides
financing to all firms in the model, and uses payments from liquid firms to fund credit line drawdowns
by firms of type H. Since liquidity shocks are idiosyncratic, all states of the world are identical. In
each state, there are μλ firms of type H who draw on the credit line to fund the liquidity shock, and
          0                                                                                           0
μ(1−λ)λ firms of type H who draw on the line to fund the liquidity merger. There are μ(1−λ)(1−λ )
firms of type H who do not need liquidity and return pledgeable income to the bank. In addition,
no firms of type L demand liquidity. (1 − μ)λ firms of type L get liquidated or acquired (producing



                                                      64
pledgeable income equal to τ ), and (1 − μ)(1 − λ) firms produce pledgeable income equal to ρ0 . Thus,
the bank’s feasibility constraint requires that:
          h                       0
                                                      i                   0
        μ λ(ρ − ρ0 ) + (1 − λ)λ [ρ + τ − (2ρ0 − δ)] ≤ μ(1 − λ)(1 − λ )ρ0 + (1 − μ)λτ +            (70)
                                                           +(1 − μ)(1 − λ)ρ0

    This condition is implied by those in 69, for any value of μ. Thus, the bank has enough pledgeable
income flowing from liquid firms to fund credit line drawdowns, and does not need to hold capital
(save cash) in its balance sheet.




                                                 65
