                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      NON-PRODUCTION BENEFITS OF EDUCATION:
                       CRIME, HEALTH, AND GOOD CITIZENSHIP

                                          Lance Lochner

                                       Working Paper 16722
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16722


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2011




For comments on different sections of this chapter, I think Gary Becker, David Card, Phil Cook, David
Deming, Darius Lakdawalla, Fabian Lange, Jens Ludwig, and participants at the Conference on the
Handbook of the Economics of Education in Munich, Germany, and the NBER Economics of Crime
Control Conferences in Boston, MA, and Berkeley, CA. This research was generously supported by
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Lance Lochner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Non-Production Benefits of Education: Crime, Health, and Good Citizenship
Lance Lochner
NBER Working Paper No. 16722
January 2011
JEL No. H52,I18,I21,I28,J24,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

A growing body of work suggests that education offers a wide-range of benefits that extend beyond
increases in labor market productivity. Improvements in education can lower crime, improve health,
and increase voting and democratic participation. This chapter reviews recent developments on these
‘non-production’ benefits of education with an emphasis on contributions made by economists.


Lance Lochner
Department of Economics, Faculty of Social Science
University of Western Ontario
1151 Richmond Street, North
London, ON N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
llochner@uwo.ca
    Non-Production Benefits of Education: Crime, Health, and Good
                              Citizenship
                                               Lance Lochner∗
                                        University of Western Ontario

                                               December 15, 2010




1        Introduction

Economists have long recognized and measured the effect of education on an individual’s own lifetime
earnings.1 More recently, attention has been paid to the effects of education on other personal and
social outcomes, such as criminal behavior, health and mortality, and voting and democratic partici-
pation.2 A growing body of work suggests that education offers a wide-range of benefits that extend
beyond increases in labor market productivity. This chapter reviews recent developments on these
‘non-production’ benefits of education with an emphasis on contributions made by economists.


2        Education’s Effects on Crime

In 1997, over two-thirds of all prison inmates in the U.S. were high school dropouts (Harlow 2003).
Despite promising evidence that education-based policies and early childhood interventions can play an
important role in helping reduce crime, evidence is still limited and sometimes mixed. The link between
schooling and crime is more complicated than simple prison statistics suggest. This section reviews
evidence in this rapidly growing area and develops a human capital-based theory for interpreting much
of this evidence.
        We first discuss the relationship between education and crime from an economic perspective, de-
veloping a simple lifecycle model that sheds light on key ways in which early childhood programs and
policies that encourage schooling may affect both juvenile and adult crime. The model is grounded
    ∗
     For comments on different sections of this chapter, I think Gary Becker, David Card, Phil Cook, David Deming,
Darius Lakdawalla, Fabian Lange, Jens Ludwig, and participants at the Conference on the Handbook of the Economics of
Education in Munich, Germany, and the NBER Economics of Crime Control Conferences in Boston, MA, and Berkeley,
CA.
   1
     See, e.g., Card (1999) or Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006, 2008).
   2
     Other studies attempt to estimate production externalities associated with education (see, e.g., Acemoglu and An-
grist, 2001, Heckman and Klenow, 1997, Moretti, 2004a, 2004b, Ciccone and Peri, 2006). Lange and Topel (2006) offer
a recent review of these studies.




                                                          1
in human capital theory and paints with a broad brush. It emphasizes the choice individuals face be-
tween legitimate work and criminal activity, with its associated punishments. By altering the relative
rewards of work and crime, educational investments affect decisions to engage in crime. While the
model does not incorporate all avenues through which education may affect crime, it serves as a useful
point of reference.
   We next discuss evidence on the impacts of educational attainment and school quality/choice on
adult crime. The evidence from studies of educational attainment on crime is largely consistent with
a human capital-based theory of crime, suggesting that increases in schooling reduce most types of
adult crime (e.g. Lochner 2004, Lochner and Moretti 2004). Studies of school choice and increases in
school quality paint a more nuanced picture: sizeable improvements in school quality produce minor
(at best) improvements in student achievement and educational attainment, while they appear to
substantially reduce crime during late adolescence and early adulthood (Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt
2006, Deming 2009a). We next discuss the contemporaneous relationship between school attendance
and crime. Using exogenous policy changes and other events that effectively force students to stay in
school or take extra days off (e.g. changes in compulsory schooling laws, teacher in-service days and
strikes), a few recent studies have shown that school attendance affects crime in rich and complex
ways.
   We also review a number of recent studies that examine the long-run impacts of early child-
hood, school-based, and young adult training interventions on juvenile and adult crime. While a few
early preschool programs have produced sizeable long-run reductions in crime – most famously, Perry
Preschool – other quite similar programs have not. School-based programs focused on improving so-
cial development among ‘risky’ children have been shown to reduce crime through early adulthood.
Finally, job training for young adults (e.g. Job Corps) appears to reduce self-reported arrests and
convictions during the period of intensive training, but it yields negligible lasting effects on crime.
Altogether, the evidence suggests that reductions in crime can be achieved by a wide range of human
capital-based intervention strategies.
   Finally, we discuss a number of policy issues related to education and its potential role as a crime-
fighting strategy.

2.1     The Economics of Education and Crime

Why does education reduce crime and does its impact vary across different types of crimes? How
might education and human capital policies help reduce crime? We begin with a simple economic
model that formalizes a number of key channels through which education may affect crime. We then
briefly discuss other factors that may help determine the relationship between education and crime.




                                                   2
2.1.1      A Dynamic Model of Schooling, Work, and Crime

We develop a dynamic time allocation model of crime, work, and education in which individuals are
assumed to maximize lifetime earnings from work and crime. The model is based on Lochner (2004);
however, it abstracts from random shocks to the returns from work and crime and simplifies certain
lifecycle aspects of the problem to focus on the role of education. It emphasizes the role of education
as a human capital investment that increases future legitimate work opportunities, which discourages
participation in crime.3 This is consistent with numerous recent studies that show that higher wages
reduce crime (e.g. Grogger 1998, Machin and Meghir 2004, Gould, et al. 2002) and decades of research
in labor economics showing that education increases wage rates (see, e.g., Card 1999).
      We consider two stages of life: a ‘schooling stage’ followed by a ‘work stage’. During the schooling
stage (ages t = 1, ..., ts ), individuals decide how much time to allocate to work, crime, and human
capital investment at school. During the ‘work stage’ (t = ts + 1, ...), individuals only decide between
work and crime. We assume that the ‘work stage’ lasts forever.
      Time spent at work Lt ≥ 0 returns income wHt Lt where w reflects the rental rate on human capital
and Ht reflects an individual’s legitimate market human capital. Time spent on crime kt ≥ 0 offers a
reward of N (kt , Ht , θ), where N (·) is strictly increasing and concave in kt , strictly increasing in θ, and
weakly increasing in Ht . The parameter θ reflects an individual’s criminal ‘ability’, and it is assumed
        ∂2N
that    ∂k∂θ   ≥ 0. While we use the term ‘criminal ability’, θ should be interpreted broadly, including
anything which affects the rewards from crime (e.g. local neighborhood conditions, the availability of
good ‘targets’). Our assumptions allow for the fact that labor market skills may also be rewarded in
the criminal sector, an issue we discuss further below. During the ‘schooling stage’, time and effort
spent in school It ≥ 0 offers no current rewards, but it increases future market skill levels according
to:
                                             Ht+1 = Ht + Af (It , Ht ),                                          (1)

where f (·) is increasing and concave in each of its arguments and A > 0 reflects an individual’s
‘learning ability’. Individuals are endowed with an initial skill level H0 . While human capital grows
during the ‘schooling stage’ for those who spend some time acquiring skills through education (or
training), it is assumed to remain constant during the ‘work stage’. We normalize an individual’s time
endowment to one at all ages, so Lt + kt + It = 1 during the ‘schooling stage’ and Lt + kt = 1 during
the ‘work stage’.
      Individuals who engage in crime at any age may be caught and imprisoned for J years with
probability πkt . We assume that the ‘incarceration rate’ π ∈ (0, 1), so there is some probability that
individuals escape punishment even if they spend all of their time committing crime. During prison,
individuals earn nothing and their skills remain unchanged when they return to the labor market.4
  3
      Fella and Gallipoli (2009) embed a similar lifecycle model of crime in a general equilibrium environment.
  4
      Most estimates suggest that earnings and employment decline following an arrest or prison term; although, there


                                                          3
For simplicity, we further assume that youth imprisoned during the ‘schooling stage’ of life leave prison
in the ‘work stage’ of life.
     In setting up the model, it is convenient to begin with the ‘work stage’. Since this stage lasts
forever, we drop the t subscripts and formulate the problem in recursive form. For a time discount
rate of β ∈ (0, 1), the value function for someone with human capital H who is in the ‘work stage’ but
not currently in prison is
                                     ©                           £                ¤     ª
                W (H) = max           wH(1 − k) + N (k, H, θ) + β πkβ J + (1 − πk) W (H) ,                         (2)
                           k∈(0,1)


which reflects the fact that the value associated with imprisonment for J years is simply β J W (H),
since individuals leave prison in the same state they entered. The interior first order condition for
time spent committing crime is
                                                                    ∂N (k, H, θ)
                                     wH + πβ(1 − β J )W (H) =                    ,                                 (3)
                                                                        ∂k
where the left hand side reflects the marginal cost of spending more time on crime while the right
hand side reflects the marginal return. Note that crime is costly in terms of current foregone earnings
(wH) as well as expected losses due to time spent in prison (note that β J < 1).
     Before discussing the effects of human capital or criminal ability on criminal choices, it is worth
discussing the marginal value of human capital, W 0 (H). The envelope condition implies that

                                                 ∂N (k, H, θ)    £                ¤
                    W 0 (H) = w(1 − k) +                      + β πkβ J + (1 − πk) W 0 (H)
                                                     ∂H
                                 w(1 − k) + ∂N (k,H,θ)
                                               ∂H
                               =                                                                                   (4)
                                 1 − β + πkβ(1 − β J )
                               ≥ 0,

                                                     ∂N                 w
where the final inequality is strict if k < 1 or     ∂H   > 0. Since   1−β   reflects the marginal value of human
capital for someone who never commits any crime, we observe three ways in which crime affects the
the marginal value of human capital during adulthood: (i) by reducing labor market work, it lowers
the payoff from human capital by wk; (ii) the rewards from crime may be increasing in human capital
( ∂N
  ∂H > 0) which increases the marginal value of skills in the criminal sector; and (iii) the likelihood
of arrest and imprisonment reduces the expected years human capital can be utilized in both the
legitimate and criminal sectors. When human capital has negligible effects on criminal earnings (i.e.
∂N
∂H   ≈ 0), engagement in crime will generally lower the marginal value of human capital due to (i) and
(iii).
has been some debate about the magnitude and duration of any effects (e.g. see Grogger, 1995, Kling, 2003, Nagin and
Waldfogel, 1995, and Waldfogel, 1994). This suggests that losses in earnings power due to stigma effects and/or human
capital depreciation outweigh any gains from new skills that may be acquired in prison. We abstract from these features
to focus on other issues.



                                                          4
       Now, we can discuss the effects of human capital and criminal ability on crime. Equation (3) makes
clear that crime is costly for individuals with higher levels of human capital. Totally differentiating
this equation with respect to H yields
                                                       ∂2N
                                          dk   w−     ∂k∂H   + πβ(1 − β J )W 0 (H)
                                             =                    ∂2N
                                                                                     .
                                          dH
                                                                  ∂k2

                                                                                                          ∂2N
If human capital raises the marginal returns from work more than crime (i.e. w ≥                         ∂k∂H ),   it is clear
that human capital reduces crime since             W 0 (H)   ≥ 0. Crime will be increasing in human capital (or
schooling) only if human capital raises the marginal returns from crime sufficiently more than the
returns from legitimate work to compensate for any expected losses from imprisonment associated
with crime. From this, it is clear that policies that increase schooling (or the efficiency of schooling)
will reduce most types of street crime among adults; although, certain types of white collar crime (e.g.
embezzlement, fraud) may increase with education if they sufficiently reward skills learned in school.
       One can also differentiate equation (3) with respect to θ to determine the effects of ‘criminal ability’
on the extent of criminal activity. A higher criminal ability raises the current payoff from crime, but
it also raises the value of staying out of prison in the future, which discourages crime. As a result, the
effects of θ on crime are generally ambiguous; however, if the probability of punishment is sufficiently
low or the length of incarceration sufficiently short, the effect of θ on current criminal payoffs will
dominate and more able criminals will commit more crime.5 Given the relatively low probabilities of
arrest and subsequent incarceration for most crimes, this is the more empirically relevant case. In the
discussion below, we assume that crime is increasing in θ.
       Now, consider the ‘schooling stage’. At ages t ≤ ts , someone not currently in prison solves the
following problem:
                 ©                                        £                                           ¤ª
   St (Ht ) = max wHt (1 − It − kt ) + N (kt , Ht , θ) + β πkt β J W (Ht+1 ) + (1 − πkt )St+1 (Ht+1 )                     (5)
                  kt ,It

subject to the time constraints and human capital accumulation equation (1).6 At an interior, the
first order conditions for investment and crime are
                                                                                         ∂f (It , Ht )
                           wHt = β[πkt β J W 0 (Ht+1 ) + (1 − πkt )St+1
                                                                    0
                                                                        (Ht+1 )]A                                         (6)
                                                                                             ∂It
                                     ∂N (kt , Ht , θ)
                           wHt =                      − βπ[St+1 (Ht+1 ) − β J W (Ht+1 )].                                 (7)
                                         ∂kt
   5
       Recognizing that W (·) depends on θ as well as H and totally differentiating (3) with respect to θ yields
                                                                         ∂2N
                                                dk   πβ(1 − β J ) ∂W
                                                                  ∂θ
                                                                     −   ∂k∂θ
                                                   =            2N              ,
                                                dθ            ∂
                                                                  2
                                                                  ∂k

                   ∂N/∂θ              2
where ∂W
       ∂θ
          = 1−β+πkβ(1−β           ∂ N
                         J ) and ∂k∂θ are both positive.
  6
    Notice Sts +1 (H) = W (H), since individuals enter the ‘work stage’ of life at that time.



                                                              5
As long as youth are engaged in all three activities (work, school, and crime), they will equate the
marginal values of each.7 Since the marginal return on work is fixed at any age (wHt ), individuals
simply spend their time studying and committing crime up to the point where the net marginal returns
on these activities equal their current period wage rate wHt . Investment offers future returns, while
the costs (foregone earnings) are paid up front. Crime is the opposite, providing current returns with
costs paid up front (foregone labor market earnings) and in the future (expected imprisonment).8 The
marginal value of human capital during the schooling period is:
                                                                                          ·                  ¸
                            ∂N (kt , Ht , θ)   £                                        ¤      ∂f (It , Ht )
St0 (Ht )   = w(1−It −kt )+                          J 0                     0
                                             +β πkt β W (Ht+1 ) + (1 − πkt )St+1 (Ht+1 ) 1 + A                 .
                                ∂Ht                                                               ∂Ht

Notice that both current and future criminal activity affect the marginal value of human capital and
incentives to invest in skills. Both current and future crime raise the probability of incarceration,
which lowers the utilization of skills. Future crime also affects the marginal value of human capital,
                                                                                                         ∂N
since crime and work will not generally reward human capital the same. For example, if                   ∂H   = 0, then
future time spent on crime reduces time spent working and utilizing human capital in the same way
that time spent in prison does.
    On average, street criminals are quite young, have low IQ levels (Kandel, et al., 1988, and White,
Moffitt, and Silva, 1989), and acquire little formal education. This suggests that the returns to
traditional market skills are substantially lower for common street crimes (e.g. larceny, robbery, auto
theft, drug dealing) than in the legitimate labor market. On the other hand, the returns to white collar
crimes like forgery, fraud, and embezzlement would seem to depend heavily on market skill levels. It
                                                                                                   ∂N
is, therefore, worth distinguishing between unskilled crimes, for which we assume                  ∂H   = 0 and white
                                               ∂N               ∂2N
collar crimes for which we expect that         ∂H   > 0 and    ∂H∂k   > 0.
    How do individual endowments (A, H0 , θ) influence decisions about investment and crime? Learn-
ing ability, A, largely influences crime through past investments and their effects on current skill
levels. More able youth will generally invest more in their skills and accumulate more skills per unit
of investment. As a result, they will commit fewer unskilled crimes at older ages than their less
able counterparts. Because incarceration costs are increasing in A (due to the higher productivity
of foregone learning opportunities) more able individuals will also commit less crime (than the less
able) during their schooling years. For low incarceration probabilities, the latter effect is relatively
unimportant and differences in crime by ability A will grow with age as human capital profiles di-
verge. Because differences in skill levels will tend to persist over time for a cohort, individuals who
begin life with more human capital (H0 ) will tend to commit fewer unskilled crime at all ages. By
contrast, individuals with higher criminal returns (θ) are more likely to engage in crime at any age.
   7
     Youth who do not work at all will equate the marginal return to crime with the marginal return to schooling
investment (i.e. they equate the right hand side of equation (6) with the right hand side of (7)).
   8
     It is clear that St (H) ≥ W (H), since the latter is the value associated with a constrained problem (I = 0) that is
otherwise the same as the former.


                                                           6
Furthermore, criminal ability (in unskilled crimes) also has a reinforcing indirect effect on crime at
older ages through its effect on early human capital investment decisions — by directly encouraging
crime over work, θ indirectly reduces the returns on skill investments causing high θ individuals to
accumulate less human capital. Altogether, factors that reflect high A and H0 or low θ should be
negatively correlated with unskilled crime. All of these relationships are likely to be muted (or even
perverse) for more skill-intensive white collar crimes. A high A and θ are also likely to be associated
with greater schooling investments.
       Now, consider the relationship between human capital and crime. This relationship is most easily
analyzed for unskilled crimes, which offer no reward for human capital. Conditional on ability and
other permanent characteristics, adults with high current skill levels face low opportunity costs of
crime and should, on average, commit less crime. As such, past investments and education should be
negatively correlated with current unskilled crime rates conditional on ability and initial skill levels.
Of course investments and education are endogenous. Individuals that expect to commit a lot of
unskilled crime in the future regardless of their current investments in skill (e.g. individuals with a
high θ) have little incentive to make any investment. Thus, variation in criminal opportunities can
also generate a negative correlation between educational attainment and unskilled crime.
       Since a higher A and a lower θ cause individuals to invest more and commit less unskilled crime,
their joint distribution is important for determining the correlation between educational attainment
and unskilled crime in the population. Holding either of these endowments constant in the population,
we should expect a negative correlation between schooling and unskilled crime.9 A positive correlation
between education and unskilled crime is, therefore, only likely to arise if A and θ are strongly positively
correlated, in which case the best criminals are also the brightest. Given the lower than average IQ
levels of most criminals (Kandel, et al., 1988, and White, Moffitt, and Silva, 1989), this seems unlikely.
       The correlation between white collar crime and education will typically be less negative (and may
even be positive). This is because a high A leads to greater investment, but that investment need not
lead to less white collar crime. And, while a high θ encourages white collar crime, it need not cause
individuals to invest less in their skills if those skills pay off in the criminal sector. Thus, two important
forces generating a negative correlation between unskilled crime and educational attainment are less
powerful for white collar crime.10
       While individual endowments are important determinants of investment, work, and crime deci-
sions, they are not the only factors affecting the education-crime relationship. Although not modeled
here (see Lochner (2004)), shocks to wages and criminal returns can influence both current and future
   9
     While H0 should be negatively correlated with unskilled crime, it is more neutral with respect to investment since
human capital increases both the returns and costs of investing.
  10
     Additionally, punishments for white collar crimes tend to be skewed more heavily toward fines relative to incarcer-
ation. This generates similar disincentives to engage in white collar crime for all education backgrounds, since fines are
largely independent of the offender’s labor market skills. In fact, the most educated may be deterred the least by fines
due to diminishing marginal utility of wealth. By contrast, incarceration is more costly for the most educated.


                                                            7
decisions. A strong positive wage or crime shock during the teenage years may cause some individuals
to drop out of school, which should then affect subsequent decisions about crime. Absent the accu-
mulation of criminal skills or habit persistence, these exogenous shocks only affect subsequent crime
through differences in accumulated human capital levels. Variation in the costs of or tastes for school-
ing may also affect the education-crime relationship among adults through accumulated skill levels.
Finally, policies and government interventions may affect schooling decisions. Policies that encourage
schooling investments should reduce crime rates among youth as they substitute time from crime to
school. Furthermore, increases in human capital acquired through additional schooling should reduce
subsequent crime rates as well. The empirical literature has primarily focused on the latter; however,
a few studies have attempted to examine the contemporaneous relationship between education policies
and crime. We review some of these studies below.

2.1.2      Other Ways in Which Education May Affect Crime

Education may also teach individuals to be more patient (Becker and Mulligan 1997). This would
discourage crime, since forward-looking individuals place greater weight on any expected future pun-
ishment associated with their criminal activities. To the extent that time preferences are affected by
schooling, crimes associated with long prison sentences (or other long-term consequences) should be
most affected. Education may also affect preferences toward risk. If schooling makes individuals more
risk averse, it should discourage crime with its greatest effects on offenses that entail considerable un-
certainty in returns or punishment. Finally, schooling may affect the set of people individuals interact
with on a daily basis in school, work, or their neighborhoods. Assuming more educated people interact
more with other educated people who are less inclined to engage in crime, this is likely to compound
any reductions in crime associated with schooling.11 In most cases, mechanisms related to changes in
preferences or social interactions suggest that educational attainment is likely to reduce most types of
crime among adults.

2.1.3      School Attendance and Contemporaneous Crime

It is useful to distinguish between the effects of educational attainment on subsequent criminal activity,
and the way in which school attendance itself affects contemporaneous crime. The latter relationship
is likely to be driven by three mechanisms (the first two being central to the time allocation problem
above). First, school may have an incapacitation effect – youth cannot be in two places at once and
many criminal opportunities are more limited in school than on the streets. Of course, school does not
last all day, so this effect depends, in part, on the ease with which youth can engage in crime during
non-school hours. Second, longer periods of school attendance should increase human capital levels
and improve future employment prospects. This, in turn, may make juvenile arrests and long periods
 11
      See Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman (1996) for a model of crime where social interactions are important.



                                                            8
of detention more costly, reducing incentives to engage in crime while enrolled in school. Third, schools
bring hundreds of adolescents together for the day and then free them all at the same time. The social
interaction effects from doing this are far from obvious, but it is quite possible that this leads to
altercations and more general group-based delinquency. The incapacitation and human capital effects
are likely to to imply negative effects of school attendance on crime, while the social interaction effect
could be positive or negative.

2.2      Evidence on Education and Crime

We now discuss evidence on the effects of educational attainment and school quality and choice on
subsequent criminal outcomes. We also review empirical studies that analyze the relationship between
school attendance and contemporaneous crime.

2.2.1      Educational Attainment and Crime

We have discussed four primary reasons schooling might affect subsequent crime: (i) education raises
wage rates, which raises the opportunity costs of crime; (ii) education may directly affect the financial
or ‘psychic’ rewards from crime; (iii) education may alter preferences for risk-taking or patience; and
(iv) schooling may affect the social networks or peers of individuals. For most crimes (except, possibly,
white collar crimes), one would expect these forces to induce a negative effect of schooling on adult
crime.
       Empirically, there is a strong negative correlation between educational attainment and official
measures of crime. In 1997, 75% of state and 59% of federal prison inmates in the U.S. did not have a
high school diploma (Harlow 2003).12 After controlling for age, state of birth, state of residence, year
of birth and year effects, Lochner and Moretti (2004) still find significant effects of schooling (especially
high school completion) on the probability of incarceration in the U.S. as reported in Figure 1.13 In
2001, more than 75% of convicted persons in Italy had not completed high school (Buonanno and
Leonida 2009), while incarceration rates among men ages 21-25 in the United Kingdom were more
than 8 times higher for those without an education qualification (i.e. dropouts) relative to those with
a qualification Machin, Marie, and Vujic (forthcoming).
       Differences by education are also apparent in self-reported survey measures of crime. For example,
in the 1980 wave of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), 34% of American men ages 20-
23 with 11 or 12 years of completed schooling self-reported earning some income from crime, compared
  12
     These figures exclude those who received a General Educational Development (GED) diploma. As shown in Cameron
and Heckman (2003) and Heckman and LaFontaine (2006), individuals with a GED perform like high school dropouts
rather than graduates in the labor market. Roughly 35% of state inmates and 33% of federal inmates completed their
GED with more than two-thirds of these inmates earning their GED while incarcerated. A small percentage of those
who did not receive a high school diploma had participated in some vocational or post-secondary courses. See Harlow
(2003).
  13
     These figures report the coefficients on indicators for different years of completed schooling from the 1960, 1970, and
1980 Censuses for white and black men ages 20-60.


                                                             9
with 24% of those with 12 years of school, and only 17% of those with more than 12 years. The effect of
education is magnified if we consider more active criminal engagement: 4.2% of 20-23 year-old NLSY
men completing 10 or 11 years of school reported earning more than half their income from crime,
compared with 1.4% of those with 12 years and 0.7% of those with at least some college education.
Similar patterns are observed for violent crime in the NLSY. See Lochner (2004) for further details.
    Western (2006) shows that while U.S. differences in incarceration rates by education existed in
the 1970s, they have grown considerably since. Among black men born 1945-49, roughly 4% of those
who dropped out of high school would spend some time in prison by age 35, while only 1% of those
with a high school degree or GED faced incarceration. By contrast, black men born 1965-69 faced
a 59% incarceration rate by age 35 if they had not completed high school compared to an 18% rate
among those who had. Trends in the incarceration differential by education among white men are
qualitatively similar. As we discuss below, these trends are predictable responses to the rapid growth
in the probability of imprisonment and prison sentence lengths, as well as the rising wage returns to
schooling over the 1980s and 1990s.
    Early studies of the relationship between education and crime focused on their correlation con-
ditional on measured individual and family characteristics using standard regression methods.14 For
example, Witte and Tauchen (1994) find no significant relationship between educational attainment
and crime after controlling for a number of individual characteristics. Grogger (1998) estimates a
significant negative effect of wages on crime, but he finds no relationship between years of completed
schooling and crime after controlling for individual wage rates. Of course, increased wages and earn-
ings are important consequences of schooling. Thus, this study suggests that education may indirectly
reduce crime through increased wage rates.
    These earlier studies must be interpreted with caution. A negative cross-sectional correlation be-
tween education and crime, even after controlling for measured family background and neighborhood
characteristics, does not necessarily imply that education reduces crime. Standard regression studies
are unlikely to estimate the causal effect of eduction on crime (i.e. the effect of increasing someone’s
schooling on his criminal activity) for a number of reasons. First, unobserved individual character-
istics like patience or risk aversion are likely to directly affect both schooling and criminal decisions.
Individuals who choose more schooling (even after conditioning on observable characteristics) might
also choose less crime regardless of their education level, in which case regression-based estimates do
not identify a causal effect. Second, using variation in crime and education across states or local
communities may also produce biased estimates. Governments may face a choice between funding
police or good public schools, which would tend to produce a spurious positive correlation between
education and crime. Alternatively, unobserved characteristics about communities or their residents
  14
     Ehrlich (1975) provides an early empirical exploration of predicted effects of education on crime from a human capital
perspective. See Witte (1997) for a survey of the early empirical literature on education and crime.



                                                            10
may directly affect the costs or benefits of both education and crime. For example, communities with
few job opportunities that reward schooling may also be faced with severe gang problems. While it
is often possible to account for permanent unobserved differences across communities by examining
the relationship between changes in schooling and crime over time, this approach does not account
for the effects of changing unobserved community characteristics. Third, reverse causality is another
important concern, for reasons discussed earlier. Individuals who plan to heavily engage in crime (e.g.
because they are particularly good at it, enjoy it, or live in areas with plenty of illicit opportunities)
are likely to choose to leave school at a young age. Arrests or incarceration associated with juvenile
crime may also cause some youth to drop out of school early (Hjalmarsson 2008).
       Recently, economists have attempted to address these difficult issues and to estimate the causal
effects of schooling on crime using instrumental variable (IV) methods. In the context of estimating
the effect of educational attainment on crime, an instrument is valid if it induces variation in schooling
but is uncorrelated with other factors that directly affect criminal proclivity (e.g. individual prefer-
ences or abilities, local law enforcement). Intuitively, this approach exploits differences in educational
attainment across individuals that arise in response to factors that have no direct impact on criminal
decisions. An ideal instrument would randomly assign some youth to drop out of high school and
others to finish. Then, comparing the differences in crime rates across these groups would identify the
causal effect of high school completion on crime. In practice, we typically do not observe such perfect
experiments, but researchers can sometimes come close.
       Because crime itself is difficult to measure, researchers are often forced to use measures of arrest or
incarceration rather than actual crimes committed. It is possible that education reduces the probability
of arrest and incarceration or the sentence lengths administered by judges, in which case estimates
based on measures of arrest or incarceration incorporate these effects in addition to any effects of
education on actual crime. While there is little direct evidence on these issues, Mustard (2001) finds
negligible effects of defendant education levels on the sentence lengths they receive. Furthermore,
results using self-reported measures of crime in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY)
support the case that education reduces actual violent and property crime and not just the probability
of arrest or incarceration conditional on crime (Lochner 2004, Lochner and Moretti 2004).15
       Many recent empirical studies analyze crime aggregated at some geographic level, exploring the
effects of average educational attainment on crime, arrest, conviction, or incarceration rates. In order
to address concerns with endogeneity or unobserved heterogeneity, researchers have typically turned
  15
     There has been considerable debate among criminologists on the merits of self-reported measures of crime vs. official
measures of arrest. Most studies find a reasonably high correlation between the two; however, it is generally agreed that
the two measures offer distinct and complementary information about criminal activity. Comparisons of self-reported
arrests vs. official arrests tend to find a stronger correlation, with agreement increasing further for self-reported vs.
official measures of criminal convictions. A number of studies report greater under-reporting of crimes and arrests by
blacks; however, studies vary considerably on this. See the classic Hindelang, Hirschi, and Weis (1981) for comprehensive
treatment of the issue or Thornberry and Krohn (2000) for a more recent survey of this literature.



                                                           11
to instrumental variables estimation or a differences-in-differences strategy using changes in state or
national rules that affect schooling decisions. An aggregate-level regression is often specified as follows:

                     ycalt = Ealt β + Xalt γ + dlt + dcl + dal + dct + dat + dca + εcalt                  (8)

where ycalt is a measure of the crime, arrest, or incarceration rate for some offense type c, age group
a, in location l, in year t. In some cases, only a single measure of crime is used (e.g. incarceration or
total arrests), in which case the c subscript is extraneous. Ealt is an aggregate measure of educational
attainment for age group a in location l at time t (e.g. average schooling attainment or high school
completion rates). Xalt is a set of observable characteristics that may vary across age, location,
and time (e.g. racial composition of an area). The d’s represent indicator variables that account for
unobserved differences by age/cohort, location, year, and criminal offense types. The term dlt allows for
location-specific time effects, which accounts for time varying unobserved location-specific differences
that may reflect differences in local public spending, economic conditions, or law enforcement. The
inclusion of dcl allows the average distribution of crime or arrest types to differ across areas. For
example, some states may focus arrests more heavily on one type of crime, while others focus on
other types. Or, some areas may be more amenable to certain crimes while others are not. Similarly,
the age distribution of crime or arrests need not be the same across areas – some age groups may
be more crime-prone in some areas or arrest policies with respect to age may differ across areas.
The term dal absorbs long-run differences in age-arrest patterns across locations. Crime-specific and
age-specific time trends in arrest common to all areas are accounted for by dct and dat , respectively.
Finally, dca accounts for long-term differences in age-crime profiles across different types of criminal
offenses. Given these fixed effects, identification of the effect of education on crime is achieved through
time variation in cohort educational attainment levels across different locations. The absence of dalt
indicator variables in equation (8) is, therefore, central to identification.
   Lochner and Moretti (2004) examine state-level male arrest rates by criminal offense and age (five-
year age categories beginning at ages 20-24 through 55-59) from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports
(UCR) for the U.S. in 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990. This data is linked to 1960-90 decennial U.S.
Census data on educational attainment and race to estimate equation (8), where ycalt represents log
arrest rates for a specific offense, age category, state, and Census year. They specifically analyze arrest
rates for murder, rape, assault, robbery, burglary, larceny, auto theft, and arson. In using log arrest
rates, the effect of education is assumed to be the same in percentage terms for each type of crime
included in the regression. They explore the effects of both average years of schooling and high school
completion rates at the cohort-level (cohorts are defined by year of birth given year t and age a) in
state l as of time t (i.e. Ealt ). In addition to including all the d fixed effects in equation (8), they also
include the percent of males that are black in age group a living in state l at time t.
   The main methodological contribution of Lochner and Moretti (2004) is the use of changes in state-


                                                     12
specific compulsory schooling laws over time as instrumental variables for schooling.16 Intuitively, this
strategy measures the extent to which an increase in a state’s compulsory schooling age leads to an
immediate increase in educational attainment and reduction in subsequent crime rates for affected
cohorts. Because the laws only affect schooling at low levels (mainly grades 8-12), their instrumental
variable (IV) estimates reflect the impact of an additional year of high school on crime.17 The impacts
of schooling at other margins may differ as discussed below.
       Lochner and Moretti (2004) estimate equation (8) using both ordinary least squares (OLS) and
IV estimation. Using OLS, they find that a one-year increase in average education levels in a state
reduces state-level arrest rates by 11 percent. IV estimates suggest slightly larger effects, although
they are not statistically different. These estimated effects are very similar to the predicted effects
derived from multiplying the estimated increase in wages associated with an additional year of school
by the estimated effects of higher wage rates on crime (from Gould, et al. 2002). This suggests that
much of the effect of schooling on crime may come through increased wage rates and opportunity costs
as emphasized in the model above. Given the strong relationship between high school completion and
incarceration apparent in Figure 1, Lochner and Moretti (2004) also estimate specifications using the
high school completion rate as a measure of schooling. OLS estimates suggest that a ten percentage
point increase in high school graduation rates would reduce arrest rates by 7%, while IV estimates
suggest a slightly larger impact of 9%.
       Lochner and Moretti (2004) also estimate separate effects of education for different types of crime
using OLS (including interactions of criminal offense type with education in equation (8)). These
results suggest similar effects across the broad categories of violent (murder, rape, robbery, and assault)
and property (burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft, and arson) crime — a one year increase in average
years of schooling reduces both property and violent crime by about 11-12%. However, the effects
vary considerably within these categories. A one-year increase in average years of schooling reduces
murder and assault by almost 30 percent, motor vehicle theft by 20 percent, arson by 13 percent, and
burglary and larceny by about 6 percent. Estimated effects on robbery are negligible, while those
for rape are significantly positive. Additional specifications suggest quantitatively similar effects for a
10-20 percentage point increase in high school graduation rates. Their results for rape are surprising
and not easily explained by standard economic models of crime.18
  16
      The relevant compulsory schooling age is based on the state law that applied when a cohort was age 14. Lochner
and Moretti’s (2004) analysis suggests that changes in compulsory schooling laws are exogenous and not related to prior
trends in schooling or state expenditures on law enforcement, so it appears to be a valid instrument. Other studies reach
similar conclusions about the exogenous nature of changes in compulsory schooling laws in other contexts (e.g. Acemoglu
and Angrist 2001, Lleras-Muney 2002).
   17
      More specifically, they reflect the impact of an additional year of high school on crime among those youth that are
affected by changes in the schooling age laws. See Angrist and Imbens (1994, 1995) for the interpretation of IV estimators
when using discrete instrumental variables.
   18
      However, the results are consistent with some specifications in Gould, et al. (2002), which suggests that local wage
rates are positively correlated with local crime rates for rape.




                                                           13
    Lochner (2004) follows a similar approach using the same UCR data from 1960 to 1980; however, he
also examines white collar crime. OLS estimation of equation (8) produces positive, though statistically
insignificant, effects of schooling on arrest rates for white collar crimes (forgery and counterfeiting,
fraud, and embezzlement). Estimates for violent and property crime are negative and similar to those
of Lochner and Moretti (2004).
    Lochner and Moretti (2004) also use individual-level data on incarceration and schooling from
the 1960, 1970, and 1980 U.S. Censuses to estimate the effects of educational attainment on the
probability of imprisonment separately for black and white men (ages 20-60). Their estimates control
for age of the respondent (three-year age categories), state of birth, state of residence, cohort of birth,
and state-specific year effects. Most importantly, controlling for state-specific year effects allows for
the possibility that different states may have different time trends for law enforcement policies or
may simply exhibit different trends in aggregate criminal activity. Analogous to their analysis of
state-level arrest rates, they use state-level changes in compulsory schooling ages as an instrument for
educational attainment. Although this analysis uses individual-based measures of incarceration and
schooling, variation in schooling laws at the state-year level effectively identifies the effect of education
on crime. As with the estimates for aggregate arrest rates, identification comes from the fact that in
any given state and year, different age cohorts faced different compulsory schooling laws during their
high school years, causing them to acquire different levels of schooling and to commit crime at different
rates. Again, both OLS and IV estimates are very similar and suggest that, on average, an extra year
of education reduces the probability of imprisonment by slightly more than .1 percentage point for
whites and by about .4 percentage points for blacks. In their sample, the probability of incarceration
for male whites (blacks) without a high school degree averaged .83% (3.6%), which translates into a
10-15% reduction in incarceration rates for both white and black males associated with an extra year of
completed schooling. These estimated effects are comparable to those for arrest rates described earlier.
OLS results suggest that completion of the twelfth grade causes the greatest drop in incarceration,
while their is little effect of schooling beyond high school (see Figure 1).
    Oreopolous and Salvanes (2009) reproduce the Lochner and Moretti (2004) IV results for black
males using the same estimation strategy with a slightly different specification and an expanded
sample that includes men ages 25-64 from the 1950-80 U.S. Censuses.19 Their estimate suggests that
an additional year of completed schooling reduces incarceration rates among black men by about 20%.
    Machin, Marie, and Vujic (forthcoming) exploit a 1972-73 increase in the minimum schooling age
(from age 15 to 16) in England and Wales to estimate the effects of schooling on criminal convictions
for property and violent crimes over the period 1972-96. Using both IV and regression discontinuity
methods, identification effectively comes from cohort-level changes in schooling attainment and crime
  19
     Most notably, they do not include state and state-specific year effects in their specification. They also remove
individuals with greater than twelve years of schooling from their sample. Their measures of compulsory schooling ages
differ as well, incorporating the fact that some states allow for exceptions to the dropout age under certain conditions.


                                                           14
for cohorts turning 15 immediately before and after the law change.20 Among men, they estimate that
a one-year increase in average schooling levels reduces conviction rates for property crime by 20-30%
and violent crime by roughly one-third to one-half as much.21 Compared to estimates for the U.S. by
Lochner and Moretti (2004), the impacts of education on property crime appear to be greater in the
United Kingdom, while the effects on violent crime are weaker.
       Buonanno and Leonida (2009) estimate the effects of educational attainment on crime rates in
Italy using regional panel data from 1980-95. Their unit of observation is a region-year (they examine
20 Italian regions), and they estimate a restricted form of equation (8) using OLS. Specifically, they
control for region and time fixed effects (dl and dt ), along with region-specific quadratic time trends
(assuming dlt = δ1l t+δ2l t2 ), and a rich set of time-varying region-specific covariates.22 These estimates
are identified from the relationship between changes in regional education levels and crime rates
(around smooth regional time trends). Their estimates suggest that a ten percentage point increase in
high school graduation rates would reduce property crime rates by 4% and total crime rates by about
3%. (Effects on property crime are statistically significant, while effects on total crime are not.) They
find no evidence to suggest that university completion reduces crime.23
       Merlo and Wolpin (2009) take a very different approach to estimating the relationship between
schooling and subsequent crime. Using individual-level panel data on black males ages 13-22 from the
NLSY, they estimate a discrete choice vector autoregression model in which individuals can choose to
engage in crime, attend school, and/or work each year.24 These decisions are allowed to depend on
unobserved individual-specific returns to each activity, as well as crime, schooling, and work choices
the previous year. Using estimates for their model, Merlo and Wolpin simulate the effects of changing
youth schooling status at age 16 on subsequent outcomes. Their estimates suggest that, on average,
attending school at age 16 reduces the probability a black male ever commits a crime over ages 19-22
by 13 percentage points and the probability of an arrest over those ages by 6 percentage points. These
represent 42% and 23% reductions in self-reported crime and arrest rates, respectively, for black males
not in school at age 16.
       A final study worth mentioning examines the effects of an explicit education subsidy on youth
  20
     They estimate models aggregated to the year-age level for individuals ages 18-40 from 1972-96. To alleviate concerns
that other important economic or social factors may have changed at the same time the compulsory schooling age
increased, they include a rich set of covariates: year and age indicators, fraction British-born, fraction employed, fraction
non-white, and fraction living in London.
  21
     Estimated effects on male property crime are statistically significant, while effects on male violent crime are not.
Estimated effects for women are, unfortunately, very imprecise.
  22
     Covariates include employment rates, GDP per capita, GDP growth rates, average wage rates, the fraction of crimes
without an arrest, police per capita, and the length of time in the judicial process.
  23
     Buonanno and Leonida (2009) also generalize their econometric specification to allow for an effect of lagged crime rates
on current crime rates, estimating this using a generalized method of moments estimator to account for the endogeneity
of lagged crime rates. This specification produces similar estimated effects of schooling on crime.
  24
     Crime, work, and school are not mutually exclusive activities in this framework – individuals can do any combination
of these three activities in each year. An individual is said to have engaged in crime in any year if he self-reported any
of the following offenses: theft, other property crime, sold drugs, or assault.



                                                             15
burglary rates in England. Between 1999 and 2002, England piloted Educational Maintenance Al-
lowances (EMA), which provided subsidies of up to £40 per week (plus bonuses for completion of
coursework) for low-income 16-18 year old youth to attend school. The program was administered in
15 local areas with low schooling participation rates. During the same time period, the Reducing Bur-
glary Initiative (RBI) funded 63 different local burglary reduction schemes as a separate pilot project.
Roughly half of all EMA pilot areas were also selected for the RBI. Sabates and Feinstein (2007) use
a differences-in-differences strategy to identify the effects of each pilot program as well as the combi-
nation of the two on burglary. Specifically, they compare changes in burglary conviction rates before
and after the introduction of RBI, EMA, or both against a set of comparison areas. While baseline
burglary conviction rates were much higher in EMA and EMA-RBI combined areas relative to the
comparison areas, annual growth rates in burglary conviction rates prior to the programs were quite
similar across all three classifications. To reduce concerns about differences between the treated and
untreated areas, Sabates and Feinstein control for a number of time-varying area-specific factors likely
to affect crime and limit their sample of comparison areas to those that best ‘match’ the distribution of
demographic characteristics in the pilot areas.25 Their findings suggest that the combination of both
the EMA and RBI significantly reduced burglary rates by 1.3 per 1,000 youth (about 5.5%) relative
to the ‘matched’ comparison areas. Effects of the EMA alone were slightly lower but still significant.
While there are obvious concerns about the extent to which time-varying determinants of burglary are
the same for treated and comparison areas, Sabates and Feinstein (2007) show that estimated effects
on burglary rates for 19-21 year olds (who were not offered the education subsidy) were much lower
and statistically insignificant.

2.2.2    School Quality and Crime

If human capital acquisition, socialization, or preference modification are important mechanisms de-
termining the impacts of educational attainment on crime, then it is likely that school quality and
the type of schools students attend also affect criminal behavior. While there are no studies which
directly estimate the effects of measured school quality on crime, three recent studies on school choice
and desegregation provide some useful insights.
    Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006) and Deming (2009a) examine the importance of school choice
in large urban U.S. school districts (Chicago and Charlotte-Mecklenburg, respectively) on a variety
of student outcomes, including delinquency and crime. Both studies examine the effects ‘winning’ a
randomized lottery for admission to schools children selectively apply to.26 By comparing the outcomes
  25
     Their regressions control for unemployment rates for individuals under 25, proportion of students eligible for free
school meals, number of qualified teachers, pupil-teacher ratios, and the number of supplementary staff for ethnic mi-
norities, percent of youth with no schooling qualifications as of age 16 (i.e. dropouts), and the percent of unauthorized
half-days missed in secondary school. We discuss results based on the ‘matched’ sample of comparison areas.
  26
     In both cases, students could always choose to attend their neighborhood school. If any additional positions were
available in a school, an open enrollment lottery was run based on all other students who applied to that school/program.


                                                           16
for youth who win vs. lose a particular school admission lottery, they estimate the effects of being
offered admission to that school relative to the preferred alternative. This reflects the ‘intention to
treat’ (i.e. the effects of being offered the opportunity to attend better schools) and not necessarily
the effects of actually attending that school, since many students did not ultimately enroll in schools
for which they were admitted by lottery. However, both studies find that ‘winning’ a lottery does
significantly increase enrollment in that school. Since many students applying outside their assigned
local school are from disadvantaged backgrounds and neighborhoods, on average, lottery winners end
up attending better quality schools, as measured by such things as student achievement scores, value
added (i.e. growth in achievement), student behavioral problems, or teacher quality. In this sense, these
studies offer an opportunity to examine the effects of school quality, broadly defined, on delinquency
and crime.
    Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006) find that winning a high school lottery in Chicago significantly
raises peer graduation rates by 6% and the share of peers who test above national norms by about
14%; however, lottery winners appear to be placed in lower tracked classes within the better schools.
Interestingly, they find no evidence that lottery winners perform better on a wide range of academic
measures (e.g. math and reading tests, enrollment, days absent) and some evidence that they are more
likely to drop out of high school. The latter may be due to a mismatch between student ability and
school demands. Despite the disappointing findings regarding academic outcomes, students who won
lotteries to high achievement Chicago public schools reported nearly 60% fewer arrests on a ninth
grade student survey. These winners also reported getting into less trouble at school, and school
administrative data suggests that they had lower incarceration rates during school ages. Of course,
it is possible that schools themselves affect student arrest and incarceration rates through differential
disciplinary policies (or criminal opportunities), so it is important to study whether these reductions
in arrests/incarceration persist beyond high school.
    To this end, Deming (2009a) examines the impacts of open enrollment lotteries (for middle and
high schools) on adult criminal outcomes seven years after random assignment.27 Given his interest
in the effects of school choice on crime, he categorizes males based on their likelihood of arrest, which
he estimates as a function of demographic characteristics, earlier math and reading test scores, and
other school-related behaviors at young ages. For his entire sample of middle and high school lottery
participants, ‘high-risk’ youth (defined as those in the top quintile of predicted arrest probability) have
seven times more felony arrests (seven years after random assignment) than the average student from
the bottom four quintiles combined.
    Like Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2006), Deming (2009a) estimates significant effects of winning a
school lottery on the quality of school attended, especially among ‘high-risk’ youth, but no effects on
Lotteries were random within population subgroups (e.g. by race or family income).
  27
     He merges Charlotte-Mecklenburg school district data with data on adult (ages 16+) arrests and incarceration from
Mecklenburg County and the North Carolina Department of Corrections.


                                                         17
achievement tests. There appears to be some effect on student enrollment during high school years,
but there is no evidence that ‘high-risk’ lottery winners are more likely to graduate from high school.28
Among high school lottery winners in the high-risk category, Deming (2009a) estimates a significant
0.35 (roughly 45%) reduction in the number of adult felony arrests (cumulative as of seven years after
the lottery) with an associated savings in victimization costs of $4,600-16,600.29 Because many crimes
do not lead to an arrest, the total benefits to potential victims and society are likely to be much larger.
His estimates suggest that winning middle school lotteries also reduces crime among high-risk youth
with most effects of a similar order of magnitude.
       Court-ordered school desegregation policies enacted since Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka
in 1954 dramatically altered the types of schools blacks attended in many American districts. In
most cases, the resources and average student achievement of schools attended by blacks would have
improved markedly.30 Guryan (2004) estimates that these desegregation efforts significantly increased
high school graduation rates among blacks by 2-3 percentage points but had no effect on white grad-
uation rates. Weiner, Lutz and Ludwig (2009) examine whether these changes affected county-level
homicide rates.31 Their estimates suggest that homicide deaths among blacks ages 15-19 declined
by 17% in the first five years after court-ordered desegregation, while homicide deaths among white
15-19 year olds declined by about 23%. Homicide deaths among slightly older whites and blacks also
declined. In looking at offenders, they find that arrest rates for homicide declined by one-third for
blacks ages 15-19, while there was no decline for young whites. Combining Guryan’s (2004) estimated
effect on high school graduation rates with the estimated effects of schooling on crime from Lochner
and Moretti (2004), they argue that much of the effect may be coming from the increased schooling
among blacks associated with desegregation.
       For some perspective, it is interesting to compare these findings with those from the Moving-to-
Opportunity (MTO) experiment, which provided housing vouchers to low-income families to move
out of high poverty neighborhoods. Evaluations of MTO report that families receiving the housing
vouchers moved into neighborhoods with about 25% lower poverty rates; however, these moves only
led to modest improvements in the quality of schools youth attended and no improvements in their
cognitive achievement (Sanbonmatsu, et al. 2006). Kling, Ludwig, and Katz (2005) report that the
MTO housing vouchers led to lasting reductions in arrests for both violent and property offenses
among young females, short-term reductions in violent crime arrests for males, and delayed increases
in property crime arrests for males. Overall, reductions in crime were modest at best.
  28
     There is more evidence of effects on high school graduation and college attendance among the lower risk quintiles.
  29
     These victimization costs (in year 2009 dollars) assign costs based on the type of offense using cost estimates from
Miller, Cohen and Wiersema (1996). They do not include justice system or enforcement costs. The larger figure uses a
cost of $4.3 million for murder while the smaller uses a value of $125,000 (twice the cost of rape).
  30
     For example, Reber (2007) shows that integration efforts in Louisiana from 1965-70 were accompanied by large
increases in per pupil funding for black students.
  31
     They use data on homicide death by year and county over the period 1958-88 from vital statistics and data on
homicide victims and arrestees from the Supplemental Homicide Report from 1976-2003.


                                                           18
    Taken together, these studies suggest that simply improving the schools attended by disadvantaged
youth appears to be much more successful in reducing criminal activity (though not necessarily in
improving academic outcomes) than changing neighborhoods. Given the mixed findings on educational
attainment levels (with modest positive effects at best), the impacts of better schools on crime appear
to be driven largely by school quality and not ‘quantity’. Whether it is the quality of teachers and
instruction or of student peers is less obvious. The fact that test scores did not improve among lottery
winners suggests that the main effects of attending ‘better’ schools on delinquency and crime are likely
to be attributed to better socialization, better peer interactions, improvements in non-cognitive skills,
or changes in preferences.32 It is, therefore, interesting that substantial improvements in ‘neighborhood
peers’ do not yield the same benefits in terms of crime reduction.

2.2.3     Contemporaneous Schooling and Crime

We now consider the relationship between contemporaneous schooling and crime. As noted earlier,
there are three main ways in which altering youth’s schooling attendance is likely to affect their con-
temporaneous engagement in crime: (i) incapacitation, (ii) raising the costs of future punishment
through human capital accumulation, and (iii) social interactions facilitated by bringing youth to-
gether. The incapacitation and human capital effects of schooling on crime are likely to be negative,
while the sign of the social interaction effect is theoretically ambiguous.
    Three relatively recent studies shed light on these effects by estimating the impacts of different
‘interventions’ that directly affect youth schooling attendance.33 Anderson (2009) examines the effects
of increasing state compulsory schooling ages on crime among affected youth (i.e. forcing some youth
to stay in school), while Jacob and Lefgren (2003) and Luallen (2006) estimate the effects of extra
days off from school due to teacher in-service days or teacher strikes (i.e. keeping youth out of school).
The policies analyzed by these studies differ in two important respects. First, increases in compulsory
schooling ages typically ‘require’ students to stay in school at least one additional year and sometimes
more, whereas teacher in-service days and strikes are of very short duration. Second, while teacher
strikes and in-service days release all students from school, changes in compulsory schooling laws
typically affect a small set of marginal students. All three potential effects of school attendance on
crime are likely to be relevant to changes in compulsory schooling, while the effects of in-service
days and teacher strikes are likely to be limited to incapacitation and social interactions. Any social
interaction effects are likely to be magnified in the latter cases due to the universal nature of the policy.
    Rather than use changes in compulsory schooling laws as instruments for educational attainment,
  32
     See Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) for evidence on the importance of ‘cognitive’ vs. ‘non-cognitive’ skills for
crime and in the labor market.
  33
     Using individual-level data, earlier studies by Gottfredson (1985), Farrington, et al. (1986), and Witte and Tauchen
(1994) explore the cross-sectional relationship between time spent in school and contemporaneous crime, concluding that
time spent in school significantly ‘reduces’ criminal activity. Unfortunately, these findings are difficult to interpret given
the simultaneous nature of the crime and schooling choices.


                                                             19
Anderson (2009) estimates the direct effect of these laws on contemporaneous county-level arrest rates
(from the UCR) from 1980 to 2006 among affected youth ages 16-18. Specifically, his estimates are
identified from within-county fluctuations in arrests (around county-specific trends) for 16-18 year-olds
(relative to 13-15 year-olds) over time as state compulsory schooling ages change.
       Anderson’s estimates for total arrest rates imply that a compulsory schooling age of 17 significantly
reduces age 17 arrests by about 8% (5.4 arrests per 1,000 youth) compared to a compulsory schooling
age of 16 or less. Similarly, an age 18 compulsory schooling age significantly reduces arrests by 9.7-
11.5% at ages 16-18. Separating arrests by type of offense, he estimates that compulsory schooling laws
significantly reduce both property and violent arrests for 16-18 year olds. Although, estimated effects
of schooling age laws on drug-related crimes are sizeable, the effects are typically not statistically
significant. Overall, the estimates generally suggest that forcing youth to spend an extra year or two
in high school significantly reduces their arrest rates over that period.
       Jacob and Lefgren (2003) examine the effects of single day changes in school-wide attendance on
juvenile crime and arrest rates in 29 large American cities from 1995 to 1999. Exploiting teacher
in-service days across jurisdictions over time as an exogenous source of variation in school days, they
essentially compare local juvenile crime rates on days when school is not in session to those when it is.34
Their findings suggest that an additional day of school reduces serious juvenile property crime by about
14% that day while it increases serious juvenile violent crime by 28%. These results are consistent with
an ‘incapacitation effect’ of school that limits participation in property crime. However, the increased
level of interaction among adolescents facilitated through schools may raise the likelihood of violent
conflicts (and other minor delinquency) after school. Interestingly, they find no evidence to suggest
that school days simply shift crime to other days without changing overall crime rates.
       Luallen (2006) follows a similar approach, using teacher strikes (typically lasting about 5 days)
rather than in-service days as an exogenous source of school days. Using data from the state of
Washington for 1980-2001, Luallen (2006) estimates that an extra day of school reduces arrests for
property crimes by about 29% while increasing arrests for violent crimes by about 32% in urban areas.
The effect on property crime is roughly double the effect estimated in Jacob and Lefgren (2003), while
the effect on violent crime is quite similar. In rural and suburban areas, Luallen finds insignificant
effects on both violent and property crime arrests. Thus, the incapacitation and social interaction
effects appear to be particularly strong in urban areas and negligible elsewhere.

2.3      Evidence on Human Capital-Based Interventions from Birth to Young Adult-
         hood

A growing body of evidence suggests that early childhood and school-age interventions can reduce
adult crime rates. Most famously, the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program substantially lowered
  34
    Their main specification includes controls to account for the possibility that crime may be higher on certain days of
the week or that different cities may experience different monthly crime cycles.


                                                           20
arrest rates through age 40 for a sample of low-income minority children in Ypsilanti, Michigan.
Several other early childhood interventions have produced similar effects on delinquency; however,
others have not. We briefly review studies of early childhood and school-age interventions that have
analyzed educational and criminal/delinquency outcomes during late adolescence or adulthood.35 We
then discuss a few programs aimed at improving school participation among adolescents or that directly
provide training to adolescents and young adults.
       Table 1 summarizes four small-scale early childhood interventions (Abecedarian Project, Chicago
Child Parent Center (CPC), High/Scope Perry Preschool, and Infant Health and Development Pro-
gram (IHDP)), their target populations, study methodology, and estimated effects on educational
attainment and crime at ages 18 or older. All of the programs included a preschool component, rang-
ing from full-time full-year care from birth to kindergarten (Abecedarian) to half-day preschool at ages
3 and 4 (Chicago CPC and Perry Preschool). Perry Preschool and IHDP also included regular home
visits at preschool ages as part of their curriculums.36 All of the programs targeted youth facing some
form of disadvantage. Abecedarian and Perry Preschool specifically targeted children at-risk of having
problems developing normally in school. Children enrolling in the Chicago CPC were all minorities
selected from families with low socioeconomic status (SES). IHDP drew from a more heterogeneous
population, targeting pre-term children born of low birth-weight (less than 2500g). Overall, these stud-
ies cover a reasonably broad range of potential preschool-based interventions and target populations.
(We discuss findings for Head Start below.)
       Youth from all four of these programs were followed until at least age 18, enough time to determine
whether the programs have medium-term effects on the education and criminal behavior of partici-
pants. Only the Chicago CPC was not evaluated using randomized trials; however, Reynolds, et al.
(2001) use a strong design of matching treated children with other comparison children based on age of
kindergarten entry, eligibility for and participation in government funded programs, and neighborhood
and family poverty. Children from the matched comparison sample would also have been eligible for
the program had they lived in a neighborhood with a center. Sample sizes range from around one
hundred children for Perry Preschool to thirteen hundred for Chicago CPC.
       Both Chicago CPC and Perry Preschool significantly increased high school completion rates overall;
however, the Chicago CPC had more sizeable effects on male graduation rates while Perry Preschool
only raised female graduation rates (Reynolds, et al. 2001, Schweinhart, et al. 2005). The IHDP had
no effect on high school dropout rates by age 18, while Abecedarian increased college attendance but
not high school completion (McCormick, et al. 2006, Campbell, et al. 2002). These programs typically
  35
    See Karoly, et al. (1998) or Blau and Currie (2006) for more comprehensive surveys of early childhood programs.
  36
    All of the programs typically provided other additional services to families and children (e.g. nutritional and health
services). While a subsample of the Abecedarian participants received an extended school-age intervention for the first
few years of school, we focus on the preschool component of the program. The additional school-age services did not
substantially impact the educational attainment or crime outcomes discussed here.




                                                           21
produced short-term gains in achievement scores and sometimes generated lasting gains.
    The final column of Table 1 reports estimated effects of these programs on late juvenile and adult
crime. As alluded to above, Perry Preschool had significant effects on lifetime crime measured as of age
40 (Schweinhart, et al. 2005). Reductions in the fraction arrested five or more times were substantial
for both males and females. Both showed reductions of about one-third; however, the size of the
effect in absolute terms is much larger for males given their higher baseline crime rate. Reductions in
crime for Perry Preschool students were observed across a broad range of crimes (e.g. drug, property,
and violent crimes) and were apparent even at younger ages. The Chicago CPC also reduced arrest
rates (by age 18) by about one-third (Reynolds, et al. 2001). Another widely cited family support and
preschool program, the Syracuse University Family Development Research Program, showed significant
reductions in juvenile delinquency measured at a slightly earlier age: 6% of preschool participants had
been placed under probation services by age 15 compared to 22% of controls (Lally, et al. 1988).37
    The estimated savings in reduced criminal justice expenditures and victimization costs resulting
from the crime reductions of Perry Preschool and Chicago CPC are sizeable. Using a 3% discount rate,
Belfield, et al. (2006) estimate that the Perry Preschool produced a social benefit of over $150,000
(year 2000 dollars) per child from crime reduction alone.38 Reynolds, et al. (2002) estimate that
reductions in juvenile crime through age 18 associated with the Chicago CPC saved society roughly
$8,000. Findings like these, especially those for Perry Preschool, led Donohue and Siegelman (1998)
to conclude that small, rigorous early intervention programs may pay for themselves through reduced
crime rates alone, if they can be targeted to high-crime groups.
    Not all early childhood programs in Table 1 yield reductions in crime. While modest reductions in
self-reported convictions and incarceration through age 21 are observed for Abecedarian, none of these
effects are statistically significant (Campbell, et al. 2002). Based on administrative records of adult
criminal charges in North Carolina, Clarke and Campbell (1998) report nearly identical rates of arrests
and criminal charges (as of age 21, on average) for treatment and control children in the Abecedarian
study. Similarly, IHDP produced no significant effects on crime through age 18 (McCormick, et al.
2006).
    What is different about Abecedarian and IHDP that these programs did not produce the same
reductions in crime? It is difficult to point to any particular curriculum difference; although, not all
preschools are alike. Abecedarian began preschool at infancy and continued through kindergarten –
  37
     The Elmira Nurse Home Visitation Program provided home visits by nurses to first-time mothers who were young,
unmarried, or of low SES. Nurses visited homes for randomly assigned mothers during pregnancy and for the first two
years of the child’s life. Olds, et al. (1998) report mixed but encouraging effects of the program on delinquency at age
15: treated youth were more likely to self-report being stopped by the police but had fewer incidences of arrests and
convictions.
  38
     This figure is for benefits through age 40. Using a 7% discount rate produces a social benefit from crime of about
$67,000 (Belfield, et al. 2006). Heckman, et al. (2009) report that savings from crime reduction account for about 40-
65% of the benefit-cost ratio for Perry Preschool, depending on assumptions about discount rates (0-7%) and the cost of
murder.



                                                          22
the longest of any program. It was also full-day year-round, unlike Perry Preschool or Chicago CPC.
Like Perry Preschool, it showed sizeable gains in achievement and IQ, so it is difficult to attribute
its lack of effects on crime to inadequate intervention. The only obvious program difference between
Abecedarian and Perry Preschool or Chicago CPC that might explain the absence of any impact on
crime is its lack of a ‘home visit’ component, but IHDP included home visits by nurses from birth
through three years of age. IHDP began early but also ended when Perry Preschool and Chicago CPC
began (age 3), so it is possible that the early ‘home visit’ combined with later preschool care is a key
combination of services necessary for long-term impacts on delinquency and crime.
   An alternative hypothesis is that the environments more than the specifics of the programs were
important in determining impacts on crime. Chapel Hill is a mid-sized mostly white and relatively
affluent university city in the South, while Ypsilanti is a smaller industrial city with a sizeable minority
population. Chicago CPC sites were in low-income neighborhoods in a large urban midwestern city.
(IHDP had sites throughout the U.S.) It seems quite possible that the same program might have
different effects in each city. As noted by Barnett and Masse (2007), crime rates were 70% higher in
Ypsilanti than Chapel Hill when the respective program participants would have been age 15. They
speculate that there may have been little crime to prevent among the Abecedarian sample; however,
Clarke and Cambpell (1998) report that the two control samples (Perry and Abecedarian) had very
similar arrest rates (around 40%) by their early 20s. McCormick, et al. (2006) report that juvenile
arrest rates among controls were similar for the IHDP and Chicago CPC as well. So, among the
target populations for these programs, crime rates were fairly similar even if local crime rates were
quite different. Of course, it is possible that the long-term effects of early childhood programs depend
as much on the environment in which participants grow up as on individual and family characteristics
of the participants themselves. If so, it is important to exercise caution in extrapolating benefits from
any single program or community to the wider population.
   Despite the fact that children targeted by all programs were disadvantaged, there is a sizeable
difference in baseline educational attainment levels between Abecedarian and IHDP on the one hand
and Chicago CPC and Perry Preschool on the other. High school graduation rates were 70% among
Abecedarian controls; dropout rates (as of age 18) were only 10% among the IHDP controls. These
both compare quite favorably with Chicago CPC and Perry Preschool controls who had high school
completion rates ranging from 30-50%. Neither IHDP nor Abecedarian increased high school grad-
uation rates. While Abecedarian improved college attendance rates, this does not appear to be an
important margin for crime (see Figure 1). Given the tight link between high school dropout and
crime discussed earlier, it may not be particularly surprising that Abecedarian and IHDP did not re-
duce crime given their negligible effects on high school completion. Yet, Perry Preschool substantially
reduced male crime rates without raising educational attainment among males. Clearly, early inter-
ventions may reduce delinquency and criminal behavior without significantly improving final schooling


                                                    23
outcomes.
       In the end, there is no easy explanation for the different findings across studies. While the results
from these studies are individually powerful given their research designs (most are based on random
assignment), it is difficult to draw strong conclusions overall about the efficacy of early childhood
interventions as a national crime-fighting strategy. The fact that sample sizes are quite modest and
that program populations are not necessarily representative of the U.S. raises additional questions.
This itself may explain some of the variation in findings across studies. It is natural to ask how
these programs would affect other populations. Questions about scalability have also been raised: can
these programs and their effects be reproduced at a larger scale? These issues have led a number of
researchers to analyze the largest early childhood program in the U.S.: Head Start. This program
targets children from low-income families usually living in low-income communities and has served
hundreds of thousands of children throughout the U.S. since its inception in 1967.
       Because no large-scale long-term random assignment studies of Head Start are available, researchers
have employed non-experimental methods. These studies generally examine impacts on national sam-
ples of individuals served by Head Start, using data from the Panel Survey of Income and Dynamics
(PSID) or Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (CNLSY). We next discuss those
studies that examine the impacts of Head Start on behavioral problems, delinquency, or measures of
adult crime.
       Garces, Thomas, and Currie (2002) and Deming (2009b) use a family fixed effects approach to
estimate the effects of Head Start on a variety of long-term outcomes. By comparing siblings who did
and did not attend a Head Start program at ages 3-5, they address important concerns about perma-
nent or long-run differences across families that may affect decisions about preschool or Head Start
enrollment.39 Garces, Thomas, and Currie (2002) use data from the PSID, examining adult outcomes
for individuals born between 1964 and 1977, while Deming (2009b) uses data from the CNLSY and
examines outcomes for individuals born in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Despite using the same
empirical approach, the two studies find quite different patterns for Head Start impacts on educational
attainment and criminal behavior. Garces, Thomas, and Currie (2002) estimate significant increases
in high school completion (by 20 percentage points) and college attendance (by 28 percentage points)
for whites only, while Deming (2009b) estimates an 11 percentage point increase in high school com-
pletion rates and a 14 percentage point increase in college attendance for blacks only. Excluding GED
recipients, Deming (2009b) estimates a smaller (7 percentage points) and statistically insignificant ef-
fect on high school completion for blacks, suggesting that much of their apparent improvement in high
school completion is due to increases in the GED.40 Regarding crime, estimates by Garces, Thomas,
  39
     Of course, they leave unanswered the question as to why some siblings enroll in Head Start while others from the
same family do not and, more importantly, whether different enrollment decisions are related to underlying differences
in child abilities or other factors that may affect outcomes later in life.
  40
     The substitution between high school degrees and GED receipt is less relevant for the earlier cohort studied by



                                                         24
and Currie (2002) suggest that Head Start reduces the probability of being booked or charged with a
crime by about 12 percentage points among blacks, with no effect on whites. Deming (2009b) finds
no significant effects of Head Start on crime for blacks or whites.41
    Carneiro and Ginja (2008) use a regression discontinuity design to estimate the effects of Head
Start on adolescent outcomes, including the probability that someone is sentenced for a crime. Their
approach exploits the fact that Head Start imposes strict eligibility criteria related to family income
and structure: children ages 3-5 are eligible if family income is below the federal poverty guidelines
or if the family is eligible for public assistance. Since these criteria vary across states and time, the
income thresholds vary across these dimensions as well. They exploit this exogenous variation in
eligibility, assuming the effects of family income (when children are ages 3-5) on subsequent outcomes
are continuous. Using data from the CNLSY on youth who would have enrolled in Head Start during
the 1980s and 1990s, they estimate that participation in Head Start at ages 3-5 significantly reduces
the probability (by 31 percentage points) a 16-17 year-old male is sentenced for a crime (based on
self-reports). They estimate similar effects for a sample of blacks only. These estimates measure the
effect of Head Start on children who were at the margin of eligibility for the program and, therefore,
represent the effects we might expect with modest expansions of the program.
    Altogether, the non-experimental evidence on Head Start appears to suggest some long-term effects
on education and crime, but findings vary in important ways across studies.42 The strongest effects
on crime appear to exist for blacks; although, Deming (2009) finds no effect on crime for either blacks
or whites. Combined with the evidence from smaller scale programs evaluated by randomized trials,
there is limited but important evidence that early childhood interventions can reduce crime later in
life for youth from disadvantaged backgrounds.
    A recent program, Fast Track, introduced in four sites around the U.S., provides group- and
individual-based services to children from grades one through ten. The program specifically targets
children from high crime and poverty neighborhoods who exhibit conduct problems in kindergarten,
with the primary aim of preventing antisocial behavior and psychiatric disorders. The program fo-
cuses on three elements of development: social and cognitive skills, peer relationships, and parenting.
Garces, Thomas, and Currie (2002), since the GED was much less common in the 1980s relative to more recent years.
  41
     His measure of crime is an indicator equal to one if the respondent reports having been convicted of a crime, been
on probation, sentenced by a judge, or is in prison at the time of the interview.
  42
     While Head Start may affect juvenile and adult crime even if it has no effect on educational attainment (as with
males in the Perry Preschool program), one might speculate that any increases in schooling (especially high school years)
associated with Head Start should lead to reductions in crime as estimated by Lochner and Moretti (2004). Under this
assumption, estimates from Ludwig and Miller (2007), which suggest that roughly doubling Head Start spending (per
capita) increases high school completion rates by as much as four percentage points, imply that this policy should also
reduce arrest rates by up to 3-4%. Of course, multiplying the Garces, Thomas, and Currie (2002) estimated effects of
Head Start on schooling attainment among whites by Lochner and Moretti’s (2004) estimated effects of education on
crime suggests that Head Start attendance should significantly reduce incarceration rates among whites, while analogous
estimates from Deming (2009b) suggest that Head Start should reduce crime among blacks. Yet, these studies estimated
no effect of Head Start attendance on self-reported measures of arrest, conviction, or incarceration rates for these
populations.



                                                           25
During early grades, parents were offered training and home visits to help improve parenting skills,
while children were engaged in group activities to foster friendships and tutoring sessions in reading.
As children aged, more individualized services were provided, along with group sessions aimed at
dealing with the transition to middle school, resistance to drugs, etc. The program also incorporated
a classroom intervention during grades 1-5 at schools with program children. Teachers implemented
2-3 sessions per week designed to promote social and emotional competence and to reduce aggression.
Experimental estimates based on random assignment suggest that the program produced sustained
improvements in conduct disorders and anti-social behavior over grades 3-9 (Conduct Problems Pre-
vention Research Group, CPPRG, 2007). As of grade 9, high risk youth (those from the top 3% of
conduct problems in kindergarten) receiving the Fast Track program showed significant reductions in
self-reported delinquency and criminal behavior; however, no significant effects on anti-social behavior
were found for other youth.43 Two recent follow-up studies (CPPRG 2010a, 2010b) suggest that the
reductions in crime and conduct problems extend at least two years beyond the conclusion of the
program (last measured at grade 12/age 19) and continue to be focused on youth that were initially
‘high risk’. Effects on juvenile conduct disorders did not appear to decline after the program, while
effects on crime showed some fade-out.
       Experimental evaluations of two earlier, more limited elementary school-age interventions are worth
commenting on, since they also focused largely on social development among ‘high-risk’ children. The
Montreal Longitudinal Experimental Study provided social skills training to first and second grade
children, along with teacher and parent training over those same years. Boisjoli, et al. (2007) report
that by age 24, children receiving the intervention (compared to control children) were twice as likely
to have completed high school and only half as likely to have a criminal record. The Seattle Social
Development Project intervened over a longer period (grades 1-6); however, it only provided teacher
and parent training (aimed at improving child social and emotional skill development). As of age 21,
Hawkins, et al. (2005) estimate that the six-year intervention had increased high school graduation
rates from 81 to 91 percent and significantly reduced self-reported crime and official lifetime court
charges (from 53 to 42 percent).
       Altogether, the evidence from Fast Track, the Montreal Longitudinal Experimental Study, and
the Seattle Social Development Project suggests that comprehensive school-age programs designed to
improve social development can produce lasting impacts on educational attainment, conduct disorders,
and criminal behavior. In many ways, these programs emphasized social over cognitive development
relative to the preschool programs summarized in Table 1. Of course, both sets of programs were
broad-based and yielded improvements in both domains.44
  43
      Results for anti-social behavior are based on an index created from self-reports of serious delinquent/criminal actions
like stealing something worth more than $100, assault, selling heroin or LSD, and sexual assault.
   44
      This is largely consistent with recent estimates of skill production functions for both cognitive and ‘non-cognitive’
skills (e.g., see Cunha and Heckman 2008).



                                                             26
       Programs targeted to older adolescents and young adults have shown mixed results. The Quantum
Opportunity Program provided entering high school students with a mentor/tutor that aided them in
schoolwork and community activities for four years. Financial incentives designed to encourage high
school graduation and college enrollment were provided for educational, service, and developmental
activities. A recent random assignment evaluation of the program reported no significant improvements
in schooling or reductions in crime six years after scheduled high school graduation (Schirm, Stuart,
and McKie 2006). In part, this may be due to the relatively low participation by youth in program
activities.45
       The Job Corps provides intensive basic educational and vocational training for economically dis-
advantaged youth and young adults ages 16-24 throughout the U.S. The program also offers a wide
range of other services (e.g. counseling, social skills training, health education, job placement services).
The average participant is enrolled for about 8 months, with most living in residence at training sites.
The program’s primary goal is to improve employment and earnings prospects. Based on a recent
random assignment evaluation, Schochet, Burghardt and Glazerman (2001) conclude that the pro-
gram produced modest positive impacts on post-program employment and earnings. The program
also reduced self-reported arrest rates by about 30% during the first year after random assignment,
when most youth would have been enrolled. Reductions in subsequent years were smaller and statis-
tically insignificant. The program also significantly reduced conviction rates by about 17% during the
four years following random assignment.46 Conclusions from the less-expensive and non-residential
JOBSTART program are largely consistent with these findings (Cave, et al. 1993).47
       Collectively, these studies indicate that human capital-based interventions from early childhood to
early adulthood can reduce juvenile and adult crime, at least for some populations. To understand
why, it is useful to return briefly to the model developed earlier. The model suggests that effective
interventions may reduce juvenile and adult crime by improving child learning productivity, A, increas-
ing adolescent human capital levels, H1 , or by socializing children (i.e. lowering θ). While preschool
programs highlighted in Table 1 may raise learning abilities, achievement gains are generally short-
lived and limited to primary school ages. Evidence of reduced criminal activity among adolescents
  45
      On average, youth spent only 177 hours per year on educational, community, and developmental activities. Roughly
one-in-four spent no time at all in these activities by the fourth year of the program.
   46
      An earlier study by Long, et al. (1981) estimated that the social benefits from reduced criminal activity among Job
Corps participants amounted to over $7,000 (in 2008 dollars) per participant – almost 30% of the total social benefit of
the program.
   47
      JOBSTART offered many of the same basic components of the Job Corps to a similar population. Cave, et al. (1993)
find modest (and statistically insignificant) positive effects on earnings 3-4 years after random assignment for the full
sample; however, earnings increased roughly 25% (in years 3 and 4) for male participants with a prior arrest (i.e. had
an arrest since age 16 but prior to random assignment). Among male participants with no prior arrest, the program
significantly reduced self-reports of an arrest (6.4 percentage points or 36%) during the first year after random assignment
(i.e. the training year) but did not reduce the fraction arrested in subsequent years. Among males with a prior arrest,
the program (insignificantly) reduced the fraction reporting an arrest over the first four years after random assignment
by about 8% and had negligible effects on arrests during the first year. There were no significant effects on arrests for
female participants.



                                                            27
attributed to early intervention programs, suggests that these programs raise adolescent market skills
(H1 ) and/or reduce criminal returns (θ) through socialization. School-based programs for high-risk
youth like Fast Track emphasized social development (i.e. lowering θ) over cognitive achievement;
yet, they also likely improved adolescent human capital levels H1 . Despite the difference in emphasis
between the two types of programs, both have shown the ability to significantly reduce juvenile and
adult crime. Job training programs for adolescents and young adults directly operate on the incentives
to invest in human capital (analogous to an increase in the subsidy rate s in our model) and have led
to modest reductions in crime during periods of heavy training. These programs have produced only
modest increases in earnings and negligible long-run effects on crime, however, suggesting that simply
training low-skilled adolescents does not provide the same promise as earlier interventions that act on
individual endowments.

2.4      Policy Lessons

We next discuss a number of important policy lessons regarding human capital policies and crime.
First, we summarize evidence on the social savings from crime reduction that we might expect from
policies that increase educational attainment or enrollment, improve school choice and quality, or
expand access to early childhood interventions. Second, we highlight a few sub-populations and
schooling margins that are likely to yield the greatest social gain from crime reduction. Finally, we
discuss a few other lessons based on the evidence.

2.4.1      Valuing the Social Benefits from Crime Reduction

Lochner and Moretti (2004) estimate that increasing educational attainment levels in the population
yields sizeable social benefits. Specifically, they calculate the social savings from crime reduction that
would result from a one percentage point increase in high school graduation rates in the U.S. Table 2
summarizes their exercise, translating all dollar values into 2008 dollars using the Consumer Price
Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U). Column 1 reports total costs per crime associated with
murder, rape, robbery, assault, burglary, larceny/theft, motor vehicle theft, and arson.48 Column 2
reports the predicted change in total U.S. arrests based on the Lochner and Moretti (2004) offense-
specific arrest estimates discussed earlier and the total number of arrests in the 1990 Uniform Crime
Reports. Column 3 adjusts the arrest effect in column 2 by the number of crimes per arrest. In total,
nearly 100,000 fewer crimes would have taken place in 1990 if high school graduation rates had been
one percentage point higher. The implied social savings from reduced crime are shown in column
4. Savings from murder alone are as high as $1.7 billion. Savings from reduced assaults amount to
nearly $550 million. Because the estimates suggest that schooling increases rape and robbery offenses,
increased costs associated with these crimes partially offset the benefits from reductions in other
 48
      These costs include incarceration and victim costs. See notes to Table 2 or Lochner and Moretti (2004) for details.



                                                            28
crimes.
       The final row reports the total savings from reductions in all eight types of crime. Because these
figures only include a partial list of crimes (e.g. nearly 25% of all prisoners in 1991 were incarcerated for
drug offenses according to the U.S. Dept. of Justice (1994)) and do not include all costs associated with
each crime (e.g. private security measures are omitted), these amounts are likely to under-estimate
the true social benefit associated with increasing high school graduation rates. Still, the savings are
substantial: the social benefits of a one percentage point increase in male U.S. high school graduation
rates (from reduced crime alone) in 1990 would have amounted to more than $2 billion.49 This
represents more than $3,000 in annual savings per additional male graduate.
       Machin, Marie and Vujic (forthcoming) also estimate the social savings from crime reduction
associated with increasing the population of individuals with an education qualification (similar to
high school completion in the U.S.). Accounting only for benefits from property crime reduction
(estimated effects on violent crime are statistically insignificant), their estimates suggest a savings of
over £10,000 per additional student qualification.
       Open school enrollment lotteries and desegregation efforts appear to reduce crime rates by improv-
ing school quality. Deming (2009a) estimates that reductions in arrests associated with offering better
quality school options to a high-risk youth produces a roughly $16,000 social savings to victims over
the next seven years. Because better schools are also likely to have reduced crimes that never led to
an arrest, total victimization savings are likely to be substantially higher. Total social savings should
be still larger once savings on prisons and other crime prevention costs are factored in.
       The effects of school attendance on contemporaneous juvenile crime rates are more complicated.
Studies estimating the effects of day-to-day changes in attendance suggest that in urban communities
additional school days reduce property crime while increasing violent crime (Jacob and Lefgren 2003,
Luallen 2006). Overall, the social costs associated with increased violence are likely to dominate
the benefits from reduced property crime. On the other hand, Anderson (2009) estimates reductions
in both violent and property juvenile crime associated with increases in compulsory schooling ages.
Thus, his findings suggest an overall social savings from juvenile crime reduction, although he does
not attempt to put a dollar value on the effects.
       Evidence on the effects of early childhood and school-age interventions are mixed. Long-run
impacts on juvenile delinquency and adult crime can be substantial for disadvantaged youth. For
example, estimates suggest that Perry Preschool produced a social benefit from crime reduction of
roughly $150,000 per child (through age 40). On the other hand, Abecedarian produced no significant
impacts on crime.
  49
    These calculations are partial equilibrium in nature, implicitly assuming that the skill prices of workers do not change
in response to a policy that increases national high school completion rates. Fella and Gallipoli (2009) show that the
social benefits of such a policy would be even larger if general equilibrium effects on the wages of high school dropouts
and graduates were incorporated.



                                                            29
2.4.2      Where are the Big Returns?

Given the most sizeable reductions in crime appear to result from the final years of high school, policies
that encourage high school completion would seem to be most promising in terms of their impacts
on crime.50 Because crime rates are already quite low among high school graduates, policies that
encourage college attendance or completion are likely to yield much smaller social benefits from crime
reduction; although, they may be desirable on other grounds.51
       In general, policies designed to encourage schooling among more crime-prone groups are likely to
produce the greatest benefits from crime reduction. Consistent with this, the school-age Fast Track
program appears to have reduced juvenile crime only among very high-risk children, showing little
impact on even moderately high-risk children (CPPRG 2007, 2010b). Similarly, Deming (2009a) esti-
mates that improved school choice for middle and high school students leads to significant reductions
in arrests for high-risk youth but not for others. As Donohue and Siegelman (1998) conclude, the over-
all efficiency of early childhood programs as a crime-fighting strategy is likely to depend heavily on
the ability to target high-risk children at very young ages. The same is likely to be true for school-age
interventions.
       Social benefits from crime reduction also vary across gender and race. Men commit much less
crime than women, on average. Thus, it is not surprising that crime-related benefits from education
policies and interventions are typically much smaller for females than males (e.g. Perry Preschool,
Job Corps). This is true even though programs sometimes reduce female and male crime rates by
similar amounts in percentage terms. Among men, Lochner and Moretti (2004) estimate much larger
effects of additional schooling on incarceration rates among blacks relative to whites. Garces, Currie
and Thomas (2002) estimate that Head Start significantly reduces crime for blacks but not whites;
however, Deming (2009b) estimates no effect on crime for either group while Carneiro and Ginja
(2008) estimate similar large effects on both. Because crime rates are much higher among blacks than
whites, on average, policies would generally need to produce much larger proportional reductions in
white crime rates to achieve similar absolute reductions in crime. None of the evidence surveyed here
suggests that this is the case.

2.4.3      Additional Policy Lessons

A few other useful lessons can be drawn from the studies surveyed here.
       First, education policies can reduce property crime as well as violent crime. In the U.S., the esti-
mated effects of educational attainment or school enrollment on property and violent offenses appear
  50
     See Hanushek and Lindseth (2009), Jacob and Ludwig (2008), or Murnane (2008) for recent discussions of policies
to improve schooling outcomes in the U.S.
  51
     The fact that crime declines substantially with high school completion but not college attendance suggests that net
expected returns from crime for most individuals lie somewhere between the wages of high school dropouts and graduates.
See Freeman (1999) for a summary of evidence regarding criminal wages and earnings.



                                                          30
to be quite similar in percentage terms (Lochner and Moretti 2004, Anderson 2009).52 Even murder
appears to be quite responsive to changes in educational attainment and school quality (Lochner and
Moretti 2004, Weiner, Lutz, and Ludwig 2009).
       Second, higher wages increase the opportunity costs (including work foregone while incarcerated)
of both property and violent crime. Lochner and Moretti (2004) show that the estimated effects of
educational attainment on crime can largely be accounted for by the effects of schooling on wages
and the effects of wages on crime. This is important, since it suggests that policymakers can reduce
crime simply by increasing labor market skills; they need not alter individual preferences or otherwise
socialize youth.53 Of course, as evidence from the Job Corps and other training programs suggests,
this is not necessarily an easy task. Training programs targeted at low-skill adolescents and young
adults have modest (at best) effects on earnings and crime. On the other hand, encouraging youth to
finish high school (e.g. through compulsory schooling laws) appears to substantially increase earnings
and reduce crime. Preventing early school dropout is likely to be more successful than trying to
compensate for dropout a few years later.
       Third, education-based policies need not increase educational attainment to reduce crime. Studies
on school choice lotteries (Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt 2006, Deming 2009a) suggest that providing
disadvantaged urban youth with better schools can substantially reduce juvenile and adult crime,
even if it has small effects on traditional education outcomes. Perry Preschool had no effect on male
schooling levels but substantially reduced male crime rates through age 40 (Schweinhart, et al. 2005).
       Fourth, evidence that violent crime is higher on school days than non-school days in urban districts
suggests that social interaction effects are particularly important for juvenile violent crime (Jacob and
Lefgren 2003, Luallen 2006). Smart policing efforts may be able to help address some of the problems
associated with schools releasing lots of adolescents at the same time. For example, an increased police
presence immediately after school or other major adolescent congregations let out may be warranted.
Or, on non-school days, it may be wise for police to focus more on targets or areas of juvenile property
crime, worrying less about violent crime. The ‘hot spot’ or ‘problem-oriented policing’ literature in
criminology suggests that informed targeting of police efforts to high crime areas (and, by extension,
times) can be effective at reducing overall crime rates.54 Alternatively, it may be useful to consider
ways of designing after-school youth programs or other weekend activities to minimize violent behavior
afterwards.
  52
     Estimates from Machin, Marie, and Vujic (forthcoming) suggest that education reduces property crime more than
violent crime in the U.K.
  53
     As Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua (2006) show, both ‘cognitive’ and ‘non-cognitive’ skills are acquired in school, are
rewarded in the labor market, and affect crime.
  54
     For a recent survey of this literature, see Braga (2005).




                                                          31
2.5      Interpreting the Evidence on Crime

Much of the empirical evidence is broadly consistent with a human capital-based model of crime and
work premised on the notion that schooling raises legitimate wage rates much more than the returns
to most types of crime. Indeed, Lochner and Moretti (2004) argue that the reductions in violent and
property crime associated with increased schooling in the U.S. is roughly equivalent to the effect of
education on wages multiplied by the effect of increased wages on crime.55 Thus, most of the effect
of education on violent and property crime may come from increased wages. By contrast, education
may increase the returns to white collar crime more than the returns to work. Consistent with this,
Lochner (2004) finds that arrest rates for white collar crime increase when education levels rise.
       The human capital-based model of crime is further supported by recent trends in incarceration
differentials by education in the U.S. as documented by Western (2006). Since the early 1980s, the U.S.
has witnessed a dramatic increase in the wage returns to schooling, the probability of incarceration,
and prison sentence lengths. All of these trends have served to increase the opportunity costs of crime
relatively more for the most educated. As predicted by the model, incarceration rates have become
more strongly correlated with education over this period.
       Education-based programs may also socialize youth, reducing personal or psychic rewards from
crime. Heckman and Rubinstein (2001) argue that ‘non-cognitive’ skills may be more important
determinants of many life outcomes than ‘cognitive’ skills among those at the bottom of the education
distribution. Emphasizing social and emotional development, school-age programs like Fast Track
have shown the ability to significantly reduce later conduct disorders and crime (among high-risk
children). These programs also improved educational outcomes, which may explain some of their
impacts on crime. Perry Preschool reduced male (and female) crime rates without affecting male
schooling outcomes. Thus, the program appears to have improved social development or increased
early skill levels (without noticeably affecting subsequent schooling investments). Evidence from school
choice lotteries suggests that improvements in school and peer quality can lead to reductions in crime
without raising student achievement or educational attainment. The most likely explanation for the
reduction in crime is that higher quality schools better socialize youth or provide them with a better
set of peers. Yet, evidence from the MTO experiment suggests that moving families to lower poverty
neighborhoods does not produce the same reductions in crime, complicating any explanation related
to peer effects or social networks.
       Education may also increase patience or alter preferences for risk; however, neither seems to be
  55
    Machin and Meghir (2004) estimate the elasticity of property crime to low-skill wages to be a little over one in the
U.K. Grenet (2010) estimates that an extra year of school (induced by the U.K.’s 1973 increase in compulsory schooling)
increases wages by about 7%. Combining these figures, the effect of an extra year of school through increased wages
should be to lower property crime by 7-10% in the U.K. Estimates from Machin, Marie, and Vujic (forthcoming) suggest
that an extra year of school reduces overall property crime by 10-15% (20-30% among men and very little among women).
Altogether, these calculations suggest that increased wages explain anywhere from one-half to all of the effect of education
on property crime in the U.K.


                                                            32
central to the estimated impacts on crime. Property crimes are generally associated with less than
one month of expected time in jail or prison conditional on being sentenced (see Table 3), hardly
enough time for modest changes in patience to play much of a role. Property crimes also have very
low expected probabilities of arrest (typically less than 10% chance) and even lower probabilities of
incarceration (typically less than 1%), so there is little actual uncertainty in outcomes associated with
these crimes (see Table 3). Yet, estimated impacts of schooling on property crime are similar to those
for violent crime, which entails much longer and more uncertain prison sentences.
   Altogether, the evidence suggests that while efforts to socialize youth can be effective, simply
providing them with valuable market skills can discourage them from choosing a life of crime. In
terms of crime reduction, human capital-based policies that target the most disadvantaged (and crime-
prone) are likely to be the most efficient, while also promoting a more equitable society. To that end,
increasing high school graduation rates and improving our nation’s worst inner city schools are likely
to yield the greatest social return.
   Although policies that increase school attendance for a year or more (e.g. increased compulsory
schooling ages) appear to reduce both violent and property crime (Anderson 2009), a few extra days
off from school may actually lead to reductions in violent crime, especially in urban areas (Jacob and
Lefgren 2003, Luallen 2006). From a human capital perspective, the increased opportunities that open
up for youth attending an additional year of schooling should raise the future costs of incarceration
associated with juvenile crime. This may serve as an important additional criminal deterrent that
does not exist for day-to-day changes in the school calendar. In general, the effects of longer periods of
attendance on contemporaneous juvenile crime are consistent with the subsequent effects of additional
schooling on adult crime.
   There are many ways by which early childhood interventions may affect juvenile and adult crime.
The human capital approach favored in this chapter highlights the potential effects of these programs
on learning abilities, adolescent skill levels, and socialization or tastes for crime. These programs
may also affect childhood preferences, including risk aversion, patience, or self-control. While a few
early childhood programs have produced sizeable reductions in both juvenile and adult crime – most
famously, Perry Preschool – other quite similar programs have not. School-age interventions focused
on developing social and emotional skills have proven successful at reducing later conduct disorders
and crime, especially among very high-risk children. The benefits from reduced crime associated with
successful programs certainly warrant the attention they have received; yet, we still need to know
much more about why other programs have not produced the same effects. Two things are clear.
First, preschool and school-age programs have substantially reduced crime for some disadvantaged
high-risk populations. Even if these gains cannot be expected in all cases, they are large enough to
warrant careful consideration on a broader scale. Second, successful programs did not always increase
educational attainment, even when they significantly reduced juvenile and adult crime rates. Thus,


                                                   33
disappointing achievement or educational outcomes need not imply the absence of benefits from crime
reduction.
         Given current evidence, it is difficult to draw strong conclusions about the relative benefits of trying
to target and ‘treat’ children at very young ages vs. intervening at later ages to keep adolescents from
dropping out of high school. Of course, we need not choose one or the other. Indeed, both are likely to
be important components of a broad-based national crime-fighting agenda. Calculations by Lochner
and Moretti (2004) and Donohue and Seigelman (1998) suggest that both human capital-oriented
policies are competitive with more traditional law enforcement and incarceration efforts when all
benefits are considered.


3         Education’s Effects on Health and Mortality

Health and mortality gaps by education are large and have been growing for decades (see, e.g., Pappas,
et al. 1993, Goesling 2007, Meara, et al. 2008). In 2000, white males with at least some college
education could expect to live 6.2 years more than their less educated counterparts (Meara, et al.
2008). As highlighted by recent surveys of the literature on education and health (e.g. Grossman
and Kaestner 1997, Grossman 2000, 2006), education is more strongly correlated with health than is
income or occupation. As discussed below, the literature has identified many reasons education may
improve health and reduce mortality.
         We address three questions in this section: (i) Does education actually improve health and mortality
outcomes (i.e. is there a causal effect of education)? (ii) If so, why? (iii) What does this mean for
education or health policy?
         We first develop a simple model of education and mortality to shed light on a few key mechanisms
at play. In particular, the model incorporates three often-discussed channels: First, education may
directly increase health production by raising the marginal productivity of health inputs or behaviors,
sometimes referred to as ‘productive efficiency’ (Grossman 1972a). Second, education may enhance
one’s ability to acquire and process health information or to follow more complicated treatments. As
a result, education may improve the ‘allocative efficiency’ of health inputs (Rosenzweig and Schultz
1982). Third, education generally increases earnings, which makes costly health care and insurance
purchases more affordable. An increase in income also raises the demand for health and longevity by
increasing consumption opportunities (Grossman 1972a). Overall, the model clarifies how education
affects mortality directly and indirectly through the choice of health inputs.
         We next discuss recent evidence on whether education has a causal effect on health and mortal-
ity.56      In particular, we focus on the growing number of studies that attempt to address well-known
concerns about the endogeneity of schooling and unobserved heterogeneity in preferences using instru-
    56
         For surveys of earlier work, see Grossman and Kaestner (1997) or Grossman (2000, 2006).




                                                             34
mental variable (IV) or regression discontinuity (RD) techniques. We discuss both the credibility of
these studies as well as their findings, concluding that the most convincing of these studies find that
additional schooling leads to modest improvements in health and small reductions in mortality.
      Much of the most recent literature on education and health has attempted to explain why schooling
may improve health and reduce mortality. Most of these studies take one of two approaches. Some
studies attempt to empirically decompose the education – health gradient by regressing various health
outcomes or behaviors on education and different subsets of potential mediators (e.g. income, ability,
preferences, information about treatments or diseases) to see how much of the education – health
gradient can be ‘explained by’ these mediators. Other studies focus on a single potential mechanism,
theory, or explanation. Most studies (by economists) in this vein have attempted to determine whether
differences in health/mortality by education are driven by differences in specific health knowledge or
behavior. We briefly review both types of studies and discuss the strengths and weaknesses of each
approach.
      Finally, we discuss a few important policy issues. First, we argue that is important to determine
whether individuals implicitly or explicitly pay for any health benefits associated with greater educa-
tion (e.g. better health insurance or more expensive treatments). This is crucial for determining the
net return on education and the value of education as a health-improving policy goal, since additional
costs should be netted out. Second, it is important to determine whether health benefits accrue exclu-
sively to the individual that becomes educated, to other family members, or to broader social networks
and society at large. Evidence of important health externalities may justify public expenditures on
schooling. Third, it is reasonable to ask whether individuals are aware of future health benefits asso-
ciated with additional schooling. If health benefits are effectively free and individuals are unaware of
those benefits (or fail to incorporate them) when making their education decisions, governments may
wish to subsidize education even in the absence of externalities.

3.1      A Simple Model of Education and Mortality

Grossman (1972a, 1972b, 1975) develops a dynamic model of health investment related to the tradi-
tional human capital investment models of Becker (1967) and Ben-Porath (1967).57 In his framework,
health affects the time endowment for workers, while education may affect health as well as returns in
the labor market. Grossman (2006) discusses key aspects of the model in a simpler static environment.
      In this section, we develop a simple model in which education and ‘health inputs’ affect mortality.
The model helps formalize and clarify three mechanisms: productive efficiency, allocative efficiency,
and differential demand for health by income. It also facilitates a ‘back of the envelope’ calculation
offered below on the potential benefits of education through improved mortality, an important and
objective measure of health. In many ways, the model developed here is similar to that of Becker
 57
      Also, see Ehrlich and Chuma (1990).



                                                    35
and Mulligan (1997), which allows individuals to affect their rate of time preference through costly
up-front expenditures.58
       Individuals wish to maximize discounted lifetime utility from consumption c, but they face some
probability of death each period. Schooling s ∈ {s, s̄} may directly improve the survival probability
(‘productive efficiency’) or individuals may purchase costly inputs x at price p to increase this proba-
bility. While we model these inputs as goods with price p, one could easily introduce other costs more
directly related to foregone opportunities (e.g. giving up smoking or drinking). We assume that the
survival probability at any age, π(x, s), is strictly increasing and concave in inputs x ≥ 0 and increas-
                                                                                                             ∂2π
ing in schooling s. We also assume complementarity between health inputs and schooling:                      ∂x∂s   ≥ 0.
Furthermore, π(0, s) ≥ 0 and lim π(x, s̄) = π̄ < 1, ensuring that people have some probability of
                                    x→∞
surviving each period but do not live forever. Since we are not concerned with lifecycle issues here,
we assume that π(x, s) is a time invariant function and that individuals must choose the same x at all
ages. Naturally, one would want to relax these assumptions in order to study how health or mortality
investments vary over the lifecycle.
       Schooling also increases individual earnings y(s) so y 0 (s) ≥ 0. However, we ignore any lifecycle
effects on income in assuming that post-school earnings are constant over time. We also abstract
from savings/borrowing decisions and assume consumption c = y(s) − px. While alive, individuals
receive utility u(c) from consumption at each date and discount utility from future consumption at
rate β̃ ∈ (0, 1). It is also useful to define the ‘effective discount rate’ β(x, s) ≡ β̃π(x, s). Without loss
of generality, we effectively normalize the utility of death at zero.59
       We begin by considering optimal health input decisions given schooling attainment s. Given our
assumptions, individuals who have completed s years of school solve the following problem:
                                          (∞                           )
                                           X
                                                          t
                           V (s) = max         [β̃π(x, s)] u[y(s) − px]
                                              x:x≥0
                                                          t=0
                                                      ½                  ¾
                                                          u[y(s) − px]
                                         =    max                            .
                                              x:x≥0        1 − β(x, s)
       Optimal health input x decisions depend on the marginal benefits less the marginal costs. These
net marginal benefits are reflected in the following function:
                                              ∂β(x, s)
                                 N (x, s) ≡            u(c) − [1 − β(x, s)]pu0 (c),                                  (9)
                                                ∂x
where the first term reflects the marginal benefits of extending life from an increase in health expendi-
tures while the second term reflects the loss in utility from foregone consumption. If inputs x are not
  58
     There are some important differences. Becker and Mulligan (1997) assume a fixed resource endowment, the cost of
increasing patience (survival probability in our case) is paid up front with a one-time expenditure, and individuals can
borrow and save to smooth consumption optimally over time. Given the emphasis on mortality here, our model assumes
that individuals receive income each period they remain alive and must pay each period to reduce their mortality rate.
For simplicity, we assume that individuals cannot borrow or save.
  59
     The ‘bad’ state in our model could be something other than death. The key assumption is that utility in this state
must be independent of schooling and health expenditures.


                                                                36
sufficiently beneficial, some individuals may choose not to purchase them at all (i.e. individuals with
                                                    ∂2π
N (0, s) < 0). Given our assumption that            ∂x∂s   ≥ 0, there exists a threshold schooling level ŝ, above
which individuals invest x = x∗ (s) > 0 (satisfying the interior first order condition N (x∗ (s), s) = 0),
and below which individuals invest x = 0.60 (In general, we would not expect all health inputs to be
strictly zero for any individuals. Allowing for multiple inputs would generally yield separate thresholds
for each input, such that more educated individuals would utilize a wider range of inputs.)
       Among individuals with s > ŝ who purchase positive health inputs, it is straightforward to show
that those inputs are increasing in completed schooling:
                        h 2     ³     ´       i        h                           i
                         ∂ β       1    ∂β ∂β            ∂β 0                00 (c) y 0 (s)
                ∗
             dx (s)      ∂x∂s +   1−β ∂s ∂x     u(c) +   ∂x u (c) − (1 − β)pu
                     =                     ∂2β
                                                                                            > 0.
               ds                        − 2 u(c) − p (1 − β)u00 (c)
                                                        2
                                                   ∂x

This reveals two main effects of past schooling on health inputs. The first term in the numerator
reflects the fact that schooling and health inputs are complementary, both directly and indirectly.
The indirect complementarity arises because the marginal value of extending life today is greater if
future survival rates are also high. Thus, by increasing future survival rates, schooling raises the
marginal value of investing in health today. The second term in the numerator reflects simple income
effects due to the market returns from schooling. By increasing earnings, schooling increases the
demand for longevity and, therefore, health inputs. Overall, health inputs may be zero for a low range
of schooling levels (s ≤ ŝ), and will be strictly increasing in schooling among those with s > ŝ.
       Since health inputs are increasing in schooling, it is clear that
                                              dπ   ∂π ∂π dx     ∂π
                                                 =    +       >    ≥0
                                              ds   ∂s   ∂x ds   ∂s
and that schooling increases survival rates. Among individuals with low schooling levels (s ≤ ŝ), the
                                                                 dπ       ∂π
total effect of schooling equals the partial effect (i.e.        ds   =   ∂s   ≥ 0). Among more educated individuals
                                                  dπ                                                            ∂π
with s > ŝ, the total effect of schooling        ds    on mortality is greater than its partial effect         ∂s   due to
the responsiveness of health inputs. Indirect effects through increased health expenditures will be
large when (i) schooling and health inputs exhibit strong direct complementary, (ii) schooling raises
income a lot, and (iii) mortality is very responsive to health inputs and/or schooling. This suggests
that productive efficiency may lead to a stronger education – health/mortality gradient at the top end
of the education distribution (i.e. s > ŝ) where health input decisions play a more important role.
       It interesting to consider how a change in the price of health inputs affects health decisions. It is
straightforward to show that input purchases are decreasing in price (dx∗ /dp < 0), while ŝ is increasing
in prices. Thus, innovations that lower the price of health inputs will cause highly educated individuals
to increase their health investments and some less-educated individuals to begin purchasing the cheaper
  60                                      2
                                         ∂ π
    The complementarity assumption ∂x∂s       ≥ 0 ensures that N (0, s) is increasing in s, yielding the threshold ŝ as the
solution to N (0, ŝ) = 0. Second order conditions for a maximum are satisfied by the assumptions on π(x, s) and u(c).



                                                            37
input. The latter effect will tend to shrink health and mortality differences by education; however, it
                                                                    dx∗
is more difficult to sign the effect of a price change on            ds   among those already using the input. While
a decline in the price of an input should unambiguously reduce education differences in the fraction
of individuals using that input, it could actually widen education differences in the quantity of inputs
used (among initial users).
    What happens if new information arises suggesting that some particular health input (or behavior)
                                                         ∂β
is good for one’s health? For example, suppose           ∂x   was previously thought to be zero but is now thought
                           ∂β
to improve health, i.e.    ∂x   > 0. This new information should cause individuals with s > ŝ to begin using
the new input, with the most educated increasing their use the most. By contrast, lower-educated
individuals may not respond at all to the new information. The higher the price of the new input, the
narrower the response will be among the most educated. In general, new information that some input
or behavior is beneficial for health is likely to increase education – health/mortality gradients even
if that information is distributed and interpreted equally by everyone.61 We would expect a similar
response to the introduction of new health inputs.

3.1.1     Valuing Mortality Benefits from Education

Using the envelope condition, it is straightforward to derive the marginal lifetime benefit of schooling:
                                       · 0     ¸ "Ã             !              #
                                         u (c)        β̃  u(c)     ∂π
                          V 0 (s) =                                   + y 0 (s)
                                         1−β        1 − β u0 (c) ∂s
                                       · 0     ¸·                     ¸
                                         u (c)            ∂π      0
                                   =              V SL ×       + y (s) ,                            (10)
                                         1−β              ∂s

The marginal value of schooling can be decomposed into a ‘mortality effect’ and a standard lifetime
earnings effect. Interestingly, the mortality effect can be calculated from standard estimates of the
value of a statistical life (VSL) and the estimated (partial) effects of schooling on survival rates.62
    Below, we calculate the ‘mortality effect’ using plausible values for the effect of schooling on
mortality and measures of the value of a statistical life. Empirically, it is difficult to distinguish
                                                               dπ                              ∂π
between the total effect of schooling on mortality             ds   and the partial effect     ∂s   observed in equation
(10). Most recent studies that attempt to estimate the causal effects of schooling on health estimate the
  61
     As with price changes, it is more difficult to generally sign the response of dx∗ /dp to marginal increases in the
productivity of inputs when some of the population is already using x.
  62
     The VSL is typically estimated as the amount of money someone would need to be compensated at date t to raise
their mortality risk by some amount dπt . Based on our model, we can write the discounted utility for someone as of
date t as Vt = u(yt − x) + β̃πt [u(c) + β̃πu(c) + (β̃π)2 u(c) + ...], where we specifically allow yt and πt to differ from all
future values since we want to consider changing both while holding lifetime utility constant. Totally differentiating Vt
with respect to πt , we obtain the VSL as the amount income would have to adjust in response to keep lifetime utility
constant:
                                                      dyt                β̃ u(c)
                                            V SL ≡ −       |        =               .
                                                      dπt Vt =V̄t      1 − β u0 (c)




                                                              38
total effect rather than the partial effect; however, as this analysis and our discussion below suggests,
the partial effect is crucial for education and health policy.

3.1.2   Allocative Efficiency

The notion that education may affect the allocation of health inputs is often discussed by economists.
See Rosenzweig and Schultz (1982) for an early treatment of the issue. Health economists have
discussed a number of reasons more educated individuals may make different health-related choices.
For example, more educated individuals may be better at acquiring or processing health information, or
they may better understand and follow complicated directions. Education may also raise the demand
more for some health inputs than others. We briefly discuss some of these ideas within the context of
a generalized version of the model above.
   To incorporate the idea of ‘allocative efficiency’, consider two potential inputs x1 and x2 with prices
p1 and p2 , respectively. To keep things very simple, assume that these inputs are perfect substitutes
in production (e.g. two different forms of medicine for the same disease), so we can write the survival
probability as π(a1 x1 + a2 x2 , s).
                   a1       p1
   Except when     a2   =   p2 ,   perfect substitutability implies that individuals will never purchase both
                                               a1       p1
inputs. They will purchase input x1 if         a2   >   p2 ;   otherwise, they will choose x2 . The least-educated
may choose to purchase neither input. The characterization of input decisions above carries over here
to the desired input. As such, the introduction of a new input x2 that is equally productive as x1 (i.e.
a1 = a2 ) but which has a lower price should cause individuals to switch to the new input, choosing a
higher input level. The effects on health are equivalent to those observed for a price reduction in the
more simple single-input model above.
   If the relative productivity of investments a1 /a2 or prices p1 /p2 depend on educational attainment
(e.g. more educated persons may be better at implementing more complicated treatments), then
the choice of inputs will naturally depend on education. If education raises the productivity of or
lowers the price of x2 relative to x1 , then more-educated individuals will choose to use x2 while less-
educated individuals will favor x1 . For example, a new treatment that only lowered costs for the most
educated should cause only them to switch treatments, increasing the education – health gradient.
New treatments that greatly simplify health regimens may reduce costs for the least educated relatively
more, having the opposite effect (Goldman and Lakdawalla 2005).
   Knowledge about more health options/inputs should generally improve health, since more knowl-
edgeable individuals may be able to take advantage of more productive or less costly inputs. This is
the presumption in much of the health economics literature. However, it is also quite possible that
individuals are aware of their health options but are simply mis-informed about the productivity of
some inputs. In this case, it is not obvious that they should under-estimate health productivity. It
seems equally plausible that some individuals may over-estimate the value of certain health behaviors


                                                               39
or treatments (e.g. the value of exercise or not drinking). This should lead to excess investments in
health. In this case, better information may actually cause individuals to invest less in their health and
become less healthy (albeit better off in utility terms). This suggests that the nature of information
deficiencies may be as important as the extent of those deficiencies.

3.2     Evidence on the effects of education on health and mortality

We first review recent empirical studies that estimate the causal effects of education on health and
mortality, focusing attention on studies that most convincingly address concerns about the endogeneity
of schooling and unobserved heterogeneity. We then discuss evidence aimed at distinguishing between
various mechanisms that might explain the relationship between education and health.

3.2.1    Does education affect health and mortality?

It is important to recognize that education may be correlated with health and mortality even if school-
ing has no causal effect on either. For example, healthier individuals are likely to be more efficient
producers of human capital through schooling (Grossman 1972a). These effects may be compounded
over time if previous health levels affect present health status. More generally, unobservable individual
characteristics (e.g. genetic background, family environment, patience) may jointly affect both educa-
tion choices and health-related behaviors (Fuchs 1982). An important goal of recent empirical studies
has been to identify the causal effects of education on health or mortality outcomes. These studies
generally rely on IV or RD estimation strategies designed to address concerns about the endogeneity
of schooling and bias from unobserved heterogeneity. We discuss this more recent literature here,
referring the reader to Grossman and Kaestner (1997) or Grossman (2000, 2006) for comprehensive
surveys of earlier research.
    Many of the most convincing and recent IV and RD studies use changes in compulsory schooling
laws as instruments for educational attainment. Estimates from these analyses reflect the effects of
education on health for youth who respond to changes in schooling laws (i.e. lesser educated youth
constrained from dropping out earlier).63 As such, they measure improvements in health associated
with lower levels of education (typically secondary school). Few studies employ instruments that would
help identify the effects of post-secondary schooling on health (de Walque (2007a) and Grimard and
Parent (2007) are notable exceptions).
    Most studies estimate health/mortality equations of the following form:

                                  Hiclt = βEicl + Xicl γ + dc + dl + dt + εiclt ,                                (11)
  63
     Angrist and Imbens (1994, 1995) show that, under certain conditions, IV estimation using discrete instrumental
variables identifies the average effect of the endogenous regressor on the outcome for the population that changes its
behavior in response to changes in the instrument. They refer to this as the ‘local average treatment effect’.




                                                         40
where Hiclt reflects a health outcome for person i born in year c and location l measured as of year t.
E reflects educational attainment, while X reflects other characteristics that may affect health. Some
studies (especially those analyzing mortality) aggregate across individuals by gender, cohort and place
of birth, but otherwise estimate similar specifications.
       Since health and survival rates have generally improved over time and across cohorts, it is important
to account for health trends across cohorts. This is especially true for studies using school reforms
as instrumental variables, since most reforms increased educational attainment for affected cohorts.
Failure to account for secular improvements in health may incorrectly attribute those changes to school
reforms, biasing estimates toward finding health benefits of schooling. The extent to which researchers
account for general trends in mortality (or other health outcomes) across cohorts is crucial for the
credibility of most IV estimates. Some of the best studies, implicitly or explicitly, exploit an RD design
by (i) focusing on changes in schooling and health only around the time of a change in school reforms
or (ii) allowing for general cohort trends.
       While the importance of accounting for general health trends cannot be overstated, RD strategies
are likely to under-estimate the long-run effects of education on health if there are important cross-
cohort spillovers. These spillovers may arise for a number of reasons. For example, firms typically
offer a limited set of health insurance options to all employees, reflecting the average demand across
all cohorts employed by the firm. Thus, health insurance policies may be relatively homogeneous
across cohorts despite differences in demand for insurance. Alternatively, social interactions (including
between spouses) may exist across cohorts. As a result, demand for smoking, drinking, or exercise
may depend on what friends and family members do. RD estimates will fail to incorporate any impact
due to these cross-cohort interactions.64 Therefore, when cross-cohort spillovers are thought to be
important, there is a tension between accounting for secular trends in health via RD estimation and
identifying the full long-term effects of education.
       Tables 4-7 summarize IV studies from the past five years that estimate the impact of education on
health and mortality. All of the studies in these tables employ credible identification strategies and
provide estimates with reasonable levels of precision. Tables 4-6 document the following characteristics
of these studies: data sources, important sample characteristics, details on the health outcome of
  64
     Consider a simple example of social interactions,
                                                  "     in which the utility associated with health#input x for individual
                                                β
                                                    ¡ 2               ¢          P
                                                                                 J
i from cohort t is given by U (xit ) = αt xit − 2 θ xit + γ[xit − x̄]2 + (1 − θ)    ωj (xit − x̄t−j )2 , where x̄t reflects the
                                                                                  j=1
                             P
                             J
cohort t average for x and         ωj = 1. This specification implies that individuals consider their own personal benefits
                             j=1
and costs associated with x, but they would also like to choose x to mimic the choices of others in their cohort as well
as J previous cohorts. θ reflects the importance of one’s own private cost and the desire to conform with others in the
same cohort relative to the desire to conform with older cohorts. If we consider a policy that increases the marginal
returns to x by ∆ at time t = 1, so αt = α0 ∀t ≤ 0 and αt = α0 + ∆ ∀t > 0, then in equilibrium, the immediate change
in x is given by x̄1 − x̄0 = ∆
                             β
                                                                                   ∆
                               , while the long-run change is given by x̄∞ − x̄0 = βθ . This implies that an RD estimator
comparing cohorts 0 and 1 will under-estimate the long-run effect of the policy change on x by a factor of θ.




                                                              41
interest, instruments for schooling, and the measure of schooling used in the analysis (e.g. years of
schooling). Two sets of estimated effects of schooling on health/mortality are reported: (i) regression-
based estimates (including probits) and (ii) IV or RD estimates that attempt to address concerns
about endogeneity or unobserved heterogeneity. Table 4 describes studies that estimate the effect of
schooling on mortality, while Tables 5 and 6 describe studies focused on other health outcomes in the
U.S. (Table 5) and Europe (Table 6).
       Our discussion is organized largely around Table 7, which categorizes selected estimates by general
health outcome or behavior across all countries. This table further reports the magnitude of estimated
effects of schooling (using IV or RD strategies) as a percent of base outcome levels (e.g. percent
reductions in mortality or smoking).
       Lleras-Muney (2005, 2006) provides the first serious attempt to estimate the causal effect of school-
ing on mortality. Using U.S. Census data from 1960, 1970, and 1980, she analyzes ten-year mortality
rates among native-born whites born 1901-1925. She first calculates mortality rates by gender, year
of birth and state of birth using consecutive Censuses. Then, she combines these mortality rates with
average years of completed schooling and compulsory schooling ages (both by gender, year of birth and
state of birth) to estimate the effect of an additional year of education on mortality using standard two
sample IV strategies.65 As reported in Table 4, her IV specification suggests that an additional year of
schooling reduces ten-year mortality rates by about 6 percentage points (an effect that is statistically
significant and nearly twice the effect estimated by OLS). This estimate is almost certainly greater
than the true effect, since it implies a nearly 60% reduction per year of school given baseline ten-year
mortality rates of 0.11 in her sample.
       Because Lleras-Muney (2005, 2006) controls for region-specific cohort trends, her estimates are
identified from state-level deviations from regional trends in schooling and mortality associated with
changes in state compulsory schooling ages. However, Mazumder (2008) notes that if states with
larger increases in compulsory schooling ages also had greater secular improvements in life expectancy
(relative to the regional average), then failing to control for state-specific trends will cause her to
overestimate the effect of schooling on mortality. Using an expanded sample to include 1960-2000 U.S.
Censuses (while continuing to study native whites born 1901-25), Mazumder (2008, 2010) shows that
controlling for state-specific cohort trends (rather than just region-specific trends) produces negligible
estimated effects of education on mortality.66
       Using U.S. data on disease-specific mortality, Glied and Lleras-Muney (2008) estimate that in-
  65
      Here main specification controls for gender, cohort, state of birth, and Census year fixed effects. She also controls
for region-specific cohort trends and observed cohort-specific state-of-birth characteristics (e.g. percent urban, percent
black, percent employed in manufacturing, average manufacturing wage, etc.). Like Lochner and Moretti (2004), she
links cohorts to compulsory schooling ages in their state of birth when they were age 14.
   66
      Mazumder (2008, 2010) further shows that the key difference in estimated effects arises due to the inclusion of
state-specific cohort trends and not the addition of 1990 and 2000 Census data. Baseline mortality rates are considerably
higher in Mazumder (2008, 2010) than in Lleras-Muney (2005, 2006), because the 1901-25 birth cohorts are older at the
time of the more recent Censuses.


                                                            42
creases in compulsory schooling ages led to greater reductions in death rates for diseases that ex-
perienced greater technological improvements in recent years, whether the latter is measured by the
number of new active drug ingredients or disease-specific declines in mortality in recent years. Given
the absence of state- or region-specific cohort trends in their specification, it seems likely that they
over-estimate the average effect of schooling on mortality. However, if state-specific cohort trends in
mortality do not vary systematically across diseases, then differences in mortality reductions across
different diseases should be consistently estimated. In this case, their finding that mortality reductions
associated with schooling are greatest for diseases experiencing faster technological improvements is
more credible. We return to this issue below.
    Two recent international studies, one in the U.K. (Clark and Royer 2010) and the other in France
(Albouy and Lequien 2009), use national increases in compulsory schooling ages and RD designs
to estimate the effects of schooling on mortality. They effectively estimate changes in educational
attainment and mortality for the first cohorts affected by increases in compulsory schooling ages
relative to the last cohorts before the reform. Both studies estimate statistically insignificant effects:
estimates by Albouy and Lequien (2009) are modest in size, while those of Clark and Royer (2010)
suggest that education actually increases mortality.67
    A growing literature studies the effects of education on self-reported health status, disability, mo-
bility, and activity. Mazumder (2008) uses data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP) from 1984-96 to estimate the effects of schooling on self-reported health for native-born white
Americans born 1901-25. As with mortality, he instruments for schooling using state-level compulsory
schooling laws, controlling for state-specific cohort trends. He estimates sizeable and statistically sig-
nificant effects of an additional year of school on the probability someone reports being in fair or poor
health (23% reduction) as well as on the probability someone reports a health limitation (17.5% re-
duction). Estimates focusing on specific limitations suggest that schooling primarily reduces problems
with seeing, hearing, and speaking; estimated effects on walking, climbing stairs, or lifting are small
and statistically insignificant. Using data from 1950-2000 U.S. Censuses and changes in state-level
compulsory schooling laws as instruments for educational attainment, Oreopoulos (2006) estimates
that an additional year of school reduces disabilities limiting personal care or mobility by about 30%
among 25-84 year-old Americans.68
    A number of recent studies examine the impacts of education on self-reported health and limitations
  67
     Clark and Royer (2010) do not actually estimate the effect of schooling on mortality. Instead, they estimate the
reduced form effect of changes in the compulsory schooling age on mortality and (using a slightly different specification)
the effect of compulsory schooling age on years of completed schooling. Their estimates suggest that the increase in
compulsory schooling increased both education and mortality rates. For comparison purposes, Tables 4 and 7 report the
results from dividing the effect of the 1947 reform on mortality by the reform’s effect on educational attainment to arrive
at an ‘IV estimate’ (in the spirit of a Wald estimator).
  68
     His sample includes Americans born 1901-56. His specifications control for general national cohort and time trends,
but they do not account for differences in health trends across states. Like Lleras-Muney (2005), he does control for
time-varying state-level demographic and labor market characteristics.



                                                            43
in Europe using changes in compulsory schooling laws. Silles (2009) uses the General Household Survey
for England, Scotland and Wales to estimate the effect of education on self-reported health in the U.K.
Using an RD design around national increases in compulsory schooling ages in 1947 and 1973, she
estimates that an extra year of secondary school increases self-reported good health by about 10%, a
modest effect about half as large as Mazumder’s estimate for self-reported bad health in the U.S. Clark
and Royer (2010) exploit the same increases in the compulsory schooling age (also with an RD design)
using data from the Health Survey of England (1991-2004). They estimate small and statistically
insignificant effects of education on self-reported health, long-term illness, and physical activity. Using
data from the General Household Survey for England and its Northern Ireland counterpart, Oreopoulos
(2006, 2008) reaches a similar conclusion about the effect of education on self-reported health in the
U.K. His analysis focuses on the 1947 increase in the compulsory schooling age in England along with a
similar increase in Northern Ireland that took place ten years later.69 Kemptner, Jurges and Reinhold
(2010) estimate the effect of increasing minimum schooling levels in (formerly West) Germany from
8 to 9 years using German Microcensus data. Interestingly, they find that education significantly
reduces reported long-term illness (by about 20%) among men but not women. Point estimates for
women are positive and sizeable, but less precisely measured.
    Based on the studies summarized in Table 7, education appears to have a weaker effect on mortality,
self-reported health, and physical activity in Europe than in the United States. This is not because
education and health are unrelated in Europe – indeed, some of the OLS results in Tables 5 and 6
imply a stronger relationship in Europe. It is tempting to speculate that the effects of education
depend on access to health care, general social welfare and unemployment policies, and the level of
overall inequality.
    While most studies examine self-reported measures of health, Powdthavee (2010) exploits the
Health Survey of England (1991-2007) and changes in compulsory schooling in the U.K. to estimate
the effects of education on hypertension as determined from blood pressure measurements (see Table 6).
IV-probit estimates exploiting the 1947 increase in the compulsory schooling age (from 14 to 15 years),
suggest that an extra year of schooling reduces hypertension by slightly more than 10% for both men
and women. Unfortunately, RD estimates using the 1973 increase in the compulsory schooling age
(from 15 to 16 years) are much more imprecise, yielding positive but statistically insignificant point
estimates. Aside from this study, there is little evidence on the effects of education on objective
measures of health.
    The final panel of Table 7 reports estimates of the effects of education on smoking and obesity,
two important contributors to a number of serious and chronic health problems. For these outcomes,
studies mostly agree: education significantly reduces smoking but has negligible effects on obesity.70
  69
     His specifications allow for general cohort trends; however, he assumes that those trends are the same for England
and Northern Ireland.
  70
     Many of these studies also find that education increases the probability of quitting smoking conditional on having


                                                          44
Clark and Royer (2010) estimate that an additional year of schooling reduces the probability someone
is currently smoking by about 13% in England, very similar to estimates for men in the U.S. by de
Walque (2007a). Unlike all other studies discussed thus far, de Walque (2007a) identifies the effect of
post-secondary schooling rather than primary or secondary schooling. This is because he uses the risk
of being drafted for the Vietnam War to instrument for schooling attainment.71 Grimard and Parent
(2007) also exploit the effect of the Vietnam draft on male college attendance decisions for cohorts
born between 1945 and 1950. Their estimates suggest that additional post-secondary schooling has
even greater effects on rates of frequent smoking, reducing the likelihood that someone smokes every
day by roughly 40%.72 Kenkel, et al. (2006) estimate the effects of receiving a GED or finishing high
school on smoking for NLSY79 respondents in their late 30s and early 40s using state-specific high
school and GED requirements and policies as instruments (e.g. the number of courses required to
complete high school, an indicator for whether local districts set graduation requirements, the fraction
of youth taking the GED test, an index of GED policies related to score requirements and fees, and
the log of per capital education spending averaged over primary and secondary school ages). They
estimate very large effects of high school graduation on smoking, with effects for women especially large
and statistically significant (88% reduction). Estimated effects of GED receipt are much weaker (not
reported here).73 In contrast to previous studies, Kemptner, Jurges, and Reinhold (2010) estimate
relatively small and insignificant effects of schooling on smoking in Germany. This difference may
be due to the cohorts analyzed in their study. In exploiting increases in compulsory schooling (from
8 to 9 years) from 1949-69, they largely identify the effects of schooling on cohorts who would have
made their initial smoking decisions before the harms of smoking were well-known. Among these
early cohorts, smoking was only weakly correlated with education (e.g. see the relatively small OLS
estimates for this study relative to others in Tables 5 and 6).74 By this reasoning, the relatively large
estimated effects of schooling on smoking by Kenkel, et al. (2006) may be explained by the fact that
these individuals would all have made their smoking decisions long after the 1964 U.S. Surgeon General
widely publicized the dangers of smoking. Consistent with the model above, the effects of education
on smoking seem to depend on the perceived impacts of smoking on health.
    The estimated effects of education on weight problems in Europe and the United States are uni-
smoked; although, this is not as easily interpreted since education affects the likelihood of starting smoking.
   71
      In some specifications, he also uses the risk of induction multiplied by the probability of being killed to instrument
for schooling. When he controls for the endogeneity of veteran status, de Walque (2007a) estimates even greater effects
of education on smoking than reported in Tables 5 and 7.
   72
      Grimard and Parent (2007) and de Walque (2007) effectively identify the effects of college for men who chose to
avoid the draft. Since these men may be more risk averse (or may value their survival more) than the average male, the
effect of college-going on smoking for them may differ from that of a more representative population.
   73
      One concern with this study is that differences in education policies or expenditures across states and over time
may affect skill levels conditional on educational attainment. That is, it may mean something different to finish high
school in a state that spends a lot on secondary schools and has high graduation requirements relative to a state with
low expenditures and weaker standards. This would, in general, violate their exogeneity assumptions; however, Kenkel,
et al. (2006) test and do not reject their exclusion restrictions in their context, so this may not be a serious problem.
   74
      See de Walque (2010) for a detailed analysis of how smoking differences by education evolved over time in the U.S.


                                                            45
formly small. None of the studies we survey report statistically significant effects on obesity (body
mass index, BMI, of 30 or more); however, a few find small but statistically significant effects on the
probability that someone is overweight (BMI of 25 or more). See Table 7.
       Tables 5 and 6 do not include a few earlier IV studies of the effects of education on health;
however, there are good reasons to question the exogeneity of at least some of their instruments.75
Both Auld and Sidhu (2005) and Adams (2002) use parental background as instruments; however,
these instruments have generally been dismissed as endogenous in the literature on schooling and
earnings (e.g., see Carneiro and Heckman (2002)). Furthermore, Kenkel, et al. (2006) reject the
validity of parental education levels as instruments in estimating the effects of education on smoking
and obesity. Adams (2002) also uses quarter of birth as an instrument for schooling; however, a
large literature on weak instruments suggests that this may produce IV estimates biased towards OLS
estimates (see, e.g., Bound, Jaeger, and Baker (1995)). Arkes (2003) and Auld and Sidhu (2005) use
local unemployment rates when individuals are in their teenage years to instrument for educational
attainment; however, the strong serial correlation in local labor market conditions over time may lead
to bias as mobility rates are often low and contemporaneous local labor market conditions may affect
health through a variety of channels. Cameron and Taber (2004) show that, at least in the estimation
of earnings equations, it is important to control for current local labor market conditions when using
past conditions as an instrument for schooling. Finally, the Danish study by Arendt (2005) uses
two national school reforms, which both raised compulsory schooling ages and affected the nature of
schooling (e.g. removal of student tracking based on tests, convergence in curricula between village
and city schools). The latter raises similar concerns to those with Kenkel, et al. (2006). Even ignoring
any concerns about endogeneity, the IV estimates in Arendt (2005) are extremely imprecise.
       Conti, Heckman and Urzua (2010a, 2010b) depart from the standard IV/RD approach in studying
the relationship between education and health. They estimate a multi-factor model of schooling,
earnings, and health outcomes using data from the British Cohort Study, which has followed all
babies born in the U.K. during one week in 1970 periodically through age 30. Their model assumes
that education, post-school earnings, and health behaviors/outcomes depend on family background
characteristics, age 10 observable health endowments, and three unobserved latent factors (cognitive
ability, non-cognitive ability, and an unobserved health endowment). Because their data contain
multiple measurements of the three (correlated) unobserved factors, they are able to estimate the
joint distribution of these factors as well as their effects on health behaviors and outcomes. They focus
attention on the impacts of completing mandatory schooling (through age 16) on smoking, obesity, and
self-reported health (fair or bad). Their estimates suggest that the causal effect of education explains
  75
    These tables also exclude a few recent IV studies exploiting schooling reforms (e.g. Grabner (2009), Jurges, Kruk and
Reinhold (2009), and Reinhold and Jurges (2010)). While the identification strategies in these analyses are reasonably
credible, the reported IV estimates are very imprecise and unable to rule out a large range of effects (including the
estimates reported in Tables 5 and 6).



                                                           46
60-70% of the raw differences in smoking by educational attainment, 35-55% of the raw differences
in self-reported health, and one-third of the differences in obesity for men (none of the difference for
women). Thus, education has important causal effects on smoking and self-reported health for men
and women, but it only reduces obesity rates (by a fairly small amount) for men. These findings are
largely consistent with the evidence presented in Table 7.
   The approach of Conti, Heckman and Urzua (2010a, 2010b) enables them to draw a number of
other interesting conclusions. First, they show that the effects of education are greatest for individuals
with relatively high cognitive skills and/or low non-cognitive skills. Second, they show that cognitive
ability is not a very important determinant of smoking decisions or obesity. There is a modest effect
of cognitive ability on self-reported health for women, but little effect for men. Finally, they estimate
that non-cognitive skills are generally more important for smoking, obesity, and self-reported health.
In fact, non-cognitive skills are roughly as important as early health endowments in explaining these
outcomes at age 30.

Parental Education and Child Health

   There is a growing literature examining the effects of parental education on child (often infant)
health and mortality. We briefly discuss a few recent studies that exploit IV and RD techniques to
address concerns about unobserved heterogeneity. Currie and Moretti (2003) provide the first evidence
that maternal education causally affects maternal pre-natal behavior and birth outcomes. They exploit
openings of two- and four-year colleges by county in the U.S. from 1940-96 as instruments for maternal
education. These college openings increased average years spent in college among their sample of 25-45
year-old women considerably (roughly one year for four-year colleges and 0.15-0.20 years for two-year
colleges). Relative to a high school graduate, their IV estimates suggest that an extra year of college
reduces the likelihood of a low birthweight child by about 20% and a pre-term birth by about 15%.
Examining maternal behaviors, they estimate that an extra year of college reduces smoking during
pregnancy by roughly one-third but only increases the incidence of pre-natal care by 3%. The impact
on maternal smoking is a likely channel for the improvements in birth outcomes. McCrary and Royer
(2009) exploit a very different source of exogenous variation in maternal schooling: school entry
age laws. State laws often specify that children must be age five by a certain date before entering
kindergarten. Using data from Texas (1989-2001) and California (1989-2002), they show that these
laws induce a discontinuity in schooling attainment for women in their sample (age 23 or less) based on
date of birth. In contrast to Currie and Moretti (2003), their RD estimates suggest negligible effects
of schooling on low-birthweight, pre-maturity, and infant mortality. In most cases, their estimates are
precise enough to rule out impacts as large as those in Currie and Moretti (2003). They also find
little evidence to suggest that schooling impacts maternal smoking decisions; however, they find some
evidence that it improves pre-natal care in Texas.

                                                   47
   Lindeboom, et al. (2009) use the U.K.’s 1947 increase in the compulsory schooling age (from 14
to 15) discussed above to estimate the effect of maternal and paternal education on child health
outcomes in the U.K. Using National Child Development Study data on all births from March 3-9,
1958, they estimate small and statistically insignificant effects of parental education on birth outcomes
(low birthweight, illness at birth) as well as child health outcomes (chronic conditions, overweight)
at ages 7-16; however, standard errors for their estimates are sizeable and cannot generally rule out
impacts of 20% or more. Finally, Chou, et al. (2010) exploit the rapid construction of junior high
schools in Taiwan from 1968 to 1973. Using variation in openings across counties as instruments for
parental education, they estimate very large effects on birth outcomes. Their estimates suggest that,
on average, the expansion of junior high schools increased schooling levels by 0.11 to 0.16 years and
reduced the incidence of low birthweight children by 5% and infant mortality by 8-19%. The implied
effects of an additional year of schooling are enormous – much larger than those of Currie and Moretti
(2003).
   Given the substantial differences in impacts estimated by these studies, it is difficult to draw any
strong conclusions about the effects of parental education on child health. Looking only at the U.S.
and U.K. studies, it is tempting to conclude that, in developed countries at least, additional college
education improves child outcomes, while additional years of high school do not. Furthermore, the
findings of Chou, et al. (2010) suggest that educational attainment may be more important in a
developing economy like Taiwan, even at lower levels of education. While these tentative conclusions
seem reasonable, there are also important differences in the estimation strategies employed by these
studies that complicates any comparison of results. First, the exogenous sources of variation that affect
schooling also tend to affect other factors that may influence child health. For example, the variation
in school entry ages used by McCrary and Royer (2009) also leads to differences in age-for-grade.
Students who start a year later are a year older than their counterparts during every grade at school.
This may affect success in school beyond the number of years attended; it may also affect the timing of
marriage and fertility or the choice of spouse. In this case, estimated effects of the policy on children
will reflect the influence of all of these factors in addition to changes in parental education. Second,
additional schooling is likely to affect the timing of fertility decisions. The aforementioned studies
typically control for maternal age, but this may be an important channel through which schooling
affects infant health and mortality. One final issue that complicates the interpretation of most of these
studies is the role of marriage markets and both parents’ education. On the one hand, both parents’
education may be important, yet it is often difficult to account for both due to data limitations and
the strong correlation between the two (Lindeboom, et al. (2009) is unusual in that it does separately
estimate the effects of both parents’ education). Many of the policies used as instruments are likely
to affect both parents’ education to different degrees, so examining the effects of only one parent’s
education likely over-states that parent’s role. These policies are also likely to affect marriage markets,


                                                    48
with effects spilling over to other cohorts/groups assumed to be unaffected by the policies. All of these
issues make estimation of the effects of parental education on child health much more complicated
than the analysis of education’s impacts on one’s own health. Future research on this topic will need
to grapple with these in terms of estimation and the interpretation of results.

3.2.2     Why does education affect health and mortality?

To the extent that education does have small to modest effects on health and mortality, what are the
key operating channels or mediating factors? Education may improve decisionmaking abilities, which
may lead to better health decisions and more efficient use of health inputs (productive efficiency). More
educated individuals may also be better at acquiring or interpreting information from doctors, other
individuals, or the press/internet. This, too, may lead to better decisions about health, including more
appropriate treatments (allocative efficiency). Economists have devoted considerable attention to the
distinction between productive efficiency (better health production given a set of inputs) and allocative
efficiency (better allocation of health inputs) as it pertains to the relationship between education and
health.
    There are many other channels through which education may affect health and mortality as shown
in Table 8, which also lists any personal costs associated with these channels and whether associated
benefits are private (accruing to the individual who receives more schooling) or public (accruing to
others). In addition to improving the production of health via productive or allocative efficiency,
education may (costlessly) improve health by alleviating stress, as emphasized by some social epi-
demiologists. This may be due to improvements in social standing or socioeconomic well-being that
result in fewer stressful situations or less long-term stress (e.g. Marmot 2004, Marmot and Wilkinson
2006).
    Education may also lead to better health outcomes, because it raises income levels. As the model
above shows, this increases the demand for better health and may cause individuals to spend more
to remain healthy. More educated individuals are more likely to purchase better health insurance or
to spend more on costly treatments.76 More educated individuals may also choose healthier lifestyles.
This may include taking greater safety precautions (e.g. wearing seat belts, installing smoke alarms),
eating a healthier diet, exercising more, drinking alcohol in moderation, or smoking less. In fact, Leigh
(1983) estimates that much of the positive effect of schooling on health can be explained by exercise,
smoking, and occupational choices; however, more recent studies have reached a different conclusion
as discussed below. While it is possible that education directly modifies preferences towards these
activities, it seems more likely that causal effects of education on these behaviors are due to costly
behavioral changes or to changes in peers, friends, or neighbors.77 If, in the absence of health benefits,
  76
     Recent quasi-experimental studies estimate significant health benefits from health insurance across a wide range of
outcomes. See McWilliams (2009) for a review of this literature.
  77
     Education may be correlated with these behaviors due to underlying heterogeneity in preferences as well (e.g. indi-


                                                          49
people would prefer to eat fatty foods, drink, smoke, and drive without a seat belt, then foregoing these
activities is costly. Similarly, more educated individuals may choose healthier or safer occupations and
employers. As the literature on compensating differentials (Rosen 1986) reminds us, these ‘benefits’
come at a cost, usually lower wages. More educated individuals may also choose to pay higher housing
prices to live in neighborhoods that offer a healthier environment (e.g. less pollution, traffic, etc.).78
In all of these cases, health benefits from increased education are effectively paid for, at least on the
margin.
    Finally, education may affect co-workers and the friends one interacts with on a frequent basis. To
the extent that more educated persons interact more with other educated persons, effects of education
on health may be increased through the desire to conform or the spread of health-related information.
These ‘social multiplier’ effects are essentially costless and provide public benefits not taken into
account when schooling decision are made.
    Empirically, economists have largely relied on two broad approaches for identifying the channels
through which education may reduce mortality or improve health. One approach examines whether
controlling for a number of potential mediating factors (e.g. income, occupation, health knowledge)
affects estimates of the education – health gradient. Put another way, these studies explore the
extent to which the correlation between education and health can be explained by different factors.
A second approach focuses more on testing or measuring the importance of specific factors. For
example, Glied and Lleras-Muney (2008) examine which diseases are most affected by schooling to see
whether differences in technological innovation are important for the education – mortality gradient.
Other studies examine changes in knowledge or behavior in response to new public information (e.g.
information that smoking is unhealthy). We briefly discuss the strengths and limitations of these
approaches and review the findings from more recent or influential studies.
    Numerous studies from a broad range of social scientists have explored the extent to which the
relationship between education and mortality or health can be explained by the well-known differences
in income (or economic well-being more generally) associated with schooling. This approach typically
begins by regressing some measure of health (including mortality) on education and a few standard
demographic characteristics (e.g. race, gender, age). Then, a measure of income or economic well-being
is included in the regression, and the extent to which the coefficient on education declines (towards
zero) is taken to be the effect of education ‘explained’ or ‘mediated’ by income. We discuss two of these
viduals with more patience or self-control may prefer a healthier lifestyle and to acquire more schooling even if education
itself does not alter these behaviors). Tables 5-7 suggest a significant causal effect of schooling on smoking but not
obesity.
   78
      See Chay and Greenstone (2005) for evidence on the effects of air quality on housing prices. Chay and Greenstone
(2003) and Currie and Neidell (2005) provide evidence that air pollution significantly increases child mortality; however,
effects on adult mortality appear to be weaker (Chay, Dobkin and Greenstone 2003). Moretti and Neidell (2009) find
evidence of important short-run effects of pollution on health. Lleras-Muney (2010) estimates that ozone pollution
significantly increases hospitalizations among military children ages 2-5. Neidell (2004) estimates important adverse
effects of pollution on child health, with larger effects on children of lower socioeconomic status.



                                                            50
studies, which extend this approach to study the importance of a broad range of mediating factors.79
       Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) explore the importance of the following mediating factors on
health behavior: (1) income and economic resources, (2) personality, self-esteem, and sense of control,
(3) social integration, (4) health-specific knowledge, (5) cognitive ability/skill, (6) preferences for risk
and time discounting. Their analysis sheds light on the role of several mechanisms in affecting health
and mortality through important health and lifestyle choices. Because they look at such a wide array
of mediating factors, they exploit numerous data sources in the U.S. (the National Health Interview
Survey, NHIS, National Survey of Midlife Development in the United States, MIDUS, the Health and
Retirement Survey, HRS, National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, NLSY, and the Survey on Smoking
SOS) as well as the National Childhood Development Study (NCDS) in the U.K.
       While Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) estimate the relationship between education and numerous
health behaviors (smoking, diet/exercise, alcohol consumption, and preventive care), it is useful to
summarize these relationships based on the importance of different behaviors for actual health out-
comes. They, therefore, calculate a ‘mortality weighted average effect’ of the relationship between
education and smoking, drinking, and obesity (three of the more important and oft-measured behav-
iors). This summary measure weights education – behavior relationships in proportion to their likely
impacts on mortality. We briefly summarize these ‘mortality weighted average effects’. Cutler and
Lleras-Muney (2010) first estimate the extent to which differences in household income (and economic
resources more generally) can account for the correlation between education and health behaviors.
Their estimates suggest that economic resources can account for 11% to 32% of this correlation in
the U.S. and U.K. Next, Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) control for other potential mediators along
with household income to explore their additional influence. Of the other types of mediators, only
cognitive ability/skills and social integration appear to be important. Using the NLSY, they find that
cognitive ability, as measured by a battery of aptitude tests taken during late teenage years, explains
about 15% of the correlation between education and health behaviors.80 Economic resources and cog-
nitive ability/skills combine to explain roughly 30% of this correlation in the NLSY. In the MIDUS
data, social integration explains 7% of the education – health behavior correlation after accounting
for income; together income and social integration account for nearly 20% of the correlation. The
strongest effects of cognitive ability/skills and social integration comes from the NCDS in the U.K.,
where ability accounts for 44% and social integration 15% of the correlation.81 Simultaneously con-
trolling for economic resources, cognitive ability/skills, social integration, time preference, and sense
of control account for 72% of the correlation between education and health behaviors in the NCDS;
  79
     See Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2006) for a recent review of this literature.
  80
     All respondents in the NLSY were given a battery of ten tests measuring such skills as math, science, reading
comprehension, word knowledge, and electronics. These tests make up the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery,
four of which go into the well-known Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT).
  81
     Ability in the NCDS is based on drawing, reading and math tests administered at ages 7, 11, and 16; although,
Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) show that scores at ages 7 are not very important.


                                                        51
however, nearly all of this effect can be accounted for by income and cognitive ability/skills alone. In
all specifications that explore the role of preferences for risk, time discounting, self-efficacy, or sense
of control, these factors are found to explain little if any of the relationship between education and
health behaviors. Lastly, Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) explore whether individuals who are better
informed about the health impacts of smoking and drinking are less likely to smoke and drink, and
whether this can explain any of the correlation between education and these unhealthy habits. Their
findings are mixed. While knowledge about the harms of smoking appears to explain about 15% of the
relationship between education and smoking, knowledge about the harms of drinking do not explain
differences in drinking by education.
       The main conclusion from Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) is that both income and cognitive
ability/skills play an important role in explaining the relationship between education and health
behaviors. These two factors combine to explain roughly 30-50% of the education – health behavior
correlation in the U.S. and nearly 70% of the correlation in the U.K.82 Social integration plays a
modest role, and all other potential mediating factors appear to be relatively unimportant.
       While commonly measured health behaviors are important determinants of health and mortality,
previous studies report that smoking, drinking, exercise, and other health behaviors can only explain
about 30% of the relationship between education and health (e.g. Marmot 1994, Cutler and Lleras-
Muney 2006). Furthermore, examining the effects of mediating factors on health behaviors does not
necessarily inform us about the full importance of these mediating factors for health status or mortality,
since some of these mediators may affect health through other channels. For example, increases in
income may improve health by reducing stress or by allowing individuals to move to safer and healthier
neighborhoods.
       Ross and Wu (1995) directly examine the importance of the following mediating factors for the
relationship between education and health: (1) work and economic resources, (2) social/psychological
resources, and (3) health lifestyle. The first two are also analyzed in Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010);
however, the third factor is treated very differently in the two studies. Unlike Cutler and Lleras-Muney
(2010), who examine the effects of other factors on health behaviors, Ross and Wu (1995) consider
the mediating effect of health-related behaviors on health itself. Using data from the 1990 Work,
Family, and Well-Being (WFW) Survey and the 1979-80 National Survey of Personal Health Practices
and Consequences (HP), Ross and Wu (1995) examine the extent to which these factors explain the
relationship between education and both self-reported health and physical functioning.83 In both data
  82
      It is not clear whether the difference between the U.S. and the U.K. is real or due to relatively more accurate measures
of economic resources and ability in the U.K.’s NCDS. Furthermore, Smith (1999, 2007) shows that correlations between
income and health are at least partially due to the adverse effects of disease onset on income and labor supply. The
extent of this ‘reverse causality’ may differ across countries.
   83
      Measures for work and economic conditions include household income, employment status, economic hardship, and
work fulfillment (WFW only). Social-psychological resource measures include sense of control and social support. Health
lifestyle measures include self-reported exercise, smoking, drinking (HP only), and health checkups (HP only). Controls
for sex, race, age, and marital status are included in all specifications.


                                                             52
sets, education is significantly associated with better self-reported health and physical functioning.
Assuming work and economic resources may affect social/psychological resources, which may in turn,
influence health-related habits, Ross and Wu (1995) first add controls for work and economic resources,
then controls for social-psychological resources, and finally controls for health behaviors. Consistent
with earlier studies examining the relationship between education, income, and mortality (e.g. Elo
and Preston (1996), Kitagawa and Hauser (1973)) they find that economic resources explain 42-46%
of the correlation between education and self-reported health and 34-54% of education’s association
with physical functioning. By comparison, the roles played by both social-psychological factors and
health habits are much weaker, each explaining less than 10% of the association between education and
either health measure. Ross and Wu (1995) estimate that all three broad classes of factors combine
to explain 46-59% (66-71%) of the association between education and self-reported health (physical
functioning).
       The finding of Ross and Wu (1995) that health behaviors explain little of the overall education
– health relationship suggests that the decomposition of the education – health behavior gradient by
Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) is limited in its implications for health outcomes. Consistent with
this finding, Cutler, et al. (2010) show that despite sizeable cross-sectional differences in mortality risk
factors (e.g. smoking, obesity, high blood pressure, high cholesterol) by education, trends in these risk
factors explain little of the observed widening in mortality gaps (generally and specifically for cancer
and cardiovascular diseases) by educational attainment.
       Altogether, these ‘decomposition studies’ offer a few lessons but are not without caveats. Taken
at face value, these studies suggest that income and ability combined are important for explaining
differences in health behaviors or outcomes by education, while differences in preferences, specific
health knowledge and psycho-social factors are relatively unimportant. It should be noted, however,
that evidence from Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) on the importance of ability relative to income is
more difficult to interpret. This is because they control for income when examining the importance
of ability, but they do not control for ability when estimating the importance of income. As shown
in the Appendix, this ordering should be reversed since post-school income is strongly influenced by
adolescent ability conditional on education (e.g., see Cawley, et al. 2000).84 Despite the suggestion by
Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) that income is more important, the reverse is also quite possible. The
fact that other studies (e.g. Ross and Wu 1995, Elo and Preston 1996, Kitagawa and Hauser 1973)
also find that income plays an important mediating role does not alleviate this concern, since they too
neglect measures of ability in their analysis. Conti, Heckman and Urzua (2010a, 2010b) argue that
non-cognitive skills may be more important factors in explaining education – health gradients than
  84
    In general, if one is interested in the importance of some mediating factor x in explaining the relationship between
education and health, then it is important to control for any additional mediating factors that may affect both x and
health directly. By contrast, one would not want to control for additional mediating factors affected by x if they do not
also affect x themselves. See the Appendix for details.



                                                           53
cognitive skills, further complicating matters. Altogether, it appears that education has important
effects on health behaviors, health outcomes, and mortality via its combined effects on income and
ability (both cognitive and non-cognitive).85 A second lesson from Ross and Wu (1995) and Cutler, et
al. (2010) is that differences in health behaviors (e.g. smoking, drinking, obesity) by education explain
little of the education – health gradient or its evolution in recent decades. An important caveat
cannot be overlooked. None of these studies address issues of endogeneity, nor do they simultaneously
control for all factors that may directly affect health and which may be correlated with potential
mediators. These studies aim to decompose the correlation between education and health, but the
relative importance of different factors in terms of correlation may not reflect the relative importance
in terms of causal effects.
       Rather than decompose education – health gradients into a variety of potential mediating factors
or explanations, a number of other recent studies have focused on estimating and testing the impli-
cations of specific channels, including the role of productive efficiency, allocative efficiency, and peer
effects/social networks. In drawing conclusions from these types of studies, it is important not to focus
too much on any one mechanism or disease in trying to understand the link between education and
health. Link and Phelan (1995) forcefully and convincingly argue that education and socioeconomic
differences are ‘fundamental causes’ of health disparities. That is, these factors affect the financial
resources, knowledge, and access to power, which determine the ability and desire of individuals to
avoid risks and address health problems. The mechanisms and diseases that lead to health disparities
by socioeconomic status continually evolve over time, arguing against a narrow research or policy focus
on any one mechanism or disease. Instead, it is important to interpret the body of evidence in light
of more basic theories about the role of financial resources, differential costs, and information. We
organize our discussion of this evidence along these lines.
       If education improves productive efficiency, more educated individuals should (i) be healthier
conditional on all health inputs and (ii) use fewer inputs conditional on input prices and health
outcomes (Grossman 1972a, 1972b). Earlier studies by health economists (e.g. Grossman 1972b,
Wagstaff 1986, Erbsland, Ried and Ulrich 1995, and Gilleskie and Harrison 1998) largely focused
on measuring the role of productive efficiency based on these two implications. Findings from these
studies are generally supportive of productive efficiency. Unfortunately, these methods require good
measures of all health inputs or input prices. If some inputs or prices are missing, it is extremely
difficult to estimate the role of productive efficiency, since unobserved inputs or prices are likely to be
  85
    Smith (1999, 2007) argues that changes in income have relatively small effects on the onset of major health diseases;
instead, the onset of disease tends to adversely affect subsequent income. This might suggest that health plays a
‘mediating’ role in determining the effects of education on income and wealth. In decompositions of the relationship
between education on health, this would incorrectly be attributed to a mediating role of income. Of course, the correlation
between income and health may be largely due to differences in treatment and management of disease by income rather
than differences in the likelihood of disease onset as emphasized by Smith (1999, 2007). In this case, education – health
decompositions are likely to measure the mediating effect of income.



                                                            54
correlated with education. In practice, these approaches also typically rely on strong functional form
assumptions about the health production function — assumptions that are difficult to verify.
       Kenkel (1991) is the first to directly examine the importance of allocative efficiency by estimating
whether specific health knowledge affects behavior. Using the same decomposition approach as de-
scribed earlier, he estimates whether controlling for knowledge about the harms of smoking, drinking,
and exercise reduces the correlation between education and those behaviors. His estimates suggest
that both knowledge and education affect smoking, heavy drinking, and exercise; however, differences
in health knowledge explain less than 20% of the correlation between education and those behaviors
(controlling for income, employment and standard demographic factors). Thus, health-specific knowl-
edge matters, but it does not explain much of the difference in health behavior. This finding is echoed
in the more recent study by Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010).
       A few recent studies have taken a more indirect approach to evaluating the role of health-specific
knowledge and allocative efficiency. These studies estimate the extent to which new public health
information affects the relationship between education and specific health behaviors. De Walque
(2010) and Aizer and Stroud (2010) show that education – smoking gradients increased substantially
in the U.S. after the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report announced the dangers of smoking. De Walque
(2007b) finds that the education – HIV prevalence gradient evolves in a similar way following a major
HIV/AIDS prevention campaign in Uganda during the late 1980s and early 1990s. Price and Simon
(2009) examine the impact of a medical research study published in 2001 which showed that the risks of
complications from attempting a vaginal birth after a caesarean (VBAC) were higher than previously
thought. Their analysis shows that VBACs declined sharply after publication of the article, with
significantly larger declines among more educated women. In a variety of contexts (and countries),
these studies show that new publicly provided information about health procedures or behaviors tends
to widen gaps in those procedures/behaviors by education.
       As Lange (forthcoming) notes, this type of evidence is consistent with two potential explanations:
(1) more educated individuals may gather and process information more easily and/or (2) more edu-
cated individuals may respond more to new information because it is of greater value to them (e.g.,
see section 3.1).86 Assuming information is exogenously acquired, Lange (forthcoming) shows that
examining actual beliefs about the likelihood of a health outcome (or someone’s risk level) may help
identify whether explanation (1) is important. If more educated individuals are better informed, then
their beliefs should be more strongly correlated with objective risks. However, the fact that more
educated individuals may have a greater demand for health does not, by itself, make that information
any better. If information is exogenously acquired, then there is no reason to expect more educated
  86
    In some cases, it may be useful to distinguish between the potential for education to improve the ability to acquire
information and the ability to process that information and make good decisions. In the former case, attempts to better
distribute information to lesser educated individuals should be helpful, while the latter suggests efforts to simplify and
explain the implications of new information may be needed.



                                                           55
individuals to have more accurate beliefs due to their greater demand for health. Based on this in-
sight, Lange (forthcoming) estimates the correlation between individuals’ beliefs about their risk of
cancer and objective risk levels (based on demographics and family history). His estimates suggest
that this correlation is stronger for more educated individuals. Consistent with this finding, Aizer and
Stroud (2010) show that knowledge about the harms of smoking increased more quickly among the
most educated following the 1964 Surgeon General’s warning. Both Lange (forthcoming) and Aizer
and Stroud (2010) conclude that those with more education are better informed and that this affects
their health decisions (i.e. cancer screenings and smoking decisions). An obvious complication is the
likely possibility that information about risks of cancer or smoking-related health problems is not
exogenously acquired. Because more educated individuals have a greater demand for health generally,
they are also likely to have a greater demand for accurate health information about their objective
risks, causing them to invest more in acquiring that information. Thus, differences in endogenously
acquired information should reflect differences in demand for health in the same way differences in
health behaviors do.
      Overall, these studies convincingly show that education affects the acquisition of health-related
information. Whether or not improved information comes at a cost is more difficult to determine.
Furthermore, does the information translate into important differences in health behaviors and, ulti-
mately, health outcomes? Aizer and Stroud (2010) show that the widening of the smoking differential
corresponds to the emergence of a knowledge gap about the effects of smoking on heart disease. Lange
(forthcoming) also shows that more educated individuals are both better informed about their cancer
risks and more likely to undergo screening for cancer. Despite these findings, evidence by Kenkel
(1991) and Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) suggests that differences in health-specific knowledge by
education account for only small differences in behavior. Furthermore, differences in behavior explain
only a small fraction of differences in health (Ross and Wu 1995).
      A number of recent studies explore the extent to which new technologies affect the relationship
between education and health. Goldman and Smith (2002) estimate that more educated patients who
suffer from diabetes or from HIV better self-manage their diseases by adhering to complex treatments.
Most notably, they find that less-educated diabetes patients benefitted more (than more-educated
patients) from an experimental treatment regimen with intensive patient monitoring. Because treat-
ments were provided freely as part of the experiment, differences in income are unlikely to explain
the differential responses by education. This strongly suggests that factors other than income (e.g.
cognitive ability) may play an important role for difficult-to-manage diseases and that differences in
these factors by education may help explain the education – health gradient. Unfortunately, it is
difficult to know whether these other factors are as important outside the ‘laboratory’ where more
intensive treatments also tend to be more costly.87
 87
      Maitra (2010) estimates that the impacts of education on diabetes in the Health and Retirement Survey are largely



                                                           56
    As noted earlier, Glied and Lleras-Muney (2008) find that more educated individuals experienced
greater survival advantages for diseases that showed the fastest technological progress. They argue
that more educated individuals may be more likely to adopt new treatments and medicines. How-
ever, Goldman and Smith (2005) find no evidence of differential diffusion of hypertension drugs by
education over the 1980s and 1990s. Goldman and Lakdawalla (2005) show that the impacts of new
treatments on education – health relationships are likely to depend on whether those treatments are
more complicated or simpler than previous treatments. Consistent with Goldman and Smith (2002),
they show that antiretroviral therapies for HIV introduced in the 1990s led to greater health improve-
ments among more educated HIV patients. By contrast, the emergence of beta-blockers as a form of
treatment for hypertension reduced education disparities in hypertensive cardiovascular disease. More
generally, they point out that innovations in health practices, technologies, or pharmaceuticals that
raise optimal treatment costs are likely to exacerbate health and mortality differences by education,
while innovations that lower treatment costs should do the opposite. Of course, most new technologies
tend to be more expensive than their predecessors, at least initially, suggesting that periods of rapid
medical innovation are likely to be associated with widening education – health gradients.
    It is difficult to know whether differences in disease management and medical treatments are due
to differences in the ability to utilize best practices/treatments or to differences in demand for health.
Do more educated individuals better self-manage their diseases, because it is easier for them to do
so or because they have more to gain from putting forth the effort? Do less educated individuals
fail to take the newest and most effective drugs, because they find the regimens difficult or because
they are too expensive? Despite serious efforts taken in these studies to narrow the focus on a single
mechanism, these open questions reveal the difficulty of the task at hand.
    A final issue worth discussing is the spillover effects of education for health. There is some evidence
regarding the peer effects associated with smoking and other health outcomes that speaks to the
potential for education to have external effects on the health of others. A number of recent studies
(e.g. Norton, Lindrooth and Ennett 1998, Gaviria and Raphael 2001, and Powell, Tauras, and Ross
2005, Fletcher 2010) use IV techniques to estimate the influence of peers on smoking and drinking
among school-age adolescents. Most of these studies assume that school peers’ family background or
neighborhood characteristics (e.g. parental education, family composition, race) have no direct affect on
whether someone engages in risky behaviors conditional on the individual’s own family background and
school characteristics. (They also implicitly assume that these neighborhood or parental characteristics
are uncorrelated with unobserved factors that may affect youth’s decisions.) These studies typically
find statistically significant peer effects; however, the magnitudes vary considerably. Using class-level
due to differences in economic resources and health insurance coverage rather than differences in disease management
or cognitive ability as emphasized by Goldman and Smith (2002). Maitra (2010) does not dispute the experimental
evidence by Goldman and Smith (2001); however, his results may suggest that income and health insurance differences
by education are more important for diabetes management once the actual costs of different treatments are factored in.



                                                         57
data, Fletcher (2010) shows that incorporating school fixed effects and allowing for some contextual
effects of peer background characteristics on smoking reduces the estimated peer effects on smoking by
about 30% relative to the approach taken in most previous studies. Krauth (2005) eschews the strong
exogeneity assumptions employed by these studies and instead takes a more structural approach to
bound the effects of peers on smoking with different assumptions about the correlation in unobserved
tastes across individuals. His approach suggests that the effects of peers on smoking are likely to be
much smaller than IV estimates suggest. Altogether, these studies suggest that peer effects for risky
behaviors like smoking and drinking may amplify the effects of policies on youth; however, Cohen-
Cole and Fletcher (2008) estimate insignificant effects of peer obesity levels on one’s own obesity
among middle and high school students in the U.S. Little is known about the extent to which peer
effects and social networks are important for adults and their health behaviors. Given the evidence
that differences in habits and health behaviors by education only explain a small share of the overall
education – health gradient, it seems unlikely that these behavior spillover effects are economically
very important. The most important spillover is likely to be from parental education to child health
as discussed earlier.
   In summary, evidence on the extent of productive efficiency is suggestive but comes with many
caveats. Growing evidence more clearly suggests that education affects the allocation of health inputs
and behaviors; however, it is still not clear whether these allocations are more efficient for more
educated individuals or simply different due to differential demand for health. The fact that differences
in income explain one-quarter to one-third of the correlation between education and health/mortality
is consistent with a differential demand-based story. The fact that differences in ability (cognitive
and/or non-cognitive) seem to matter suggests that productive and allocative efficiency may also be
important. Peer effects appear to exist among adolescents for some risky behaviors like smoking and
drinking, but there is no evidence to suggest that this type of externality is important among adults
or for broader measures of health.

3.3   Implications for education and health policy

For public policy purposes, it is constructive to categorize potential channels according to the following:
(i) Does the potential benefit to health come at some direct cost to the individual (other than through
costs associated with schooling)? (ii) Does the health benefit come primarily from one’s own schooling
or does it result from the schooling of others?
   If acquiring more schooling makes someone healthier or live longer, there is every reason to think
individuals will take that into account when making their education decisions – if they are aware of
the benefit and value it. If the benefits are private and known, then there is little case to be made
(at least on efficiency grounds) for subsidizing schooling with the aim of improving health outcomes.
On the other hand, if the benefits are unknown or are public in nature (e.g. peer effects), then


                                                    58
education subsidies may be efficient. Thus, it is clearly important to distinguish between channels
implying public vs. private benefits. Most mechanisms that link education and health suggest that
the benefits are private, or at least contained within the family. Empirical evidence on peer effects
in health behaviors are limited to a few risky behaviors and adolescents. While these studies tend to
find some role for peers, it is unlikely that the peer effects of education on health more generally are
very important. There is some evidence that parental education affects child health outcomes. To
the extent that individuals internalize benefits to their future offspring and recognize benefits to their
own health when making education decisions, they have a strong incentive to optimally weigh those
benefits against the costs of schooling.
   If individuals are unaware of the health benefits of education (for themselves or their future chil-
dren) at the time schooling decisions are made, it is important to distinguish between benefits that
must be paid for and those that are freely acquired through schooling. If individuals are unaware of
benefits that come without cost (e.g. lower stress, better at gathering/interpreting information, bet-
ter decisionmaking), youth may acquire too little schooling. However, failure to fully consider future
benefits that come at a personal cost (e.g. better health care or healthier lifestyle choices) is not likely
to distort education decisions in the same way it is not important for youth to know how much they
will spend on golf during retirement.
   Distinguishing between costly and free health benefits of education may also be of interest to
researchers interested in quantifying the total net benefits from schooling. To this end, health benefits
(net of their associated costs) should be incorporated. These benefits may be important for accurate
cost-benefit analyses of specific education-related programs or more generally for evaluating whether
individuals appear to appropriately balance the total costs and benefits of schooling. If the total private
benefits substantially outweigh the private costs, it may indicate that distortions exist in the education
sector (e.g. borrowing constraints, lack of information about the costs or benefits of schooling).
   What do we know about the extent to which the health benefits of education are paid for? On the
one hand, evidence that health behaviors and habits play little role in explaining the education – health
gradient would seem to suggest that differences in these types of costly inputs are not particularly
important (even though education does appear to affect smoking behavior). On the other hand, the
fact that differences in income by education explain one-fourth to one-third of the education – health
gradient is consistent with some role for costly inputs. It is not clear why income should be such an
important mediator otherwise. Of course, as noted earlier, none of these studies necessarily identifies
the channels through which education causally affects health. Furthermore, much of the education –
health relationship is left unexplained. Unfortunately, existing studies are not particularly informative
about the extent to which the health benefits of education are effectively paid for through costly changes
in behavior or in health inputs.
   In calculating the total returns to schooling, it would be useful to put a dollar value on all estimated


                                                    59
health benefits. Most benefits are difficult to value (e.g. improvements in self-reported health) even if
we could accurately estimate their magnitudes. Fortunately, equation (10) shows how we can value the
estimated reductions in mortality associated with schooling using measures of the value of a statistical
life (VSL). Typical VSL estimates of $3-5 million suggest that a 0.01 reduction in ten-year mortality
rates should be valued at roughly $3-5 thousand in annual gains.88 Since the IV estimates in Table 4
generally measure the total effect of education on mortality, dπ/ds, rather than the desired partial
effect, ∂π/∂s, a high-end estimate of the total benefit from mortality reduction is probably around
$9-15 thousand dollars (assuming ten-year mortality rates are reduced by 0.03, roughly half the IV
estimates of Lleras-Muney (2005, 2006)). This is quite large relative to estimated increases in annual
earnings for an additional year of school; however, it is probably much higher than the actual benefit
given the small and statistically insignificant estimates on mortality found in three of the four studies
reported in Table 4. If education reduces ten-year mortality rates by 0.01 — roughly 10% of baseline
mortality rates for 45-80 year-olds in Lleras-Muney (2005) (a figure more in line with the larger set
of estimates on self-reported health, health limitations, and activity) — and if roughly half of that
reduction is ‘paid for’ in the form of costly health investments and behavior changes, then a ballpark
figure for the mortality benefits of an extra year of school is probably on the order of $1,500-2,500 per
year, a non-trivial sum comparable in size to the gains from crime reduction discussed earlier. The
value of more general health improvements may also be sizeable.
      Of course, even if education does produce health-related externalities or if some of the health
benefits of education are not incorporated by youth making their education decisions, it is not clear
that education-related policies are the best way to address these problems. Other, more targeted
information or public health campaigns may be more efficient policies worth considering. General
education policies may also produce different health effects in different environments. Table 7 suggests
that the health and mortality benefits from education (and education policies) may be weaker in Europe
(compared to the U.S.) where there is greater access to health care, more generous social support, and
lower income inequality. We might expect the opposite in developing countries characterized by high
inequality and very limited access to health care.

3.4      Suggestions for Future Research on Education and Health

Research on the effects of education on health has accelerated in recent years. Much of that research
has justifiably focused on (i) identifying causal effects using IV or RD methods or (ii) on identifying
the channels by which education influences health. Most studies of the former type exploit changes
in compulsory schooling laws in a few developed countries. Looking forward, we are likely to learn
the most from exploiting other sources of exogenous variation in schooling at different margins or by
looking at a wider range of countries (or by focusing on different subpopulations). Does schooling raise
 88
      See Viscusi (1993) and Viscusi and Aldy (2003) for summaries of VSL estimates.


                                                          60
health in developed economies? Do the effects of education differ across countries with very different
underlying levels of inequality or access to medical care? Answers to these questions are not only
interesting in their own right, but they may also shed additional light on key mechanisms.
         Thanks to a number of recent studies, we know much about factors that ‘explain’ the correlation
between education and health, but we know little about how these factors actually determine the causal
relationship. Attempts to identify different channels through which education causally impacts health
and mortality should, therefore, be high on the list of priorities. In particular, it is important to better
determine the extent to which health and mortality benefits of education are driven by differences in
demand, in which case they are likely to be paid for via costly inputs and foregone opportunities. This
is of central concern for policy analysis.
         In addition to searching for exogenous sources of variation in schooling induced by policies and
other natural experiments, efforts to put some structure on the education and health decision problems,
combined with additional data on individual abilities and skills as in Conti, Heckman and Urzua (2010a,
2010b), is also likely to yield new insights about which subpopulations benefit most from education
and why.


4         Education’s Effect on Citizenship, Political Participation, and
          Democracy

The hypothesis that education encourages and strengthens democracy has a long intellectual history,
with Lipset (1959) crediting the basic idea to Aristotle. Early views by Lipset (1959) and Aristotle
emphasize the role of education in informing citizens and increasing their capacity to make ‘good’
electoral decisions while resisting demagoguery. Education may also affect both the benefits and
costs of voting and other forms of political engagement. For example, education may instill civic and
democratic values, either through the explicit design of education systems (especially in democratic
countries) or indirectly by improving analytical skills and an awareness of history and a diversity of
opinions.89 Education may also indirectly affect political participation by altering social networks
and peers. By raising wage rates, education may affect the time costs associated with active political
participation and voting. As noted by Verba, et al. (1995), individuals report that lack of time is the
most important reason for political inactivity.
         Despite the plethora of hypotheses linking education and democracy, formal economic models of
this link are scarce. A notable exception is Glaeser, Ponzetto and Shleifer (2007), who emphasize the
social nature of political action and education’s role in facilitating social interaction. They develop
a model in which education endogenously affects political participation, assuming more educated
    89
    Spilimbergo (2009) finds that countries which send students abroad for higher education experience greater democra-
tization if the host countries are democratic. This suggests that direct efforts by education systems to teach democratic
ideals may be important.



                                                           61
individuals are better at persuading others to become politically active (or, alternatively are more
persuadable by other active participants). To the extent that these social influences are more valuable
to larger political constituencies with less active participation (i.e. broader political regimes), the
authors show that a more educated population is likely to be more inclusive and democratic.
       While democracy and political freedoms are, no doubt, intrinsically valuable, economists have
largely been interested in the link between education and democracy based on the potential for demo-
cratic institutions to facilitate economic growth.90 This is evident in two other political economy
models that consider the inter-relationship between the distribution of education, democracy, and
economic growth. These models focus more on the conflict between different political constituencies
as defined by education and income rather than potential reasons educated citizens may behave more
democratically. Bourguignon and Verdier (2000) assume that power is initially concentrated among
a small group of educated elites and that the larger uneducated populace is excluded from the po-
litical process. By assumption, only the educated vote in their framework. Their main objective is
to understand conditions under which the educated elite will selfishly choose policies to increase ac-
cess to education and, therefore, broaden the political base. Their results suggest that a more equal
initial distribution of education leads to faster democratization and more economic growth. Rajan
(2009) instead emphasizes the fact that less powerful constituencies have competing education and
policy preferences. He argues that in a plutocracy in which political power is determined by wealth,
a growth in wealth and power among educated lower-middle class constituents may threaten the eco-
nomic rents earned by wealthier elites more than the prospect of a fully democratic government in
which everyone has equal power regardless of wealth. In this case, the distribution of education may
affect decisions to democratize; however, democratization, if it occurs, is likely to be characterized by
policy gridlock and weak economic growth.
       Beginning with Barro (1999), economists have sought to empirically determine whether increases
in a nation’s education strengthen democratic institutions. Most studies are macro in nature, using
aggregate measures of democracy and education across countries and over time to study the issue.
A few microeconometric studies exploit individual-level data within the U.S., U.K., and Germany to
estimate the effects of an individual’s own education on their likelihood to participate in the political
process in one way or another. We review both types of studies below.
  90
    Proponents of the idea that democracy encourages growth are diverse in their reasoning (e.g., see Hayek 1960,
Wittman 1989, North 1990, Olson 1993, and Sen 1999). Others are more skeptical (e.g., see de Tocqueville 1835,
Huntington 1968, Buchanan and Tullock 1962, Alesina and Rodrik 1994, Persson and Tabellini 1994, Besley and Coate
1998). Evidence on the effects of democracy on growth is mixed (e.g., see Przeworski and Limongi 1993, Barro 1997,
Minier 1998, La Porta, et al. 1999, Tavares and Wacziarg 2001, Doucouliagos and Ulubasoglu 2008, Papaioannou and
Siourounis 2008).




                                                       62
4.1      Macro Evidence on Education and Democracy

Empirically, education and democracy are highly correlated across countries. For example, Barro
(1999) shows that countries with higher average years of primary schooling also have greater electoral
rights and civil liberties. Economists have begun to examine this relationship more closely to determine
whether changes in education actually lead to changes in democracy and political freedom, attempting
to assign causality. These studies typically estimate an equation of the form:

                              Dc,t = ρDc,t−1 + Ec,t−1 β + Xc,t−1 γ + δt + µc + εc,t ,                                 (12)

where Dc,t reflects some measure of democracy or political openness in country c and period t, Ec,t−1
reflects some measure of a country’s education level in period t − 1, Xc,t−1 reflects any number of
potential time-varying determinants of democracy, δt reflects unrestricted time effects, and µc reflects
country fixed effects.
       Glaeser, et al. (2004) estimate a version of equation (12) using standard fixed effects estimation
methods (and five-year periods). Their estimates suggest that lagged education improves a variety
of measures of democracy.91 However, Acemoglu, et al. (2005) point out that Glaeser, et al. (2004)
do not account for time effects in their specification, so identification largely comes from widespread
international increases in education and democracy over time. Accounting for time effects (using the
same specifications and data), Acemoglu, et al. (2005) find little remaining effect of education.92
       More importantly, it is well-known that simple fixed effects estimates of equation (12) are likely
to be biased with short panels. This is because Dc,t−1 is correlated with all past values of εc,t−j for
j ≥ 1. (Note that Ec,t−1 is also likely to be correlated with past ε’s if there are any feedback effects
of democracy on schooling.) Arellano and Bond (1991) show that if the ε’s are serially uncorrelated,
then one can obtain consistent estimates by first differencing equation (12) and using lagged values
of democracy (and schooling) to instrument for their differences, based on the following moment
condition: E[(εc,t − εc,t−1 )Dc,t−j ] = 0 for all j ≥ 2. Using this approach and five-year differences from
1965 to 1995, Acemoglu, et al. (2005) estimate small and statistically insignificant effects of average
educational attainment on political freedom. They, therefore, conclude that cross-country correlations
between education and democracy are due to omitted country-specific factors (e.g. political, social,
and economic institutions).93
       Most recently, Bobba and Coviello (2007) and Castello-Climent (2008) argue that the Arellano
and Bond estimator is likely to suffer from weak instrument problems, since democracy is highly
persistent over time (in this case, past values of democracy are only weakly correlated with changes in
  91
     Specifically, they find significant effects on a measure of ‘executive constraints’ and a general measure of democracy
(Jaggers and Marshall 2000) as well as autocracy as measured by Alvarez, et al. (2000).
  92
     Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008b) use a sample of countries that are non-democratic in 1960 to estimate the effects
of education on the probability of making a democratic transition. Their estimates suggest that education significantly
increases the probability, intensity, and speed of democratization.
  93
     Also, see Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005) on the importance of institutions.


                                                            63
democracy). A similar problem arises with respect to measures of education if one instruments for its
changes using past values. The presence of weak instruments implies that estimates will be imprecise
and biased towards the standard first difference estimator (that does not use any instruments). These
authors, therefore, suggest that the ‘system GMM’ estimator of Blundell and Bond (1998) be used
instead. This estimator includes the additional moment equation,

                                     E[(Dc,t−1 − Dc,t−2 )(µc + εc,t )] = 0,                                  (13)

which implies that changes in democracy must be orthogonal to country fixed effects. Both Bobba and
Coviello (2007) and Castello-Climent (2008) estimate much larger and statistically significant effects
of educational attainment on democracy using this estimator. More interestingly, Castello-Climent
(2008) finds that the distribution of education in a country is more important than the average level.
Her estimates suggest that greater equity in educational outcomes is associated with stronger measures
of democracy.94
       The system GMM estimator has the advantage of using additional information/instruments; how-
ever, the cost is an additional stationarity assumption (equation 13) that is quite strong, since it
requires that changes in democracy be unrelated to steady state levels of democracy (i.e. µc /(1 − ρ)).
Given the widespread increases in democracy over the past few decades, it seems likely that many
countries are still converging towards their long-run steady states. In this case, we would expect µc to
be positively correlated with changes in democracy, violating the additional assumption of the system
GMM estimator. In this case, there is no clear preference between the Arellano-Bond estimator and
the Blundell-Bond system estimator – the former likely suffers from bias due to weak instruments
while the latter likely suffers from bias due to an invalid moment restriction. Given these concerns, we
turn next to microeconometric evidence on the causal effects of education on voting and citizenship.

4.2      Estimating ‘Causal’ Effects of Education on Citizenship

A large literature in political science demonstrates a strong correlation between educational attain-
ment and political participation, voting, and civic awareness at the individual level. See Nie, et al.
(1996) for an extensive review. Of course, as noted repeatedly above, correlation need not imply cau-
sation. Three recent studies by economists (Dee 2004, Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos 2004, Siedler
2010) use individual-level data and instrumental variables strategies to estimate the causal effects of
educational attainment on voter registration, voting, support for free speech, and other measures of
civic engagement (e.g. newspaper readership, group membership). Table 9 summarizes evidence from
these studies on voting and voter registration, while Table 10 summarizes evidence on other measures
of political/social involvement and views.
  94
    Spilimbergo (2009) uses the system GMM estimator to estimate the effects of ‘sending’ post-secondary students
abroad to democratic countries on the originating country. His estimates suggest that foreign-educated individuals
promote democracy back home if the education is acquired in democratic countries.


                                                       64
    Dee (2004) examines the effects of education on voting and other forms of civic engagement in
the U.S. using data from the High School and Beyond (HS&B) longitudinal study and the General
Social Surveys (GSS). HS&B followed a cohort of high school sophomores in 1980 through 1992, while
Dee’s analysis of the 1972-2000 GSS considers individuals born 1900-1964. Milligan, Moretti, and
Oreopoulos (2004) examine political outcome measures in the U.S. using the biannual National Election
Surveys (NES) from 1948 to 2000 and the 1978-2000 waves of the November Voting Supplement to the
Current Population Survey (CPS). The former offers more detailed and consistent measures of political
activity for a long time period, while the latter offers much larger sample sizes. Milligan, Moretti,
and Oreopoulos (2004) also analyze political behavior in the U.K. using the British Election Surveys
(BES) for 1964, 1974, 1979, 1983, 1987, 1992, and 1997, as well as 50 surveys from the Eurobarometer
(EB) U.K. surveys covering 1973-1998. Siedler (2010) studies political outcomes in (formerly Western)
Germany using data from even numbered years of the ALLBUS (German Social Survey) from 1980 to
2004 (plus the 1991 survey) as well as the large ForsaBus survey on political attitudes from 1991 to
2006.
    All three studies exploit variation in compulsory schooling or minimum work age laws as discussed
in previous sections. Cross-state variation in the these laws over time is exploited in the U.S. and
Germany, while increases in minimum schooling ages in U.K. occurred nationally in 1947 and 1973.
Specifications using variation in these laws identify the effects of secondary schooling on political
behaviors and attitudes. By contrast, Dee’s (2004) analysis using the HS&B data exploits cross-
sectional variation in (i) distance two a 2-year college and (ii) number of 2-year colleges in the county
of residence in 1983. He, therefore, estimates the causal effect of college enrollment (rather than
secondary schooling) on voting and volunteering using these data.95
    Table 9 reveals sizeable effects of schooling on voting behavior in the U.S., but much weaker and
statistically insignificant effects in the U.K. and Germany. In the U.S., the effects of high school
graduation on voting are comparable to the effects of college enrollment: the latter increases rates
of voting by 30-50% (Dee 2004), while the former increases voting by 40-70% (Milligan, Moretti and
Oreopoulos 2004).96 Education not only affects voting in the U.S., but it also affects voter registration.
Milligan, Moretti and Oreopoulos (2004) argue that differences in registration may drive the impacts of
education on voting in the U.S. The fact that voter registration is voluntary and left to the individual
in the U.S., while it is mandatory and the responsibility of local governments in the U.K., may explain
the larger impacts of education on voting in the U.S.
    Table 10 summarizes the estimated effects of education on political interest, efforts to acquire
  95
     We refer to Dee’s (2004) bivariate probit specifications (with instruments excluded from the voting choice equation)
as IV-based estimates. We report his estimates of the average marginal effect of enrollment.
  96
     Dee (2004) notes that the estimated effect of a year of completed schooling in the GSS, 0.07, is comparable in
magnitude to the effect of college enrolment, 0.18-0.20, after accounting for the fact that college enrollment is associated
with roughly 2.5 years of additional schooling, on average.




                                                            65
information about politics and elections, political views about civil rights and freedoms, and general
political and social involvement. Dee (2004) and Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos (2004) estimate
sizeable effects of education on a broad range of political domains in the U.S. In particular, they
find that additional years of high school significantly increase interest in politics, efforts to acquire
information about political issues/campaigns, and beliefs in freedom of speech. By contrast, evidence
regarding volunteering and group membership, as emphasized in the theory of Glaeser, Ponzetto and
Shleifer (2007), receives little support in U.S. data. There is, however, modest evidence from the
U.K. that additional secondary schooling increases individuals’ efforts to discuss politics with others
and to persuade others to share their views (Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos 2004). Evidence from
Germany is generally inconsistent with the view that education encourages democratic ideals (Siedler
2010).
    Overall, the micro-empirical evidence suggests important effects of education on a wide range of
political behaviors and views in the U.S.; however, this is not the case in the U.K. or Germany.
Evidence from the U.S. is most consistent with the older views of Aristotle and Lipset that education
leads to a more informed and engaged citizenry. The evidence is less supportive of the idea that
schooling influences political outcomes by substantially altering the nature of social interaction.


5    Conclusions

A fast growing literature has established that education and human capital impact a wide range of
personal decisions and activities. Education has been shown to reduce crime, improve health, lower
mortality, and increase political participation. The social benefits from these impacts can be sizeable.
For example, Lochner and Moretti (2004) estimate that high school completion may lower the annual
social costs of crime by roughly $3,000 per male graduate. Increasing high school completion rates in
the U.S. by one percentage point would reap a savings of more than $2 billion. Annual benefits from
reductions in mortality are likely to be in the neighborhood of $1,500-2,500 per additional graduate;
however, there is considerable uncertainty about this value.
    Much of the evidence on the causal effects of education on crime, health, and citizenship has
come from changes in compulsory schooling laws, which primarily affect secondary schooling choices.
School lotteries have also been used to estimate the effects of improvements in middle and high school
quality on delinquency and crime. As a result, we know much about the impact of additional years
of high school on crime, health, and citizenship, but evidence on the effects of higher education is
more scarce. Given the rise in college attendance throughout the world, additional efforts to study
this margin are needed. There is good reason to believe that increases in college-going are not likely
to yield dramatic benefits from crime reduction (at least in the near future), since studies have shown
that education-based interventions and policies appear to reduce crime and delinquency most among
the least able, most disadvantaged. A few studies have estimated significant reductions in smoking

                                                   66
and improvements in political participation in response to additional years of college, but studies that
measure the impacts of higher education on health or citizenship are the exception. There is growing
evidence that preschool and school interventions at early ages can reduce delinquency and crime
years later. While some programs (e.g. Perry Preschool, CCPC) have been credited with remarkable
reductions in adult crime, other similar programs (e.g. Abecedarian, IHDP) have not. Unfortunately,
we do not yet understand these differential impacts.
   Much of the evidence is U.S. based. A growing number of very recent studies have begun to analyze
the non-production benefits of education in the U.K., Germany, and Europe more generally; however,
very few studies exploit data from developing countries where education levels are much lower. One
might expect substantial differences in the impact of education on crime, health, and citizenship across
countries with very different criminal justice, health care, and political systems. Indeed, comparisons
across estimates from the U.S. and Europe seem to suggest that education may improve health and
mortality less in Europe, where health care tends to be universal and economic inequality is generally
lower. Education also appears to impact voting and political participation less in Europe, where voter
registration is required and governments are more active in registering voters. While it is tempting
to speculate about factors that might explain observed differences in estimates across countries, we
are far from understanding them. Much can be learned from simply extending successful empirical
strategies to a broader range of countries.
   In addition to documenting the impacts of education on non-production activities, this chapter has
also discussed what is known about the underlying mechanisms that produce those impacts. We have
argued that education may largely affect crime, because it raises human capital and legitimate wage
rates. It seems less likely that education reduces crime by altering preferences for risk or impatience.
Decompositions of the impacts of education on health suggest that improvements in earnings may
explain as much as one-third of the education – health gradient. The fact that education increases
knowledge and ability also appears to be important; however, there is little evidence that changes
in preferences or psychological traits play important roles. Evidence from the U.S. on the impacts
of education on citizenship and democracy appear to support the views of Aristotle and Lipset that
schooling leads to a more informed and engaged citizenry.
   What role should government play given the findings of this chapter? Crime reduction is an
obvious externality that may justify expenditures on policies that improve the skills of the most
disadvantaged (e.g. targeted preschool programs, improvements in school quality in low-income areas,
or policies that encourage high school completion). Current evidence suggests that well-targeted
education-based programs can be more cost-effective than traditional law enforcement policies once
all costs and benefits are accounted for. Education policies targeted to the most disadvantaged have
the added benefit of reducing economic inequality. There is little evidence of important education
externalities in the health domain (most gains are private or, at least, contained within the family),


                                                  67
so arguments for education interventions based on health gains are likely to be based on equity and
social justice or on the argument that individuals are unaware of some health benefits. It is important
to acknowledge that equity-based proposals that focus on educating the most disadvantaged are likely
to be inefficient if individuals are aware of the full costs and benefits of education. Indeed, some
individuals may benefit more (in terms of health and in other ways) from transfers of income than
from additional schooling.97 However, if individuals are unaware of some health benefits and unknown
benefits are achieved without cost, then education-based policies may be justified. Unfortunately, we
still do not know the extent to which most health benefits are effectively paid for through higher health
care expenditures or costly changes in behavior. These costs must be factored into policy decisions.
Finally, it is clear that increases in political participation will affect the democratic process; however,
it is difficult to know exactly how and even more difficult to put a value on this.


Appendix: Estimating Mediating Effects

Researchers are often interested in the effect of education on health (or other outcomes) that operates
through or is mediated by some particular variable. This appendix considers this problem in a simple
setting. See Alwin and Hauser (1975) for an early treatment of this type of problem. Also, see Hauser
and Goldberger (1971) and Goldberger (1972) for discussions of identification and estimation in more
general environments.
       Consider the following model for health outcome y as a function of education E, and mediating
variables x1 and x2 :

                                           y = Eα + x1 β1 + x2 β2 + ε                                             (14)
                                         x1 = EγE + x2 γ2 + η1                                                    (15)
                                         x2 = EδE + x1 δ1 + η2 .                                                  (16)

To focus on the appropriate way to attribute effects of education through a mediating variable, we
abstract from concerns about endogeneity, assuming ε ⊥
                                                     ⊥ (E, x1 , x2 ). The direct, or partial, effect of
E on y holding x1 and x2 constant is given by α in equation (14). We assume 0 ≤ γ2 δ1 < 1 so the
system is well-behaved.
       By solving for x1 and x2 as functions of E, η1 and η2 , then substituting these into equation (14),
we can write y as a function of E (and error terms) only:
              ·                                        ¸ ·            ¸      ·            ¸
                     (γE + γ2 δE )β1 + (δE + δ1 γE )β2     β1 + β2 δ1          β2 + β1 γ2
       y =E α+                                          +               η1 +                η2 + ε.               (17)
                                 1 − δ1 γ2                 1 − δ1 γ2            1 − δ1 γ2
                                                          (γE +γ2 δE )β1 +(δE +δ1 γE )β2
This defines the ‘total effect’ of E on y: a = α +                   1−δ1 γ2             .
  97
     Of course, income transfers typically create disincentives for work, so education interventions may provide a less
inefficient way of improving equity regardless of its health benefits.


                                                          68
       Suppose we are interested in the effect of education on health that operates through or is mediated
by x1 . In the model defined by equations (14)-(16), this is given by

                         M E1 = γE [β1 + δ1 β2 + δ1 γ2 β1 + δ12 γ2 β2 + δ12 γ22 β1 + ...]
                                γE (β1 + δ1 β2 )
                              =                  .                                                               (18)
                                    1 − δ1 γ2
       A common decomposition approach for estimating M E1 is to regress y on E and x2 ; then regress
y on E, x1 , and x2 (i.e. equation (14)), subtracting the latter estimated coefficient on E from the
                                                       p
former. Estimation of equation (14) yields α̂ → α given the assumption ε ⊥
                                                                         ⊥ (E, x1 , x2 ). Further
                                                                                     p
assuming E(η1 |E, x2 ) = 0 and estimating y = Ea2 + x2 b2 + ν2 yields â2 → α + γE β1 . The estimate of
the mediating effect of x1 is then:

                            g                p                γE δ1 (γ2 β1 + β2 )
                            M E 1 = â2 − α̂ → γE β1 = M E1 −                     .
                                                                  1 − δ1 γ2
This strategy obtains consistent estimates for the effect mediated through x1 , M E1 , if any of three
special cases hold: (a) no effect of x1 on x2 (δ1 = 0); (b) no direct effect of E on x1 (γE = 0); or
(c) no effect of either x1 or x2 on outcome y (β1 = β2 = 0). In general, this strategy leads to bias,
because including x2 in the specifications eliminates the mediating role x1 plays through its impact on
x2 . If all parameters are positive, this produces a downward biased estimate of the mediating effect of
x1 .98 Also, notice that even if β2 = 0 (so x2 does not directly affect outcome y), this estimator may
be biased if x1 and x2 affect each other.
       A second common decomposition used to estimate M E1 regresses y on E; then regresses y on
E and x1 and subtracts the latter estimated coefficient on E from the former. That is, estimate
y = Ea + ν and y = Ea1 + x1 b1 + ν1 , then subtract the estimate of a1 from the estimate of a. This
strategy is often used (implicitly or explicitly) when x2 is unavailable in the data, in which case the
first estimation strategy is infeasible. As long as E(η1 |E) = E(η2 |E) = 0 (and ε ⊥
                                                                                   ⊥ E as assumed
                                   p                                      p
throughout), it is clear that â → a. If E(η2 |E, x1 ) = 0, then â1 → α + β2 δE . This approach yields the
following estimator for the mediating effect of x1 :
                                    p (γE + γ2 δE )(β1 + δ1 β2 )          γ2 δE (β1 + δ1 β2 )
                   d
                   M E 1 = â − â1 →                            = M E1 +                     .
                                             1 − δ1 γ2                         1 − δ1 γ2
This strategy obtains consistent estimates for the effect mediated through x1 , M E1 , if any of three
special cases hold: (a) no effect of x2 on x1 (γ2 = 0); (b) no direct effect of E on x2 (δE = 0); or (c) no
effect of either x1 or x2 on outcome y (β1 = β2 = 0). It is not enough for x2 to have no direct effect
                                                                              γ2 δE β1
on y to obtain consistent estimates of M E1 . In this case, the bias          1−δ1 γ2    depends on the effect of x1
on x2 , x2 on x1 , and the direct effect of education on x2 .
       The decision regarding which estimator to use depends on the relationship between the x variables,
the direct effects of each x on the outcome y, and the effects of education on each x. Notice that
  98
     This strategy does, however, identify the effect of increasing E through x1 if any effects on x2 could somehow be
offset.


                                                           69
d
M      g
  E1 = M E 1 = M E1 if β1 = β2 = 0, so both estimation strategies will identify the mediating effect of
x1 in this case. Of course, this is neither surprising nor interesting. If we assume that both x variables
affect the outcome of interest, the decision of which estimator to use depends on the relationship
between education and both x’s and on the interdependence of the two x’s on each other. Assuming
                                                              d
both x variables affect each other, then the first estimator, M E 1 , yields a consistent estimate of the
                                                                                            g
mediating effect of x1 if education does not directly affect x2 while the second estimator, M E 1 , yields
a consistent estimate if education does not directly affect x1 . If we instead assume that education
directly affects both x variables, then the choice of estimators depends on whether we can rule out
an effect of one x variable on the other. If x1 does not affect x2 , then the first estimator will yield a
consistent estimate of M E1 , while the second estimator is consistent if x2 does not affect x1 .
      These findings imply the following general lessons when estimating the mediating effect of some
variable using the standard de-composition approach: On the one hand, failure to control for other
variables can bias estimates of the mediating effect when (a) education directly affects those variables
and (b) those variables directly impact the ‘mediating variable’ of interest. On the other hand,
controlling for other variables can also bias estimates of the mediating effect when (a) the mediating
variable directly affects these other variables and (b) education directly affects those variables.
      If x2 is available in the data, it is possible under some conditions to use the two estimators to
bound the mediating effect of x1 . For example, suppose x1 and x2 are normalized such that they
both have positive effects on y (i.e. β1 and β2 are positive).99 If x1 and x2 have positive cross-effects
(i.e. γ2 ≥ 0 and δ1 ≥ 0) and if education increases both x1 and x2 (i.e. γE ≥ 0 and δE ≥ 0), then
                                                                 g
the two estimation strategies bound the mediating effect of x1 : M              d
                                                                   E 1 ≤ M E1 ≤ M E 1 . Alternatively,
under the exogeneity assumptions assumed throughout this Appendix, one could simply construct a
consistent estimate of the mediating effect of x1 using equation (18) and parameter estimates from
equations (14)-(16).


References

  [1] Daron Acemoglu and Joshua Angrist. How Large are Human Capital Externalities? Evidence
        from Compulsory Schooling Laws. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, 15:9–74, 2001.

  [2] Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. Institutions as a fundamental cause
        of long-run growth. volume 1, Part 1 of Handbook of Economic Growth, chapter 6, pages 385–472.
        Elsevier, 2005.

  [3] Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson, and Pierre Yared. From education to
        democracy? The American Economic Review, 95(2):44–49, 2005.
 99
      Note that this can be verified from estimation of equation (14).




                                                            70
 [4] Scott J. Adams. Educational attainment and health: Evidence from a sample of older adults.
    Education Economics, 10(1):97–109, 2002.

 [5] Anna Aizer and Laura Stroud. Education, knowledge and the evolution of disparities in health.
    NBER Working Paper 15840, 2010.

 [6] Valerie Albouy and Laurent Lequien. Does compulsory education lower mortality? Journal of
    Health Economics, 28(1):155–68, 2009.

 [7] Alberto Alesina and Dani Rodrik. Distributive politics and economic growth. The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 109(2):465–90, 1994.

 [8] M. Alvarez, J. A. Cheibub, F. Limongi, and A. Przeworski. Democracy and Development:
    Political Institutions and Material Well-Being in the World, 1950–1990. Cambridge University
    Press, Cambridge, 2000.

 [9] Duane F. Alwin and Robert M. Hauser. The decomposition of effects in path analysis. American
    Sociological Review, 40(1):37–47, 1975.

[10] Mark Anderson. In School and Out of Trouble? The Minimum Dropout Age and Juvenile Crime.
    Working Paper, 2009.

[11] Joshua D. Angrist and Guido W. Imbens. Identification and estimation of local average treatment
    effects. Econometrica, 62(2):467–475, 1994.

[12] Joshua D. Angrist and Guido W. Imbens. Two-stage least squares estimation of average causal
    effects in models with variable treatment intensity. Journal of the American Statistical Associ-
    ation, 90(430):431–42, 1995.

[13] Manuel Arellano and Stephen Bond. Some tests of specificatino for panel data: Monte carlo
    evidence and an application to employment equations. Review of Economic Studies, 58(2):277–
    97, 1991.

[14] Jacob Nielsen Arendt. Does education cause better health? a panel data analysis using school
    reforms for identification. Economics of Education Review, 24(2):149–60, 2005.

[15] Jeremy Arkes. Does schooling improve adult health? RAND DRU-3051, 2003.

[16] M. Christopher Auld and Nirmal Sidhu. Schooling, cognitive ability and health. Health Eco-
    nomics, 14(10):1019–34, 2005.

[17] W. Steven Barnett and Leondard N. Masse. Comparative benefit-cost analysis of the Abecedar-
    ian program and its policy implications. Economics of Education Review, 26:113–25, 2007.

                                                  71
[18] Robert J. Barro. Determinants of economic growth: A cross-country empirical study. The MIT
    Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1997.

[19] Robert J. Barro. Determinants of democracy. The Journal of Political Economy, 107(6):S158–83,
    1999.

[20] Gary S. Becker. Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income: An Analitical Ap-
    proach. Woytinsky Lecture 1, University of Michigan, Institute of Public Administration, Ann
    Arbor, 1967.

[21] Gary S. Becker and Casey B. Mulligan. The endogenous determination of time preference. The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3):729–58, 1997.

[22] Clive R. Belfield, Milagros Nores, W. Steven Barnett, and Lawrence Schweinhart.          The
    High/Scope Perry Preschool Program: Cost-Benefit Analysis Using Data from the Age-40 Fol-
    lowup. Journal of Human Resources, 41:162–190, 2006.

[23] Yoram Ben-Porath. The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings. The Journal
    of Political Economy, 75(4):352–65, 1967.

[24] Timothy Besley and Stephen Coate. Sources of inefficiency in a representative democracy: A
    dynamic analysis. The American Economic Review, 88(1):139–56, 1998.

[25] David Blau and Janet Currie. Pre-School, Day Care, and After-School Care: Who’s Minding
    The Kids. In E. Hanushek and F. Welch, editors, Handbook of the Economics of Education,
    volume 2, chapter 20. Elsevier, Science B.V., Amsterdam, 2006.

[26] Richard Blundell and Stephen Bond. Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic
    panel data models. Journal of Econometrics, 87(1):115–43, 1998.

[27] Matteo Bobba and Decio Coviello. Weak instruments and weak identification, in estimating the
    effects of education, on democracy. Economics Letters, 96(3):301–06, 2007.

[28] Rachel Boisjoli, Frank Vitaro, Eric Lacourse, Edward D. Barker, and Richard E. Tremblay.
    Impact and Clinical Significance of a Preventive Intervention For Disruptive Boys. British
    Journal of Psychiatry, 191:415–419, 2007.

[29] Franois Bourguignon and Thierry Verdier. Oligarchy, democracy, inequality and growth. Journal
    of Development Economics, 62(2):285–313, 2000.

[30] Anthony Braga. Hot Spots Policing and Crime Prevention: A Systematic Review of Randomized
    Controlled Trials. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 1:317–342, 2005.


                                                72
[31] Giorgio Brunello, Daniele Fabbri, and Margherita Fort. Years of schooling, human capital and
    the body mass index of European females. IZA Discussion Papers 4667, Institute for the Study
    of Labor (IZA), 2009.

[32] James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock. The calculus of consent: logical foundations of con-
    stitutional democracy. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI, 1962.

[33] Paolo Buonanno and Leone Leonida. Education and Crime: Evidence from Italian Regions.
    Applied Economics Letters, 13:709–13, 2006.

[34] Stephen V. Cameron and James J. Heckman. The Nonequivalence of High School Equivalents.
    Journal of Labor Economics, 11(1, part 1):1–47, 1993.

[35] Stephen V. Cameron and Christopher Taber. Estimation of educational borrowing constraints
    using returns to schooling. Journal of Political Economy, 112(1):132–82, 2004.

[36] Frances A. Campbell, Craig T. Ramey, Elizabeth Pungello, Joseph Sparling, and Shari Miller-
    Johnson. Early Childhood Education: Young Adult Outcomes From the Abecedarian Project.
    Applied Developmental Science, 6:42–57, 2002.

[37] David Card. The Economics of Crime. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, editors, Handbook of
    Labor Economics, volume 3A, chapter 30. Elsevier, Science B.V., Amsterdam, 1999.

[38] Pedro Carneiro and Rita Ginja. Preventing Behavior Problems in Childhood and Adolescence:
    Evidence from Head Start. Working Paper, 2008.

[39] Pedro Carneiro and James J. Heckman. The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-secondary
    Schooling. The Economic Journal, 112(482):705–34, 2002.

[40] Amparo Castelló-Climent. On the distribution of education and democracy. Journal of Devel-
    opment Economics, 87(2):179–90, 2008.

[41] John Cawley, James Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Edward Vytlacil. Understanding the role
    of cognitive ability in accounting for the recent rise in the economic return to education. In
    Meritocracy and Economic Inequality, pages 230–65. Princeton University Press, 2000.

[42] Kenneth Chay, Carlos Dobkin, and Michael Greenstone. The clean air act of 1970 and adult
    mortality. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(3):279–300, 2003.

[43] Kenneth Y. Chay and Michael Greenstone. The impact of air pollution on infant mortality:
    Evidence from geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession. The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 118(3):1121–67, 2003.


                                               73
[44] Kenneth Y. Chay and Michael Greenstone. Does air quality matter? evidence from the housing
    market. Journal of Political Economy, 113(2):376–424, 2005.

[45] Shin-Yi Chou, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Ted Joyce. Parental education and child
    health: Evidence from a natural experiment in Taiwan. American Economic Journal: Applied
    Economics, 2(1):33–61, 2010.

[46] Antonio Ciccone and Giovanni Peri. Identifying human-capital externalities: Theory with ap-
    plications. The Review of Economic Studies, 73(2):381–412, 2006.

[47] Damon Clark and Heather Royer. The Effect of Education on Adult Health and Mortality:
    Evidence from Britain. Working Paper, 2010.

[48] Stevens H. Clarke and Frances A. Campbell. Can Intervention Early Prevent Crime Later? The
    Abecedarian Progect Compared with Other Programs. Early Childhood Research Quarterly,
    13:319–43, 1998.

[49] Ethan Cohen-Cole and Jason M. Fletcher. Is obesity contagious? Social networks vs. environ-
    mental factors in the obesity epidemic. Journal of Health Economics, 27(5):1382–87, 2008.

[50] Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. Fast Track Randomized Controlled Trial to
    Prevent Externalizing Psychiatric Disorders: Findings From Grades 3 to 9. Journal of the
    American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46:1250–62, 2007.

[51] Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. The Effects of the Fast Track Preventiv Inter-
    vention on the Development of Conduct Disorder across Childhood. Child Development, 2010a.

[52] Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. Fast Track Intervention Effects on Youth Arrests
    and Delinquency. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 2010b.

[53] Gabriella Conti, James Heckman, and Sergio Urzua. The Education-Health Gradient. American
    Economic Review, 100(2):234–38, 2010a.

[54] Gabriella Conti, James J. Heckman, and Sergio Urzúa. Understanding the Early Origins of
    the Education-Health Gradient: A Framework That Can Also Be Applied to Analyze Gene-
    Environment Interactions. Working Paper, June 2010b.

[55] Julie Cullen, Brian Jacob, and Steven Levitt. The Effect of School Choice on Participants:
    Evidence from Randomized Lotteries. Econometrica, 74:1191–1230, 2006.

[56] Flavio Cunha and James J. Heckman. Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology
    of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation. The Journal of Human Resources, 43:738–782,
    2008.

                                              74
[57] Janet Currie and Enrico Moretti. Mother’s education and the intergenerational transmission
    of human capital: Evidence from college openings.       The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    118(4):1495–1532, 2003.

[58] Janet Currie and Matthew Neidell. Air pollution and infant health: What can we learn from
    california’s recent experience? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3):1003–30, 2005.

[59] David M. Cutler and Adriana Lleras-Muney. Education and health: Evaluating theories and
    evidence. Working Paper 12352, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006.

[60] David M. Cutler and Adriana Lleras-Muney. Understanding differences in health behaviors by
    education. Journal of Health Economics, 29(1):1–28, 2010.

[61] Alexis de Tocqueville. Democracy in America. Wordsworth, Hertfordshire, 1998. (originally
    published in 1835).

[62] Damien de Walque. Does education affect smoking behaviors?: Evidence using the Vietnam
    draft as an instrument for college education. Journal of Health Economics, 26:877–95, 2007a.

[63] Damien de Walque. How does the impact of an hiv/aids information campaign vary with educa-
    tional attainment? evidence from rural Uganda. Journal of Development Economics, 84(2):686–
    714, 2007b.

[64] Damien de Walque. Education, information and smoking decisions: Evidence from smoking
    histories in the United States, 1940-2000. Journal of Human Resources, 45(3):682–716, 2010.

[65] Thomas S. Dee. Are there civic returns to education?       Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-
    10):1697–1720, 2004.

[66] David Deming. Better Schools, Less Crime? Working Paper, 2009a.

[67] David Deming. Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development: Evidence from
    Head Start. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3):111–34, 2009b.

[68] John J. Donohue III and Peter Siegelman. Allocating Resources Among Prisons and Social
    Programs in the Battle Against Crime. The Journal of Legal Studies, 27:1–44, 1998.

[69] Hristos Doucouliagos and Mehmet Ali Ulubasoglu. Democracy and economic growth: A meta-
    analysis. American Journal of Political Science, 52(1):61–83, 2008.

[70] Isaac Ehrlich and Hiroyuki Chuma. A model of the demand for longevity and the value of life
    extension. Journal of Political Economy, 98(4):761–82, 1990.



                                               75
[71] Irma T. Elo and Samuel H. Preston. Educational differentials in mortality: United States,
    1979-85. Social Science and Medicine, 42(1):47–57, 1996.

[72] Manfred Erbsland, Walter Ried, and Volker Ulrich. Health, health care, and the environment.
    econometric evidence from german micro data. Health Economics, 4(3):169–82, 1995.

[73] David P. Farrington, Bernard Gallagher, Lynda Morley, Raymond J. St. Ledger, and Donald J.
    West. Unemployment, School Leaving and Crime. British Journal of Criminology, 26:335–56,
    1986.

[74] Guiulio Fella and Giovanni Gallipoli. Education and Crime over the Life Cycle. Working Paper,
    University of British Columbia, 2009.

[75] Jason M. Fletcher. Social interactions and smoking: Evidence using multiple student cohorts,
    instrumental variables, and school fixed effects. Health Economics, 19(4):466–84, 2010.

[76] Victor R. Fuchs. Time preference and health: an exploratory study. In Victor R. Fuchs, editor,
    Economic aspects of health, chapter 3, pages 93–120. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1982.

[77] Eliana Garces, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie. Longer-Term Effects of Head Start. American
    Economic Review, 92:999–1012, 2002.

[78] Alejandro Gaviria and Steven Raphael. School-based peer effects and juvenile behavior. The
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(2):257–68, 2001.

[79] Donna B. Gilleskie and Amy L. Harrison. The effect of endogenous health inputs on the rela-
    tionship between health and education. Economics of Education Review, 17(3):279–95, 1998.

[80] Edward Glaeser, Giacomo Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer. Why does democracy need education?
    Journal of Economic Growth, 12:77–99, 2007.

[81] Edward Glaeser, Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose Scheinkman. Crime and Social Interactions. Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 111(2):507–48, 1996.

[82] Edward L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. Do insti-
    tutions cause growth? Journal of Economic Growth, 9:271–303, 2004.

[83] Sherry Glied and Adriana Lleras-Muney. Technological innovation and inequality in health.
    Demography, 45(3):741–61, 2008.

[84] Brian Goesling. The Rising Significance of Education for Health? Social Forces, 85(4):1621–44,
    2007.



                                               76
[85] Arthur S Goldberger.     Structural equation methods in the social sciences.   Econometrica,
    40(6):979–1001, 1972.

[86] Dana Goldman and James P. Smith. Socioeconomic differences in the adoption of new medical
    technologies. American Economic Review, 95(2):234–37, 2005.

[87] Dana P. Goldman and Darius N. Lakdawalla. A theory of health disparities and medical tech-
    nology. Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(1):1–32, 2005.

[88] Dana P. Goldman and James P. Smith. Can patient self-management help explain the ses health
    gradient? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
    99(16):10929–34, 2002.

[89] Denise Gottfredson. Youth Employment, Crime, and Schooling. Developmental Psychology,
    21:419–32, 1985.

[90] Eric Gould, David Mustard, and Bruce Weinberg. Crime Rates and Local Labor Market Op-
    portunities in the United States: 1977-1997. Review of Economics and Statistics, 84:45–61,
    2002.

[91] Michael J. Grabner. The Impact of Education on Health Using Compulsory Schooling Laws.
    Working Paper, 2009.

[92] Julien Grenet. Is it Enough to Increase Compulsory Education to Raise Earnings? Evidence
    from French and Brisish Compulsory Schooling Laws. Working Paper, 2010.

[93] Franque Grimard and Daniel Parent. Education and smoking: Were Vietnam war draft avoiders
    also more likely to avoid smoking? Journal of Health Economics, 26:896–926, 2007.

[94] Jeffrey Grogger. The Effect of Arrests on the Employment and Earnings of Young Men. Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 110:51–71, 1995.

[95] Jeffrey Grogger. Market Wages and Youth Crime. Journal of Labor Economics, 16:756–91, 1998.

[96] Michael Grossman. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. The Journal
    of Political Economy, 80(2):223–55, 1972a.

[97] Michael Grossman.      The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation.
    Columbia University Press, New York, 1972b.

[98] Michael Grossman. The human capital model. In Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse,
    editors, Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1, Part 1, chapter 7, pages 347–408. Elsevier
    B.V., 2000.

                                                 77
 [99] Michael Grossman. Education and nonmarket outcomes. In E. Hanushek and F. Welch, editors,
     Handbook of the Economics of Education, volume 1, chapter 10, pages 577–633. Elsevier B.V.,
     2006.

[100] Michael Grossman and Robert Kaestner. Effects of education on health. In Jere R. Behrman
     and Nevzer Stacey, editors, The social benefits of education, chapter 4, pages 69–123. University
     of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1997.

[101] Jonathan Guryan.     Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates. American Economic Review,
     94(4):919–43, 2004.

[102] Caroline W. Harlow. Education and Correctional Populations. U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of
     Justice Statistics, 2003.

[103] Robert M. Hauser and Arthur S. Goldberger. The treatment of unobservable variables in path
     analysis. Sociological Methodology, 3:81–117, 1971.

[104] J. David Hawkins, Richard F. Catalano, Rick Kosterman, Robert Abbott, and Karl G. Hill.
     Promoting Positive Adult Functioning Through Social Development Intervention in Childhood.
     Long Term Effects From the Seattle Social Development Project. Archives of Pediatrics and
     Adolescent Medicine, 159:25–31, 2005.

[105] Friedrich A. von Hayek. The constitution of liberty. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1960.

[106] James J. Heckman and Peter Klenow. Human capital policy. Working Paper, 1997.

[107] James J. Heckman and Paul LaFontaine. Bias-Corrected Estimates of GED Returns. Journal
     of Labor Economics, 24(3):661–700, 2006.

[108] James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Petra Todd. Earnings Functions, Rates of Return, and
     Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond. In E. Hanushek and F. Welch, editors,
     Handbook of the Economics of Education, volume 1, chapter 7, pages 307–458. Elsevier B.V.,
     2006.

[109] James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Petra Todd. Earnings Functions and Rates of Return.
     Journal of Human Capital, 2(1):1–31, 2008.

[110] James J. Heckman, Seong H. Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz. Ther
     Rate of Return to the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program. NBER Working Paper No. 15471,
     2009.

[111] James J. Heckman and Yona Rubinstein. The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons from
     the GED Testing Program. American Economic Review, 91(2):145–59, 2001.

                                                 78
[112] James J. Heckman, Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. The Effects of Cognitive and Noncogni-
     tive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior. Journal of Labor Economics,
     24(3):411–82, 2006.

[113] Michael J. Hingelang, Travis Hirschi, and Joseph G. Weis. Measuring Delinquency. Sage Publi-
     cations, Inc., 1981.

[114] Randi Hjalmarsson. Criminal Justice Involvement and High School Completion. Journal of
     Urban Economics, 63(2):613–30, 2008.

[115] Samuel P. Huntington. Political order in changing societies. Yale University Press, New Haven,
     1968.

[116] Brian Jacob and Lars Lefgren. Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation, Concen-
     tration, and Juvenile Crime. American Economic Review, 93:1560–77, 2003.

[117] K. Jaggers and M. G. Marshall. Polity iv project. Technical report, Center for International
     Development and conflict Management, University of Maryland, 2000.

[118] Hendrik Jürges, Eberhard Kruk, and S. Reinhold. The Effect of Compulsory Schooling on Health
     - Evidence from Biomarkers. Working paper, Mannheim Research Institute for the Economics
     of Aging (MEA), University of Mannheim, 2009.

[119] E. Kandel et al. IQ as a Protective Factor for Subjects at High Risk for Antisocial Behavior.
     Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56:224–6, 1988.

[120] Lynn A. Karoly et al. Investing in Our Children: What We Know and Don’t Know about the
     Costs and Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions. RAND, 1998.

[121] Daniel Kemptner, Hendrik Jürges, and Steffen Reinhold. Changes in compulsory schooling
     and the causal effect of education on health: Evidence from germany. Working paper 10200,
     Mannheim Research Institute for the Economics of Aging (MEA), University of Mannheim,
     2010.

[122] Donald Kenkel, Dean Lillard, and Alan Mathios. The roles of high school completion and ged
     receipt in smoking and obesity. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3):635–60, 2006.

[123] Donald S. Kenkel. Health behavior, health knowledge, and schooling. The Journal of Political
     Economy, 99(2):287–305, 1991.

[124] Evelyn M. Kitagawa and Philip M. Hauser. Differential Mortality in the United States. Harvard
     University Press, Cambridge, 1973.


                                                79
[125] Jeffrey Kling. The Effect of Prison Sentence Length on the Subsequent Employment and Earnings
     of Criminal Defendants. Working Paper, Princeton University, 2002.

[126] Jeffrey Kling, Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence Katz. Neighborhood Effects on Crime for Female and
     Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment. Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 120(1):87–130, 2005.

[127] Brian Krauth. Structural Estimation of Peer Effects in Youth Smoking. Advances in Health
     Economics and Health Services Research, 16:201–11, 2005.

[128] Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. The quality
     of government. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15(1):222–79, 1999.

[129] J. Ronald Lally, Peter Mangione, and Alice Honig. The Syracuse University Family Development
     Research Program: Long-Range Impact of an Early Intervention with Low-Income Children
     and Their Families. In D. Powell, editor, Parent Education as Early Childhood Intervention:
     Emerging Directions in Theory, Research, and Practice, pages 79–104. Ablex, Norwood, 1988.

[130] Fabian Lange. The Role of Education in Complex Health Decisions: Evidence from Cancer
     Screening. Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.

[131] Fabian Lange and Robert Topel.         The social value of education and human capital.     In
     E. Hanushek and F. Welch, editors, Handbook of the Economics of Education, volume 1, chap-
     ter 8, pages 459–509. Elsevier, 2006.

[132] J. Paul Leigh. Direct and indirect effects of education on health. Social Science and Medicine,
     17(4):227–34, 1983.

[133] Maarten Lindeboom, Ana Llena-Nozal, and Bas van der Klaauw. Parental education and child
     health: Evidence from a schooling reform. Journal of Health Economics, 28(1):109–31, 2009.

[134] Seymour Lipset. Some social requisites for democracy: Economic development and political
     legitimacy. American Political Science Review, 53(1):69–105, 1959.

[135] Adriana Lleras-Muney. Were Compulsory Attenance and Child Labor Laws Effective? An
     Analysis from 1915 to 1939. Journal of Law and Economics, 45(2), 2002.

[136] Adriana Lleras-Muney. The relationship between education and adult mortality in the United
     States. The Review of Economic Studies, 72(1):189–221, 2005.

[137] Adriana Lleras-Muney. Erratum: The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in
     the United States. The Review of Economic Studies, 73(3):847, 2006.


                                                  80
[138] Adriana Lleras-Muney. The Needs of the Army: Using Compulsory Relocation in the Military
     to Estimate the Effect of Air Pollutants on Childrens Health. Journal of Human Resources,
     45:549–90, 2010.

[139] David Long, Charles Mallar, and Craig Thornton. Evaluating the Benefits and Costs of the Job
     Corps. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 1:55–76, 1981.

[140] Jeremy Luallen. School’s Out...Forever: A Study of Juvenile Crime, At-Risk Youths and Teacher
     Strikes. Journal of Urban Economics, 59:75–103, 2006.

[141] Jens Ludwig and Douglas L. Miller. Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances? Evidence
     From a Regression Discontinuity Design. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122:159–208, 2007.

[142] Stephen Machin, Olivier Marie, and Suncica Vujic. The Crime Reducing Effect of Education.
     Economic Journal, forthcoming.

[143] Stephen Machin and Costas Meghir. Crime and Economic Incentives. Journal of Human Re-
     sources, 39:958–79, 2004.

[144] Sudeshna Maitra. Can patient self-management explain the health gradient? Goldman and
     Smith’s “patient self-management help explain the SES health gradient?” (2002) revisited.
     Social Science & Medicine, 70(6):802–12, 2010.

[145] Michael Marmot. Status syndrome : how your social standing directly affects your health and
     life expectancy. Bloomsbury Pub., London, 2004.

[146] Michael Marmot and Richard G. Wilkinson. Social determinants of health. Oxford University
     Press, Oxford ; New York, 2006.

[147] Michael G. Marmot. Social differentials in health within and between populations. Daedalus,
     123(4):197–216, 1994.

[148] Bhashkar Mazumder. Does education improve health? a reexamination of the evidence from
     compulsory schooling laws. Economic Perspectives, pages 2–16, 2008.

[149] Bhashkar Mazumder. Erratum: Does education improve health? A reexamination of the evi-
     dence from compulsory schooling laws. November 16 2010.

[150] Marie C. McCormick et al. Early Intervention in Low Birth Weight Premature Infants: Results
     at 18 Years of Age fir the Infant Health and Development Program. Pediatrics, 117:771–80,
     2006.




                                                81
[151] Justin McCrary and Heather Royer. The effect of female education on fertility and infant health:
     Evidence from school entry policies using exact date of birth. NBER Working Paper No. 12329,
     2009.

[152] Ellen R. Meara, Seth Richards, and David M. Cutler. The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes In
     Mortality And Life Expectancy, By Education, 19812000. Health Affairs, 27(2):350–60, 2008.

[153] Antonio Merlo and Kenneth Wolpin. The Transition from School to Jail: Youth Crime and High
     School Completion among Black Males. Penn Institute for Economic Research Working Paper
     09-002, 2009.

[154] Ted Miller, Mark Cohen, and Brian Wiersema. Victim Costs and Consequences: A New Look.
     Final Summary Report to the National Institute of Justice, Feb. 1996.

[155] Kevin Milligan, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulos. Does education improve citizenship?
     evidence from the United states and the United Kingdom. Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-
     10):1667–95, 2004.

[156] Jenny A. Minier. Democracy and growth: Alternative approaches. Journal of Economic Growth,
     3:241–66, 1998.

[157] Enrico Moretti. Estimating the social return to higher education: Evidence from longitudinal
     and repeated cross-sectional data. Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2):175–212, 2004. Higher
     education (Annals issue).

[158] Enrico Moretti. Workers’ education, spillovers, and productivity: Evidence from plant-level
     production functions. The American Economic Review, 94(3):656–90, 2004.

[159] Enrico Moretti and Matthew Neidell. Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behavior: Evidence
     from the Ports of Los Angeles. Working Paper 14939, NBER, 2009.

[160] D. Nagin and J. Waldfogel. The Effects of Criminality and Conviction on the Labor Market
     Status of Young British Offenders. International Review of Law and Economics, 15:109–26,
     1995.

[161] Matthew Neidell. Air pollution, health, and socio-economic status: the effect of outdoor air
     quality on childhood asthma. Journal of Health Economics, 23(6):1209–36, 2004.

[162] Douglass C. North. Institutions, institutional change, and economic performance. Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge and London, 1990.




                                                 82
[163] Edward C. Norton, Richard C. Lindrooth, and Susan T. Ennett. Controlling for the Endogeneity
     of Peer Substance Use on Adolescent Alcohol and Tobacco Use. Health Economics, 7:439–53,
     1998.

[164] David L. Olds et al. Long-Term Effects of nurse Home Visitation on Children’s Criminal and An-
     tisocial Behavior: 15-Year Follow-up of a Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of the American
     Medical Association, 280:1238–44, 1998.

[165] Mancur Olson. Dictatorship, democracy, and development. The American Political Science
     Review, 87(3):567–76, 1993.

[166] Philip Oreopoulos. Estimating average and local average treatment effects of education when
     compulsory schooling laws really matter. The American Economic Review, 96(1):152–75, 2006.

[167] Philip Oreopoulos. Estimating average and local average treatment effects of education when
     compulsory schooling laws really matter: Corrigendum. University of British Columbia Working
     Paper, 2008.

[168] Philip Oreopoulos and Kjell G. Salvanes. How Large are Returns to Schooling? Hint: Money
     Isn’t Everything. NBER Working Paper No. 15339, 2009.

[169] Elias Papaioannou and Gregorios Siourounis. Democratisation and growth. The Economic
     Journal, 118(532):1520–51, 2008a.

[170] Elias Papaioannou and Gregorios Siourounis. Economic and social factors driving the third wave
     of democratization. Journal of Comparative Economics, 36(3):365–87, 2008b.

[171] Gregory Pappas, Susan Queen, Wilbur Hadden, and Gail Fisher. The increasing disparity in
     mortality between socioeconomic groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986. The New England
     Journal of Medicine, 329(2):103–109, July 8 1993.

[172] Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini. Is inequality harmful for growth? The American Economic
     Review, 84(3):600–21, 1994.

[173] Nattavudh Powdthavee. Does Education Reduce the Risk of Hypertension? Estimating the
     Biomarker Effect of Compulsory Schooling in England. Journal of Human Capital, 4(2):173–
     202, 2010.

[174] Lisa M. Powell, John A. Tauras, and Hana Ross. The importance of peer effects, cigarette
     prices and tobacco control policies for youth smoking behavior. Journal of Health Economics,
     24(5):950–68, 2005.



                                                83
[175] Joseph Price and Kosali Simon. Patient education and the impact of new medical research.
     Journal of Health Economics, 28(6):1166–74, 2009.

[176] Adam Przeworski and Fernando Limongi. Political regimes and economic growth. The Journal
     of Economic Perspectives, 7(3):51–69, 1993.

[177] Raghuram G. Rajan. Rent preservation and the persistence of underdevelopment. American
     Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1):178–218, 2009.

[178] Sarah Reber. School Desegregation and Educational Attainment for Blacks. NBER Working
     Paper Paper No. 13193, 2007.

[179] Steffen Reinhold and Hendrik Jürges. Secondary school fees and the causal effect of schooling
     on health behavior. Health Economics, 19(8):994–1001, 2010.

[180] Arthur J. Reynolds, Judy A. Temple, Dylan L. Robertson, and Emily A. Mann. Long-term
     Effects of an Early Childhood Intervention on Education Achievement and Juvenile Arrest: A
     15-Year Follow-up of Low-Income Children in Public Schools. Journal of the American Medical
     Association, 285:2339–46, 2001.

[181] Sherwin Rosen. The theory of equalizing differences. In Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard
     Layard, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 1, chapter 12, pages 641–92. Elsevier
     B.V., 1986.

[182] Mark R. Rosenzweig and T. Paul Schultz. The behavior of mothers as inputs to child health:
     The determinants of birth weight, gestation, and rate of fetal growth. In Economic Aspects of
     Health, NBER Chapters, pages 53–92. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 1982.

[183] Catherine E. Ross and Chia-ling Wu. The links between education and health. American
     Sociological Review, 60(5):719–45, 1995.

[184] Ricardo Sabates and Leon Feinstein. Effects of Government Initiatives on Youth Crime. Oxford
     Economic Papers, 60(3):462–83, 2008.

[185] Allen Schirm, Elizabeth Stuart, and Allison McKie. The Quantum Opportunity Program Demon-
     stration: Final Impacts. Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., 2006.

[186] Peter Schochet, John Burghardt, and Steven Glazerman. National Job Corps Study: The
     Impacts of Job Corps on Participants’ Employment and Related Outcomes. Mathematica Policy
     Research, June 2001.




                                                84
[187] Lawrence J. Schweinhart, Jeanne Montie, Zongping Xiang, W. Steven Barnett, Clive R. Belfield,
      and Milagros Nores. Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study through Age 40.
      High/Scope Press, 2005.

[188] Amartya Sen. Development as freedom. Anchor Brooks, New York, 1999.

[189] Thomas Siedler. Schooling and citizenship: Evidence from compulsory schooling reforms. Dis-
      cussion Papers of DIW Berlin 665, DIW Berlin, German Institute for Economic Research, 2007.

[190] Thomas Siedler. Schooling and citizenship in a young democracy: Evidence from postwar Ger-
      many. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 112(2):315–38, 2010.

[191] Mary A. Silles. The causal effect of education on health: Evidence from the United Kingdom.
      Economics of Education Review, 28:122–28, 2009.

[192] James P. Smith. Healthy bodies and thick wallets: The dual relation between health and
      economic status. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(2):145–66, 1999.

[193] James P. Smith. The impact of socioeconomic status on health over the life-course. Journal of
      Human Resources, XLII(4):739–64, 2007.

[194] Antonio Spilimbergo. Democracy and foreign education. American Economic Review, 99(1):528–
      43, 2009.

[195] Jos Tavares and Romain Wacziarg. How democracy affects growth. European Economic Review,
      45(8):1341–78, 2001.

[196] Terence Thornberry and Marvin Krohn. The Self-Report Method for Measuring Delinquency
      and Crime. In D. Duffee et al., editors, Criminal Justice 2000: Innovations in Measurement and
      Analysis. National Institute of Justice, 2000.

[197] U.S. Department of Justice. Profile of Inmates in the United States and in England and Wales,
      1991. Washington, DC, 1994.

[198] U.S. Department of Justice. State Prison Expenditures, 1996. Washington, DC, 1999.

[199] S. Verba, K. L. Scholzman, and H. E. Brady. Voice and Equality. Harvard University Press,
      Cambridge, 1995.

[200] W. Kip Viscusi. The value of risks to life and health. Journal of Economic Literature, 31(4):1912–
      46, 1993.

[201] W Kip Viscusi and Joseph E Aldy. The value of a statistical life: A critical review of market
      estimates throughout the world. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(1):5–76, 2003.

                                                  85
[202] Adam Wagstaff. The demand for health : Some new empirical evidence. Journal of Health
     Economics, 5(3):195–233, 1986.

[203] Joel Waldfogel. The Effect of Criminal Conviction on Income and the Trust ‘Reposed in the
     Workmen’. The Journal of Human Resources, 29:62–81, 1994.

[204] David Weiner, Byron Lutz, and Jens Ludwig. The Effects of School Desegregation on Crime.
     NBER Working Paper Paper No. 15380, 2009.

[205] J. White, T. Moffitt, and P. Silva. A Prospective Replication of the Protective Effects of IQ in
     Subjects at High Risk for Juvenile Delinquency. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
     57:719–24, 1989.

[206] Ann D. Witte. Crime. In J. Behrman and N. Stacey, editors, The Social Benefits of Education,
     chapter 7. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1997.

[207] Ann D. Witte and Helen Tauchen. Work and Crime: An Exploration Using Panel Data. NBER
     Working Paper 4794, 1994.

[208] Donald Wittman. Why democracies produce efficient results. The Journal of Political Economy,
     97(6):1395–1424, 1989.




                                                 86
    Figure 1: Regression-Adjusted Probability of Incarceration by Education (Men Ages 20-60)
                                                                   (a) Whites

                                               0.018


                                               0.016


                                               0.014
                 Probability of Imprisonment




                                               0.012


                                                0.01


                                               0.008


                                               0.006


                                               0.004


                                               0.002


                                                  0
                                                       2   4   6   8           10         12   14   16   18
                                                                       Years of Schooling


                                                                   (b) Blacks
                                                0.07



                                                0.06



                                                0.05
                 Probability of Imprisonment




                                                0.04



                                                0.03



                                                0.02



                                                0.01



                                                  0



                                               −0.01
                                                       2   4   6   8           10         12   14   16   18
                                                                       Years of Schooling



Notes: From 1960, 1970, and 1980 U.S. Censuses. Regressions control for age, state of birth, state of
residence, cohort of birth, state, and year effects. Source: Lochner and Moretti (2004).
Table 1: Effects of Selected Early Childhood Programs on Educational Attainment and Adult Crime

Program                 Program Description           Program Population             Methodology            Education Effects                Crime Effects
                                                                                                            increased high school
                                                                                                            graduation rate by 0.03
                        full-time full-year pre- developmentally at-risk
Abecedarian                                                                                                 (0.70 vs. 0.67) and
                        school from infancy      children, Chapel Hill,  Random Assign.                                                no sig. effects by age 21
Project                                                                                                     enrollment in 4-yr
                        to kindergarten          NC
                                                                                                            college by 0.22* (0.36 vs.
                                                                                                            0.14)

                                                                                                            increased high school
                        half-day preschool                                                                  completion rate by 0.09          by age 18, reduced
Chicago Child                                         low-income minority
                        (school year) ages 3                                         Matched Sample         (0.57 vs. 0.48) for              fraction arrested by 0.08*
Parent Center                                         children, Chicago, IL
                        and 4                                                                               females and 0.14* (0.43          (0.17 vs. 0.25)
                                                                                                            vs. 0.29) for males


                                                                                                            increased high school            by age 40, reduced
                        half-day
                        half day presch
                                 preschool
                                        ool           low income black
                                                      low-income                                            gra
                                                                                                            graduation             52*
                                                                                                                duation rates by 0.52        fraction arrested 5 or more
High/Scope Perry        (school year) ages 3          children at risk of                                   (0.84 vs. 0.32) for              times by 0.10* (0.24 vs.
                                                                                     Random Assign.
Preschool               and 4, bi-weekly              school failure,                                       females and reduced              0.34) for females and
                        home visits                   Ypislanti, MI                                         grad. rates by 0.04 (0.50        0.24* (0.45 vs. 0.69) for
                                                                                                            vs. 0.54) for males              males

                        weekly/bi-weekly
Infant Health &         home visits from 0-36                                                               no sig. effect on high
                                                low birth-weight pre-                                                                        no sig. effects on arrests
Development             months, full-time full-                                      Random Assign.         school dropout (approx.
                                                term infants, 8 sites                                                                        by age 18
Program (IHDP)          year pre-school 12-36                                                               10% dropout rate)
                        months
Notes: Effects for Abecedarian Project taken from Campbell, et al. (2002) and Clarke and Campbell (1998). Effects for Chicago Child Parent Center taken from Reynolds,
et al. (2001). Effects for Perry Preschool taken from Schweinhart, et al. (2005). Effects for IHDP taken from McCormick, et al. (2006). *denotes difference is statistically
significant at 0.05 level.
   Table 2: Social Benefits of Increasing High School Completion Rates by 1 Percent

                                  Total Cost    Est. Change    Est. Change        Social
                                  per crime      in Arrests     in Crimes         Benefit
         Violent Crimes
          Murder                   4,506,253        -373            -373      $1,683,083,243
          Rape                      132,938         347            1,559      -$207,270,899
          Robbery                    13,984          134             918       -$12,839,495
          Assault                    14,776        -7,798         -37,135      $548,690,721

         Property Crimes
          Burglary                   1,471          -653           -9,467       $13,920,409
          Larceny/Theft               295          -1,983         -35,105       $10,347,853
          Motor Vehicle Theft       1,855          -1,355         -14,238       $26,414,558
          Arson                     58,171           -69            -469        $27,302,131

         Total                                    -11,750         -94,310     $2,089,648,519

Notes: These costs reflect incarceration and victim costs. Victim costs are taken from Miller, et
al. (1996). Incarceration costs per crime equal the incarceration cost per inmate multiplied by the
incarceration rate for that crime (approximately $25,000). Incarceration rates by offense type are
calculated as the total number of individuals in jail or prison (from U.S. Department of Justice, 1994)
divided by the total number of offenses that year (where the number of offenses are adjusted for non-
reporting to the police). Incarceration costs per inmate are taken from U.S. Department of Justice
(1999). All dollar figures are translated into 2008 dollars using the CPI-U. Source: Lochner and
Moretti (2004).
                  Table 3: Expected Punishment Associated with Incarceration (Uniform Crime Reports)

                                                  Probability of    Probability of   Unconditional       Estimated       Expected Days
                               Probability         Conviction       Incarceration    Probability of   Months Served     Served per Crime
 Crime                        Cond. of Arrest    Cond. on Arrest    on Conviction    Incarceration    if Incarcerated      Committed

 Violent Crimes                     0.25               0.22              0.79            0.043              91               119.4

   Murder & Non-Negligent           0.85               0.67              0.95            0.544             248              4,102.4
    Manslaughter
   Forcible Rape                    0.15               0.39              0.90            0.051             136               212.2

   Robbery                          0.15               0.36              0.89            0.047              94               134.8

   Aggravated Assault               0.30               0.17              0.71            0.035              59                63.2

 Property Crimes                    0.06               0.11              0.68            0.004              24                3.2

   Burglary                         0.07               0.27              0.76            0.015              29                13.2

   Larceny-Theft                    0.05               0.08              0.61            0.002              20                1.4

   Motor Vehicle Theft              0.10               0.08              0.73            0.006              17                3.1

Notes: Probability of arrest computed from crimes and arrests in the U.S. (Uniform Crime Reports, 2000) adjusted for non-reporting
to the police (National Criminal Victimization Survey, 2000). It is assumed that all murders are reported to the police. Probability
of conviction conditional on arrest divides total arrests in the U.S. by total State and Federal convictions for 2000. Probability of
incarceration conditional on conviction is based on reporting of State courts. Estimated months served if incarcerated applies to State
prisoners and is estimated by the U.S. Department of Justice based on sentence lengths handed out that year and the average percent
of sentences served by prisoners released that year. Unless otherwise noted, all criminal justice figures are for 2000 and are taken from
Durose and Langan (2003) “Felony Sentences in State Courts, 2000”. Source: Lochner (2004).
Table 4: Regression Discontinuity and Instrumental Variable Studies of the Effects of Years of Schooling on Mortality and Survival


                                                                                                      Important Features of                                         Estimated Effect
                                                                                                          Estimation          Mortality or
     Study                     Data                       Sample                  Instrument             Specification      Survival Measure         No Instruments          RD/IV Methods
                                                                            State-Specific Changes   2SLS with State-
   Mazumder                                         Native Whites Born                                                          10-Year Mortality         -0.036                    0.006
                   U.S. Censuses (1960-2000)                                    in Compulsory      Specific Linear Cohort
  (2008, 2010)                                           1901-25                                                                     Rate
                                                                                Schooling Ages             Trends                                         (0.003)                   (0.031)

                                                                            State-Specific Changes  2SLS with Region-                                     -0.036                    -0.063
 Lleras-Muney                                       Native Whites Born                                                          10-Year Mortality
                   U.S. Censuses (1960-1980)                                    in Compulsory      Specific Linear Cohort
  (2005, 2006)                                           1901-25                                                                     Rate                 (0.004)                   (0.024)
                                                                                Schooling Ages             Trends

                   Birth & Mortality Data, Office                                                                                                                          Women              Men
                                                  Residents of England & National Compulsory    RD with Cohorts
 Clark & Royer         for National Statistics,                                                                                 Prob. of Dying b/w
                                                   Wales in 1970-2004, Schooling Age Increase Defined by Quarter of                                                         0.004             0.012
     (2010)             England and Wales                                                                                         Ages 45 & 69
                                                      Born 1925-38             in 1947               Birtha
                            (1970-2007)
                                                                                                                                                                         (Reduced Form Not Sig.)


                                                                                                                                Survival from Age                                   0.013
                  French Censuses and       French Individuals Born                                                                 15 to 52
                                                                              National Compulsory                                                                                   (0.011)
               Enchantillon Demographique      on First 4 Days of                                     RD with 1 Year Cohort
  Albouy &                                                                       Schooling Age
                Permanent (Various Years     October in 1920-25 or                                       Window Around
Lequien (2009)                                                               Increases for Cohorts
               1968-99), National Registers  1950-55 and alive in                                     Schooling Age Change
                                                                              Born in 1923 & 1953                               Survival from Age
                 on Deaths (1968-2005)                1968                                                                                                                          0.063
                                                                                                                                    45 to 82
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0 620)
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.620)


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Estimates in bold are statistically significant at 0.05 level. aClark and Royer (2010) do not report IV estimates; values reported in table reflect RD
estimated effect of 1947 reform on death rates between ages 45 and 69 divided by the effect of the reform on average years of completed schooling.
Table 5: Recent U.S.-Based Instrumental Variable Studies of the Effects of Schooling on Health

                                                                                        Schooling                                               Estimated Effect
    Study               Data                  Sample               Instrument            Measure           Health Outcome             No Instruments          IV Methods
                                                                                                                                   OLS/Probit (Marg. Eff.)     IV/2SCML (Marg. Eff.)
                                                                                                         Self-Reported Heath              -0.036                      -0.082
                                                                                                              Fair or Poor               (0.001)                     (0.034)
                 Survey of Income
                    and Program                                   State-Level                             Number of Nights in               -0.073                       -1.083
 Mazumder                               Native Whites Born                               Years of         Hospital Last Year               (0.0186)                     (0.767)
                    Participation                                Compulsory
  (2008)                                     1901-25                                    Education
                  (1984, 1986-88,                               Schooling Laws
                                                                                                                                             -0.025                      -0.007
                  1990-93, 1996)                                                                          Trouble with Stairs
                                                                                                                                            (0.001)                     (0.032)
                                                                                                                                            -0.025                       -0.074
                                                                                                            Health Limitation
                                                                                                                                           (0.0013)                     (0.035)
                                                                                                                                             OLS                          2SLS
                                        Natives Born 1901-        State-Level                             Disability that Limits            -0.014                       -0.025
Oreopoulos         U.S. Censuses                                               Average Years of              Personal Care                 (0.0003)                     (0.006)
                                        56, Ages 25-84 at        Compulsory
  (2006)            (1950-2000)                                                   Education
                                         Time of Survey         Schooling Laws                            Disability that Limits            -0.020                       -0.043
                                                                                                                Mobility                   (0.0004)                     (0.007)

                                                                                                                                            OLS                         2SLS
                                          Born 1957-64                           High School                                        Women         Men           Women          Men
  Kenkel,            National                                    High School &
                                         Observed in 1998                         Graduate                                           -0.194      -0.226          -0.102       -0.229
  Lillard &     Longitudinal Survey                                  GED                                    Currently Smoke
                                          (Oversamples                             Indicator                                        (0.030)     (0.029)         (0.124)      (0.088)
  Mathios         of Youth, 1979                                Requirements &
                                         Minorities & Poor                     (GED results not
   (2006)             Cohort                                        Policies
                                             Whites)                            reported here)                                        0.005           0.013      -0.021           -0.008
                                                                                                                 Obese
                                                                                                                                     (0.029)         (0.026)    (0.139)          (0.082)

                                                                                                                                                                              Risk of
                                                                                                                                                                             Induction
                                                                                                                                                                Risk of      x Risk of
                                                                                                                                               OLS             Induction    Being Killed
                   National Health
                                                                                    Number of Years         Currently Smoke                  -0.040              -0.038           -0.040
                 Interview Survey -
                                        Natives born 1937-                           of Education                                           (0.004)             (0.020)          (0.019)
 de Walque            Smoking                               Risk of Induction
                                        56, aged 25+ at the                           Above High
   (2007)           Supplements                             in Vietnam War                                                                   0.041               0.051            0.066
                                         time of the survey                             School             Stopped Smoking
                   (Various years                                                                                                           (0.002)             (0.031)          (0.029)
                     1983-1995)
                                                                                                                                             -0.173              -1.169           -0.181
                                                                                      Indicator for         Currently Smoke
                                                                                                                                            (0.015)             (0.642)          (0.087)
                                                                                    College Graduate
                                                                                         or M
                                                                                            More                                             0 178
                                                                                                                                             0.178               2 190
                                                                                                                                                                 2.190            0 297
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.297
                                                                                                           Stopped Smoking
                                                                                                                                            (0.010)             (1.395)          (0.133)

                                                                                                                                               OLS                        2SLS
                 Current Population
 Grimard &        Survey Tobacco     White native-born           Vietnam Draft                              Currently Smoke                  -0.055                      -0.136
                                                                                         Years of             Every Day
  Parent            Supplements     citizens at least age       Cohort Indicator                                                            (0.002)                     (0.024)
                                                                                        Education
   (2007)        (1995, 1996, 1998, 25, born 1935-74            (Born 1945-50)
                                                                                                                                             -0.043                      -0.111
                       1999)                                                                                 Ever smoked
                                                                                                                                            (0.002)                     (0.029)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. de Walque (2007) provides t-statistics rather than standard errors; standard errors are calculated as the reported estimates divided by reported t-
statistics. 2SCML reflects the two-stage conditional maximum likelihood estimator. Estimates in bold are statistically significant at 0.05 level.
Table 6: Recent European Instrumental Variable Studies of the Effects of Years of Schooling on Health

                                                                                                                                                     Estimated Effect
     Study                        Data                             Sample                       Instrument         Health Outcome          No Instruments             IV
                                                                                                                                                 OLS                    2SLS
                                                                                                                  Self-Reported Health           -.081                 -0.005
                                                                                                                       Fair or Bad              (0.003)                (0.014)
                                                                                                                                                 -0.033                 0.023
                                                                                                                      Long Illness
                                                                                                                                                (0.003)                (0.016)
                                                                                                                                                 -0.021                 0.014
                                                                                                                    Reduced Activity
                                                                                                                                                (0.002)                (0.012)
                                                               National Compulsory
Clark & Royer Health Survey of England Residents of England in   Schooling Age                                                                   -0.024                 0.028
                                                                                                                         Obese
    (2010)          (1991-2004)        1991-2004, Born 1918-72 Increases in 1947                                                                (0.003)                (0.016)
                                                                     & 1973
                                                                                                                                                -0.015                  -0.025
                                                                                                                     Hypertension
                                                                                                                                                (0.003)                (0.018)
                                                                                                                                                -0.072                  -0.035
                                                                                                                    Currently Smoke
                                                                                                                                                (0.003)                (0.014)
                                                                                                                                                 0.055                  -0.001
                                                                                                                    Physically Active
                                                                                                                                                (0.004)                (0.019)

                                                                                                                                          Probit (Marg. Eff.)   IV Probit (Marg. Eff.)
                                                                       National Compulsory                                                Women       Men        Women        Men
                                               Residents of England in                                               Hypertension
 Powdthavee          Health Survey of England                             Schooling Age                                                   -0.017      -0.015     -0.084      -0.070
                                              1991-2007, Born 1929-39                                             (1947 Law Change)
   (2010)                  (1991-2007)                                  Increases in 1947
                                                     or 1952-65
                                                                             & 1973                                  Hypertension
                                                                                                                                          -0.009      -0.008     0.014        0.075
                                                                                                                  (1973 Law Change)

                Annual U.K. General                                                             Increased                                         OLS                   2SLS
                                       Native-Born British & N.                                                Self-Reported Poor                -0.037                 0.007
              Household Surveys (1983-                                                         Compulsory
 Oreopoulos                            Ireland Residents Born                                                         Heath                     (0.002)                (0.008)
               98) & Northern Ireland                                                     Schooling Ages in G.
 (2006, 2008)                          1921-51, Ages 25-84 at
               Continuous Household                                                        Britain (1947) & N. Self-Reported Good                0.065                  -0.010
                                            Time of Survey
                 Surveys (1985-98)                                                           Ireland (1957)           Heath                     (0.002)                (0.011)

                                                                                                                                                 OLS             2SLS          RD
                                                                                                                  Self-Reported Good             0.026           0.045        0.064
                       General Household                                National Compulsory                              Heath                  (0.001)         (0.009)      (0.003)
                       Survey for England,    U.K. Individuals Ages 25-    Schooling Age
  Silles (2009)                                                                                                                                  0.008           0.055        0.075
                    Scotland and Wales (1980-             60             Increases in 1947 No Long-Term Illness
                              2004)                                           & 1973                                                            (0.001)         (0.009)      (0.003)
                                                                                            No Activity-Limiting                                 0.008           0.046        0.051
                                                                                                 Illness                                        (0.001)         (0.008)      (0.002)
                                                                                                                                                  OLS                  2SLS
                                                                                                                                          Women         Men     Women        Men
                                                                                                                                           -0.012      -0.029    0.013      -0.039
                                                                                                                   Long-Term Illness
                                                                                                                                          (0.002)     (0.001)   (0.024)    (0.019)
                                                                                                                                           -0.013      -0.029    0.036        -0.037
                                                                                                                  Work Limiting Illness
                                                                                            Increased State-                              (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.022)      (0.017)
  Kemptner,                                             Germans Born 1930-60,
                       German Microcensus                                                 Specific Compulsory                             -0.047       -0.031    -0.016       -0.034
  Jurges &                                              Living and Educated in                                        Overweight
                     (1989, 1995, 1999, 2002,                                             Schooling from 8 to 9                           (0.002)     (0.001)   (0.016)      (0.015)
  Reinhold                                               Former West German
                              2003)                                                       Years Between 1949
    (2010)                                                      States
                                                                                                and 1969                                  -0.020       -0.018    0.007        -0.028
                                                                                                                         Obese
                                                                                                                                          (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.012)      (0.015)
                                                                                                                                          -0.005       -0.026    0.014        -0.012
                                                                                                                     Ever Smoked
                                                                                                                                          (0.002)     (0.001)   (0.011)      (0.013)
                                                                                                                                          -0.021       -0.032    0.001        0.005
                                                                                                                    Currently Smoke
                                                                                                                                          (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.01)      (0.012)

                                        European Women (from                                                                              Probit (Marg. Eff.)   IV Probit (Marg. Eff.)
                ECHP (1998), SHARE                                                             Increased                                        -0.022                 -0.044
  Brunello,                            10 Countries) Ages 25-65                                                       Overweight
               (2004), GSOEP (2002),                                                          Compulsory                                       (0.001)                (0.021)
Fabbri & Fort                           Born Within 7 Years of
              BHPS (2003), Enquete sur                                                     Schooling Ages by
   (2009)                               Cohort First Affected by                                                                                -0.012                 -0.012
                   la Sante (2003)                                                              Country                 Obesity
                                         School Law Changes                                                                                     (0.001)                (0.013)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Estimates in bold are statistically significant at 0.05 level.
Table 7: Effects of Years of Education on Health and Mortality by Outcome (Best IV/RD Estimates from Selected Studies)


                                                                                                              Estimated      Effect as %
            Study              Country                Outcome Details                  Sample Average           Effect       of Average

A. Mortality
    Mazumder (2008)               U.S.             10-Year Mortality Rates                   0.213               0.006           2.8%

       Lleras-Muney
                                  U.S.             10-Year Mortality Rates                   0.106              -0.063*         -59.4%
       (2005, 2006)

                                                                                      Women:         0.146       0.004           2.7%
  Clark & Royer (2010) a          U.K.        Prob. of Dying b/w Ages 45 & 69
                                                                                      Men:           0.221       0.012           5.4%

     Albouy & Lequien                                                                 Ages 15-42:     0.07       -0.013         -18.6%
                                France              37-Year Mortality Rate
         (2009) b                                                                     Ages 45-82:     0.40       -0.063         -15.8%

B. Self-Reported Health
    Mazumder (2008)               U.S.             Self-Report Fair or Poor                  0.357              -0.082*         -23.0%

                                                   Self-Report Fair or Bad                    0.25               -0.005          -2.0%
   Clark & Royer (2010)
                                  U.K.                   Long Illness                         0.46                0.023           5.0%

         Oreopoulos                               Self-Report Poor Health                    0.150               0.007            4.7%
                                  U.K.
        (2006, 2008)                              Self-Report Good Health                    0.564               -0.01           -1.8%

                                                  Self-Report Good Health                    0.661               0.064*           9.7%
        Silles (2009)             U.K.
                                                   No Long-Term Illness                      0.685               0.075*          10.9%

    Kemptner, Jurges &                                                                Women:         0.15        0.013           8.7%
                               Germany                Long-Term Illness
     Reinhold (2010)                                                                  Men:           0.20       -0.039*         -19.5%

C. Disability, Limited Mobility, Activity
    Mazumder (2008)           U.S.                     Health Limitation                     0.423              -0.074*         -17.5%

                                              Disability Limiting Personal Care              0.092              -0.025*         -27.2%
    Oreopoulos (2006)             U.S.
                                                 Disability Limiting Mobility                0.128              -0.043*         -33.6%

                                                       Reduced Activity                       0.16                0.014           8.8%
   Clark & Royer (2010)           U.K.
                                                       Physically Active                      0.44               -0.001          -0.2%

D. Smoking
   Clark & Royer (2010)           U.K.                 Currently Smoke                        0.27              -0.035*         -13.0%

                                                                                      Women:         0.26       -0.229*         -88.1%
   Kenkel, et al. (2006)c         U.S.                 Currently Smoke
                                                                                      Men:           0.27        -0.102         -37.8%

    de Walque (2007) d            U.S.                 Currently Smoke                        0.40              -0.040*         -10.0%

     Grimard & Parent                            Currently Smoke Every Day                    0.31              -0.136*         -43.9%
                                  U.S.
         (2007)                                        Ever Smoked                            0.58              -0.111*         -19.1%

                                                                                      Women:         0.24         0.001           0.4%
                                                       Currently Smoke
    Kemptner, Jurges &                                                                Men:           0.36         0.005           1.4%
                               Germany
     Reinhold (2010)                                                                  Women:         0.39         0.014           3.6%
                                                         Ever Smoked
                                                                                      Men:           0.63        -0.012          -1.9%

E. Obesity
   Clark & Royer (2010)           U.K.                      Obese                             0.21               0.028           13.3%

                                                                                      Women:         0.44        -0.016          -3.6%
                                                          Overweight
    Kemptner, Jurges &                                                                Men:           0.66       -0.034*          -5.2%
                               Germany
     Reinhold (2010)                                                                  Women:         0.13         0.007           5.4%
                                                            Obese
                                                                                      Men:           0.16        -0.028         -17.5%

  Brunello, Fabbri & Fort 10 European               Overweight (Women)                       0.387              -0.044*         -11.4%
          (2009)           Countries                  Obese (Women)                          0.114               -0.012         -10.5%

                                                                                      Women:         0.27        -0.021          -7.8%
   Kenkel, et al. (2006)c         U.S.                      Obese
                                                                                      Men:           0.25        -0.008          -3.2%

        a
Notes: Clark and Royer (2010) do not report IV estimates for the effect of education on mortality; values reported in table reflect RD
estimated effect of 1947 reform on death rates between ages 45 and 69 divided by the effect of the reform on average years of completed
schooling. bMortality estimates for Albouy & Lequien (2009) are calculated from survival rates; mortality rates inferred from from Figures 1
and 2. cKenkel, et al. (2006) estimates are for high school graduation rather than years of schooling. dAverage smoking rates for de
Walque (2007) inferred from Figure 1 for those with a high school degree. * denotes statistical significance at 0.05 level.
          Table 8: Channels through Which Education May Improve Health

                                                                                Benefits Private
Channel                                                     Private Costs         or Public?
1. Reduce Stress                                                None               Private
2. Better Decisionmaking Ability/Use of Inputs                  None               Private
3. Better at Gathering/Interpreting Information                 None               Private
4. Health Insurance                                           Financial            Private
5. Healthier lifestyle
  a. Safety Precautions (e.g. seatbelts, smoke alarms)    Utility, Financial        Private
  b. Diet                                                 Utility, Financial        Private
  c. Exercise                                             Utility, Financial        Private
  d. Non-Smoking, Alcohol Moderation, Avoiding Drugs     Utility, Saves Money       Private
6. Healthier/Safer Employment                                Lower Wages            Private
7. Healthier Neighborhoods                                 Housing Prices           Private
8. Healthier Peers and Friends                                    None              Public
Table 9: Effects of Education on Voter Registration and Voting

                                                                                                                             Sample         IV
       Study               Data       Education Measure Instrumental Variable             Voting/Registration Measure         Mean       Estimate   % Effect

A. United States
                                                                                       Registered to vote                     0.67        0.218*      32.5
     Dee (2004)           HS&B            college enroll.      local 2-yr colleges     Voted in last 12 months                0.36        0.176*      48.9
                                                                                       Voted in 1988 presidential election    0.55        0.178       32.4
     Dee (2004)            GSS           years of school     state school/labor laws Voted in last presidential election      0.73        0.068*      9.3
                                                                                       Registered to vote                     0.82        0.093       11.3
Milligan et al. (2004)     NES          high school grad.    state school/labor laws
                                                                                       Voted in last election                 0.68        0.288*      42.3
Milligan et al. (2004)     CPS          high school grad.    state school/labor laws Voted in last election                   0.62        0.435*      70.4

B. United Kingdom
Milligan et al. (2004)     BES           years of school    national min. school age Voted in last election                   0.85        -0.008      -0.9
Milligan et al. (2004)      EB           years of school    national min. school age Name on electoral list                   0.92        -0.014      -1.5

C. Germany
Siedler (2007, 2010)     ALLBUS          years of school    national min. school age Voted in last election                   0.93a       0.005       0.5
                                                                                                                                     a
Siedler (2007, 2010)     ForsaBus        years of school    national min. school age Voted in last election                   0.93        0.000       0.0

Notes: HS&B = High School and Beyond; GSS = General Social Surveys NES = National Election Survey; CPS = Current Population Survey November Voting
Supplements; BES = British Election Studies; EB = Eurobarometer surveys for Britain and Northern Ireland. aSample means taken from ALLBUS data in Table 3
of Siedler (2007) for those 'not affected by the reform'. * reflects statistically significant at 0.05 level.
Table 10: Effects of Education on Political Interest, Information, Views, and Participation

                                                                                                                                             Sample      IV
        Study              Country       Data     Education Measure      Instrumental Variable                    Outcome                     Mean    Estimate % Effect
A. Political Interest
Milligan et al. (2004)       U.S.         NES       high school grad.    state school/labor laws            Interested in election            0.30     0.270*     90.0

 Siedler (2007, 2010)      Germany     ALLBUS        years of school     national min. school age           Interested in politics            0.30a   -0.096*    -32.0

 Siedler (2007, 2010)      Germany     ForsaBus      years of school     national min. school age           Interested in politics            0.30a    -0.008     -2.7

B. Political Information
     Dee (2004)              U.S.         GSS        years of school     state school/labor laws     Newspaper readership index (0-4)         3.2      0.113*     3.5
                                                                                                          Follow campaign on TV               0.79     0.392*    49.6
                                                       high school
Milligan et al. (2004)       U.S.         NES                            state school/labor laws      Follow campaign in newspapers           0.66     0.852*   129.1
                                                       completion
                                                                                                           Follow public affairs              0.66     0.544*    82.4
Milligan et al. (2004)       U.S.         EB         years of school    national min. school age           Follow news every day              0.9      -0.007     -0.8

C. Political Views/Philosophy
                                                                                                        Allow homosexual to speak             0.73     0.123*     16.8
     Dee (2004)              U.S.         GSS        years of school     state school/labor laws
                                                                                                         Allow militarist to speak            0.59     0.036*      6.1
Si dl (2007
Siedler (2007, 2010)
               2010)       Germany    ALLBUS
                                      ALLBUS      years off schoo
                                                              h l       national
                                                                          ti l min.
                                                                                 i school
                                                                                     h l age             Demonstrating
                                                                                                                  ti is ciivil
                                                                                                                            il right          0 67a
                                                                                                                                              0.67     -0.001
                                                                                                                                                        0 001     -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                   01

D. Political/Social Participation
     Dee (2004)              U.S.        HS&B         college enroll.       local 2-yr colleges        Volunteered in last 12 months          0.37     -0.047    -12.7
     Dee (2004)              U.S.         GSS        years of school     state school/labor laws            Group memberships                 1.8      0.164      9.1
Milligan et al. (2004)       U.S.         NES       high school grad.    state school/labor laws          Attend political meetings           0.07     0.132    188.6
                                                                                                    Often or occasionally try to persuade
                                                                                                                                              0.45     0.066*     14.7
                                                                                                            others to share views
Milligan et al. (2004)       U.K.         EB         years of school    national min. school age
                                                                                                    Discuss political matters with friends
                                                                                                                                              0.67     0.095*     14.2
                                                                                                            at least occasionally
                                                                                                           Active in citizen group            0.17a    -0.050    -29.4
 Siedler (2007, 2010)      Germany     ALLBUS        years of school    national min. school age
                                                                                                        Participated in demonstration         0.09a    -0.016    -17.8

Notes: HS&B = High School and Beyond; GSS = General Social Surveys NES = National Election Survey; EB = Eurobarometer surveys for Britain and Northern Ireland.
a
  Sample means taken from ALLBUS data in Table 3 of Siedler (2007) for those 'not affected by the reform'. * reflects statistically significant at 0.05 level.
