NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEARNING VERSUS STEALING:
HOW IMPORTANT ARE MARKET-SHARE REALLOCATIONS TO INDIA'S PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH?
Ann E. Harrison
Leslie A. Martin
Shanthi Nataraj
Working Paper 16733
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16733

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

We thank Mr. M.L. Philip, Mr. P.C.Nirala, Dr. Praveen Shukla, and Mr. M.M. Hasija at the Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation for their assistance in understanding the Annual Survey
of Industries data collection process; Rana Hasan, Karl Jandoc, and Steve O’Connell for discussions
regarding the firm-level data; and Pauline Grosjean and Ben Crost for providing us with their district-level
concordances, which formed a basis for ours. This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 0922332. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Ann E. Harrison, Leslie A. Martin, and Shanthi Nataraj. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Learning Versus Stealing: How Important are Market-Share Reallocations to India's Productivity
Growth?
Ann E. Harrison, Leslie A. Martin, and Shanthi Nataraj
NBER Working Paper No. 16733
January 2011
JEL No. F13,F14,F23
ABSTRACT
The new trade theory emphasizes the role of market-share reallocations across firms (“stealing”) in
driving productivity growth, while the older literature focused on average productivity improvements
(“learning”). We use comprehensive, firm-level data from India’s organized manufacturing sector
to show that market-share reallocations did play an important role in aggregate productivity gains
immediately following the start of India’s trade reforms in 1991. However, aggregate productivity
gains during the overall 20-year period from 1985 to 2004 were driven largely by improvements in
average productivity. By exploiting the variation in reforms across industries, we document that the
average productivity increases can be attributed to India’s trade liberalization and FDI reforms. Finally,
we construct a panel dataset that allows us to track firms during this time period; our results suggest
that while within-firm productivity improvements were important, much of the increase in average
productivity also occured because of firm entry and exit.

Ann E. Harrison
Department of Agricultural
and Resource Econonmics
University of California, Berkeley
210 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
aharrison2@worldbank.org
Leslie A. Martin
University of California, Berkeley
Agricultural and Resource Economics
310 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
llamartin@berkeley.edu

Shanthi Nataraj
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
snataraj@rand.org

1

Introduction

The new trade theory stresses the importance of market-share reallocations in increasing aggregate
productivity following a trade liberalization (Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum 2003, Melitz
2003). In contrast, the earlier literature emphasized the idea that trade could improve average
productivity among existing firms (Corden 1974, Grossman and Helpman 1991, Helpman and
Krugman 1985, for example). Yet there are few empirical studies that quantify the relative importance of average productivity gains versus gains from market-share reallocations in the wake of a
major trade liberalization.
In this paper, we use a comprehensive, firm-level dataset that allows us to examine the role
played by market-share reallocations in aggregate productivity growth in India’s organized manufacturing sector from 1985 to 2004.1 In 1991, India embarked on a series of reforms, including
a major trade liberalization. We confirm that market-share reallocations were an important source
of productivity growth in the years immediately following the start of the 1991 reforms, but not
during other periods.
We document three distinct phases in India’s manufacturing productivity during the period from
1985 to 2004. During this time, aggregate productivity (defined as output-weighted, mean firm
productivity) grew by nearly 20%. From 1985 to 1990, the growth in aggregate productivity was
driven by “learning” - that is, an increase in unweighted, average firm productivity. This measure
of learning captures the change in productivity for the average firm, and therefore includes not only
changes in productivity among surviving firms, but also changes in average productivity that can be
attributed to firm entry and exit. In the period immediately following the start of the reforms (19911994), the “stealing” of market share - that is, the reallocation of market share from less productive
to more productive firms - became more important than learning in driving aggregate productivity
growth. In the longer run (1998-2004), learning once again became the more important factor in
aggregate productivity growth, with stealing (reallocation) contributing little. During the 20-year
1
The organized (formal) manufacturing sector in India consists of firms that are registered under Sections 2m(i)
and 2m(ii) of the Factories Act; all firms with 20 or more employees (10 if power is used) are required to register. The
organized sector accounts for approximately 80% of manufacturing sector output, though only 20% of employment.

2

period from 1985 to 2004 as a whole, we find that most of the increase in aggregate productivity
can be explained by improvements in average productivity.
We then examine the extent to which individual policy reforms were associated with these
productivity gains. In particular, we exploit variations in tariff cuts, foreign direct investment
(FDI) liberalization, and industrial licensing reforms across industries to examine the contribution
of each reform to overall growth. We find that the average decline in final goods tariffs during
this time period implies a 3.2% increase in aggregate productivity, while the average decline in
input tariffs implies a 21.8% increase. Moreover, the FDI liberalization also accounts for a 2.2%
increase in aggregate productivity.
Finally, although firm identifiers are not available for the organized sector data during most
of the time period we study, we construct a panel dataset by matching individual firms from one
year of the survey to the next. This panel allows us to examine the relative importance of withinfirm changes, versus firm entry and exit, in explaining average productivity growth. When we
attempt to isolate within-firm changes in average productivity by controlling for firm-level fixed
effects, we find that the impacts of the input tariff and FDI liberalizations on average productivity
are strongly attenuated, though still economically and statistically significant. Our results suggest
that although within-firm productivity growth is important, a substantial fraction of the average
productivity increase that is attributable to these policies is also due to firm entry and exit.
Our study was motivated by the emphasis that the new trade theory places on the importance of
market-share reallocations in increasing aggregate productivity. Although a number of papers have
tested various implications of this literature (see, for example, Arkolakis (forthcoming), Bernard et
al. (2003), Bernard, Jensen and Schott (2006), Berthou and Fontagne (2010), Eaton, Kortum and
Kramarz (2008), Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004), Manova and Zhang (2010)), few are able to
directly test the effect of a trade liberalization episode on market-share reallocations, and existing
evidence on the role of reallocation is mixed. For example, Tybout and Westbrook (1995) find that
the reallocation of market share to relatively low-cost firms explained little of the overall change in
productivity following Mexico’s trade liberalization; however, Pavcnik (2002) and Menezes-Filho

3

and Muendler (2007) find that market-share reallocation was an important driver of productivity
growth following trade reforms in Chile and Brazil, respectively. Trefler (2004) documents that
a fall in Canadian tariffs increased industry-level labor productivity, but not within-plant labor
productivity, which he interprets as evidence that reallocation was more important than withinplant improvements. In Colombia, Fernandes (2007) finds that average productivity gains were
more important than reallocation, but that reallocation became important in many industries during
periods of tariff liberalization. We add to this literature by showing that in the case of India, marketshare reallocations were important, but only during the period immediately following the start of
the trade reforms.
Our study also contributes to the substantial body of work examining India’s 1991 reforms.
Topalova and Khandelwal (forthcoming) establish that the reductions in final goods and input tariffs increased productivity among approximately 4,000 large, publicly listed manufacturing firms.
Sivadasan (2009) uses a dataset that is similar to ours for the early years of the reforms (1986-1994)
and finds that the reduction in final goods tariffs and the FDI liberalization increased productivity. He also documents that the final goods tariff and FDI liberalizations were linked with average
productivity increases, but not reallocation, in the early 1990’s. Nataraj (2010) compares the reactions of the organized and unorganized manufacturing sectors to trade liberalization, and finds that
while the reduction in final goods tariffs increased productivity significantly among unorganized
firms, the reduction in input tariffs was more important in increasing organized sector productivity. Aghion, Burgess, Redding and Zilibotti (2008) find that following the removal of licensing
requirements, the number of factories and output increased, particularly in states with relatively
less restrictive labor regulations.
Our study is distinguished from previous literature on the 1991 reforms in several ways. First,
we document that market-share reallocations were important to overall productivity growth immediately following the start of the 1991 reforms, while average productivity gains were more
important during the periods from 1985-1990 and 1998-2004. Second, we show that the trade
and FDI liberalizations explain a substantial amount of overall productivity growth. Third, our

4

construction of a panel of firms allows us to show that a large share of the increase in average
productivity appears to be due to firm entry and exit.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief background on the
Indian reforms; Section 3 describes the data and outlines the construction of the panel of firms;
Section 4 discusses the empirical framework and presents results; and Section 5 concludes.

2

The 1991 Reforms

Prior to 1991, India had a highly restrictive trade regime, with average final goods tariffs on manufactured products of approximately 95%, as well as non-tariff barriers on most goods. FDI was
capped at 40% for most industries, and large manufacturing firms were required to obtain operating licenses. During the 1980s, India began to liberalize its licensing policies to some extent,
removing licensing requirements from approximately one-third of industries; however, trade and
FDI restrictions remained in place. India’s fiscal deficit continued to grow during this time, as did
its balance of payments deficit.
In 1991, a combination of economic and political shocks - namely, a rise in oil prices, a decrease in remittances and lower demand from abroad, and an unstable political climate - created
a balance of payments crisis (Topalova and Khandelwal forthcoming). A new government requested help from the IMF, which was granted on the condition that India undertake several reforms (Hasan, Mitra and Ramaswamy 2007). In July 1991, the government announced a series
of major policy changes, including FDI liberalization, exchange rate liberalization, the removal of
the requirement for operating licenses in most industries (“delicensing”), the removal of import
licensing requirements for capital and intermediate goods, and a reduction and harmonization of
tariffs across industries. Many of these policy changes were formalized in India’s Eighth Five-Year
Plan (1992-97).
Between 1991 and 1997, the average final goods tariff rate on manufactured products fell from
95% to 35% (Panel (a) of Figure 1). Not only did average tariffs fall, but tariffs were also har-

5

monized across industries; therefore, the industries with the highest pre-reform tariffs faced the
highest tariff cuts. Panel (b) of Figure 1 shows a negative, linear relationship between an industry’s
pre-reform tariff level and the change in tariffs through 1997.2 After the Eighth Five-Year Plan
(post-1997), India continued to lower its tariffs, though the reductions were no longer as uniform.
Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows that tariffs for some industries were even increased during this time.
Panel (c) of the same figure indicates that if we compare tariff changes through 2004 with prereform tariffs, the negative relationship exhibited through 1997 still holds, although there are a few
more outliers.
In addition to final goods tariffs, we also consider the impact of input tariffs on productivity.
We calculate input tariffs using India’s Input-Output Transactions Table, following the method
suggested by Amiti and Konings (2007). For example, if the footwear industry derives 80% of
its inputs from the leather industry and 20% from the textile industry, then the input tariff for the
footwear industry is 0.8 times the final goods tariff for the leather industry plus 0.2 times the final
goods tariff for the textile industry. In our baseline measure of input tariffs, we use both traded and
non-traded inputs, assigning tariff rates of zero to non-traded inputs.3
One potential concern with including input tariffs in our empirical analysis is that final goods
and input tariffs may be highly correlated, thus leading to multicollinearity problems in estimation. Panel (d) of Figure 1 shows the relationship between the change in final goods tariffs and the
change in input tariffs for a given industry. Though the two measures are related, there are a number of industries that received relatively large reductions in final goods tariffs but relatively small
reductions in input tariffs, and vice versa. Moreover, the overall correlation coefficient between
final goods and input tariffs (across years and industries) is 0.7. Within years, the correlation coefficient is even lower (less than 0.5 in all years), which suggests that multicollinearity is not likely
to be a significant problem.
We also consider two other policy changes that occurred during this period: the removal of in2

Section 4.6 shows that excluding the two industries that do not fit this pattern does not affect the results.
In Section 4.6, we present results from an alternative measure of input tariffs that considers only manufacturing
sector inputs.
3

6

dustrial licensing requirements and the allowance of FDI into most industries without case-by-case
approval. Until the 1980s, India’s “license raj” required every firm with more than 50 employees
(100 employees without power) and a certain amount of assets to obtain an operating license. The
license specified, among other things, the amount of output a firm could produce, the types of
goods it could make, and its location. In 1985, approximately one-third of industries were “delicensed” (the requirement for a license was dropped); in 1991, most industries were delicensed as
part of the broader reforms package (Aghion et al. 2008). The restrictions on foreign investment
were also liberalized during the 1990’s. Prior to 1991, FDI was capped at 40% for most industries;
beginning in 1991, FDI inflows of up to 51% were allowed in selected industries with “automatic”
approval (Sivadasan 2009).
By the end of 1991, nearly 85% of industries had been delicensed. The licensing requirement
was removed from several additional industries in subsequent years, and by the end of the 1990’s,
over 90% of industries had been delicensed. In contrast, the FDI liberalization occurred somewhat
more slowly: only one-third of industries were FDI liberalized in 1991. A few additional industries
were liberalized by 1997, but it was not until 2000 that the government indicated that all industries would be eligible for automatic FDI approval, except those requiring an industrial license or
meeting several other conditions. Table 1 shows the evolution of the reforms over time.
The fact that most of these policy changes occurred as part of an externally-required reforms
package lowers the chance that industries were selected into the reforms based on political factors.
In addition, to the extent that industries with certain characteristics may have been more likely
to be liberalized, we use a fixed-effects estimation strategy that should address any time-invariant
characteristics that could have affected selection. However, if the reforms are correlated with prereform trends in industry characteristics, then our results may be biased. To evaluate the potential
extent of this bias, we examine the correlations between changes in reforms (1990-2004) and prereform trends in industry characteristics (1985-1989). We follow Topalova and Khandelwal (forthcoming) and consider a number of industry characteristics including wage, share of production
workers, capital-labor ratio, total employment and output, and firm size (average employment).

7

We also consider pre-reform trends in total factor productivity (TFP). Table A.1 indicates that
there are no statistically significant correlations between pre-reform trends in industry characteristics and future reforms. Moreover, in Section 4.6 we show that our results are robust to limiting our
analysis to the period through 1997; since these initial reforms were largely carried out as outlined
in the Eighth Five-Year Plan, which was developed in the wake of the 1991 crisis, they are even
less likely to be subject to potential selection issues than reforms in later years.

3

Data

3.1

Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) Data

The primary dataset we use is firm-level surveys from the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI).
The period of coverage for each ASI survey is the accounting year that ended on any day during
the fiscal year: the 1985-86 survey (which we refer to as the 1985 survey) refers to the factory’s
accounting year that ended on any day between April 1, 1985 and March 31, 1986. We obtained
firm-level data for all available years between 1985 and 2004. Data were not available for 1995.
In addition, the way in which input data were collected and made available for the years 1996
and 1997 did not make it possible to construct certain key variables for those two years that were
consistent with the other years. Therefore, we restrict our analysis to the firm-level data for the
remaining 17 years between 1985 and 2004 (1985 through 1994 and 1998 through 2004).
The sampling universe for the ASI is all firms that are registered under Sections 2m(i) and
2m(ii) of the Factories Act, as well as firms registered under the Bidi & Cigar Workers Act, and
a number of utility and service providers. We include only manufacturing firms in our analysis.
All firms that have 20 or more employees (10 or more employees if a power source is used) are
required to register.4 The sampling frame is derived from the registry list of each state’s Chief
4

Although firms with fewer than 10 employees are not required to register under this act, and therefore should not
appear in the sampling universe, between 15% and 20% of the ASI firms in each year report fewer than 10 employees.
These firms may be registered for various reasons, including the possibility that they used to have more than 10
employees but shrank; that they plan to grow in the future; and that registering may be a signal to creditors or other
business partners.

8

Inspector of Factories, and all but four small states are covered.
The ASI divides firms into two sectors - the “census” sector, in which firms are surveyed every
year, and the “sample” sector, in which firms are sampled every few years. Between 1985 and
2004, the inclusion of firms in the census and sample sectors, as well as the sampling strategy,
changed several times. To ensure that our analysis is consistent over time and is representative of
the population of firms, we apply the sampling multiplier weights that are provided for each firm.
Each unit surveyed is generally a factory; however, if an owner has two factories in the same
state, sector (census versus sample) and industry, a joint return can be furnished. In the population
of firms, fewer than 2% of the observations report more than one factory, and we will use the term
“firm” to mean one observation in our dataset.5
The key variables we construct from the ASI data are output, material input, labor, and capital.6
We drop closed firms from the dataset, and we include only firms with positive values of the key
variables. To address a few extreme outliers, we also trim the top 0.5% of output and material input
values.
We deflate output using industry-specific wholesale price indices (WPI) from the Government
of India’s Handbook of Industrial Statistics. Similarly, our material input measures are deflated by
constructing deflators using the WPI along with India’s 1993-94 Input-Output Transactions Table.
Labor is measured as the total number of people employed by the firm. For the baseline analysis,
we deflate the book value of capital by the WPI for machinery. In Section 4.6, we show that our
results are robust to measuring capital using the perpetual inventory method described in Harrison
(1994), as modified by Sivadasan (2009).
Summary statistics for the population are presented in Table 2. Only open firms that have
positive values of our key variables are included. Sampling weights are applied to the summary
statistics in the first column, so the results are representative of the overall organized sector. The
second column shows results for the firms that were sampled, without applying sampling weights.
5

We tested the robustness of our results to including only observations that report one factory. Results are not
presented here as they are virtually identical to baseline results.
6
Output includes the ex-factory value of products, the increase in the stock of semi-finished goods, and the value
of own construction; material input includes material and fuel.

9

Since larger firms are surveyed more often than smaller firms, the mean and median values of
output, capital, material inputs, and labor are much larger in the sampled population rather than
the estimated population.

3.2

Creating a Panel

The ASI data provide unique firm identifiers beginning in 1998. However, it has not previously
been possible to track firms prior to 1998, and thus to follow them during the most significant
period of reforms. As discussed in Harrison (2009), we overcome this challenge by matching
individual firms from one year of the survey to the next between 1985 and 1998. We then combine
this constructed panel with the pre-formed panel provided by the ASI from 1998-2004.
We construct our panel in three steps. First we pair firms that appear in consecutive years. We
search for exact duplicates in Open and Close values between one year and the next (e.g. we look
for a match between the Close value in 1985 and the Open value in 1986) in one of the following
six variables: stock of raw materials, fuels, and stores; stock of semi-finished goods; stock of
finished goods; inventory; loans; and fixed capital. We only consider matches with more than four
non-zero digits. In the case of multiple potential matches, we take the pair that matches the largest
number of digits over the six variables, with a minimum match of six digits, implying an exact
match in least two matching variables.
We apply this technique from 1985-1994 and from 1996-1998. After 1998 we use the preformed panel. However, the detailed data for 1995 have not been released. To link firms over this
gap year, we consider matches within state, 2-digit industry code, and permanent serial number.
Though the ASI provides a permanent serial number for each firm, this number is not unique; however, we find that the numbers are consistent across previously matched firms from 1990 onwards.
We therefore use the permanent serial number along with state and industry codes to bridge the gap
in 1995. We validate matches by checking the year of initial production and growth in labor, fixed
capital and fuels. For labor forces of less than 1,000 employees, we use observed growth rates in
labor among known matches to develop a nonlinear relationship between labor force observed one
10

year and labor force observed the following year. We then require potential pairs in non-adjacent
years to fall within the 10th and 90th percentiles of this observed labor force growth. For fixed
capital and fuels we allow for one standard deviation of positive or negative growth. Based on our
analysis of the pre-formed panel, for the year of initial production we allow for variation of up to
two years, as well as switched tens and ones digits (e.g. 1984 is allowed to replace 1948).
We then extend the technique used to bridge the gap across 1995 to other years, in order to
match broken series to each other and to unmatched observations. We consider matching any
series with an exact match in terms of state, 2-digit industry code, and permanent serial number.7
We apply the same labor, fixed capital, and fuels checks that we performed when bridging the gap
in 1995, only allowing a successful match to fail one of these checks.
From 1985 to 1994, and in particular from 1985 to 1989 when permanent serial numbers are
rarely consistent across more than two years for known matches, we iterate a similar procedure
using exact district code matches. The mapping of district codes to geographical regions changes
frequently over the period of our survey, so we generate a concordance of district codes over time,
using existing concordances as well as the changing codes observed in our known panel matches.8
Since we observe each firm’s year of initial production, we are confident that we can correctly
identify survivors and entrants in our panel. However, given the substantial fraction of firms that
are not surveyed every year, we are more reserved about our ability to identify exiting firms. The
rates of exit that we observe in our panel are significantly higher than the rates that we extrapolate
from the observed distribution of year of initial production. Therefore, in estimating productivity, we avoid methods that rely on accurately identifying firm exits, and instead employ an index
number method that is robust to potentially spurious exit. In Section 4.4, we exploit the fact that
we can confidently identify surviving firms to examine the extent to which average productivity
improvements are driven by within-firm learning.
Summary statistics for the panel are presented in the final column of Table 2. Larger firms
7

Given the number of firms that switch between manufacturing different types of textiles, we combine textile codes
(NIC-87 codes 23, 24, and 25) for this exercise.
8
We thank Pauline Grosjean and Ben Crost for providing us with their district code concordance, which formed a
basis for ours.

11

(those that are in the “census” sector and are surveyed every year) make up more than 60% of the
firm-year observations in the panel, 45% of firm-year observations in the full sample of firms, and
only 20% of firm-year observations in the estimated population. The panel should not be seen as
representative of a random selection of firms in the population, but rather a selection of relatively
large firms. Nonetheless, the bottom rows in Table 2 show that 71% of firm-year observations that
appeared in the sample, representing 94% of total deflated output over the entire period and 92%
of the labor force, are captured for at least two years in the panel.

3.3

Policy Variables

The four policies we consider - final goods tariffs, input tariffs, delicensing, and FDI reform - were
discussed in Section 2. Our tariff data are based on the Government of India’s Customs Tariff
Working Schedules and the Trade Analysis and Information System (TRAINS) database. Both
sources provide rates for approximately 5,000 harmonized system (HS) product codes. Using the
concordance of Debroy and Santhanam (1993), we match the product lines with 3-digit NIC-87
codes, and calculate average final goods tariff rates within each of approximately 140 industries.9
We calculate input tariffs as described in Section 2
To capture the effects of the delicensing reforms, we use data from Aghion et al. (2008) from
1985 to 1997, supplemented by information from Press Notes from the Ministry of Commerce &
Industry from 1998 to 2004. The delicensing variable is a dummy that takes on a value of one if
any products in a three-digit industry have been delicensed, zero otherwise. Our measure of FDI
liberalization is also based on Press Notes from the Ministry of Commerce & Industry, and takes
on a value of one if any products in a three-digit industry have been liberalized, zero otherwise.
Table 1 shows the evolution of the trade, licensing, and FDI reforms between 1985 and 2004.
9

Prior to 1986, tariff data were reported in Brussels Tariff Nomenclature (BTN) rather than HS codes. For these
years, we first map BTN codes to HS codes using a concordance table from the TRAINS database.

12

4
4.1

Empirical Framework and Results
Measuring Total Factor Productivity

For the full sample of data, we measure TFP using a chain-linked, index number method suggested
by Aw, Chen and Roberts (2001):

T F Pijt

=

(qijt − qjt )
| {z }

deviation f rom avg. q

+

t
X
(qjr − qjr−1 )
r=2

|

{z

}

yearly change in q

Z
t X
Z
X
X

1 z
1 z
z )(z
z
−
(ζijt + ζjt
(ζjr + ζjr−1
)(zjr − zjr−1 )
ijt − zjt ) +
2
2
z=1
r=2 z=1
|
{z
} |
{z
}
deviation f rom avg. z

(1)

yearly change in z

where
qijt =log of output for firm i, industry j, time t
z
ζijt
=revenue share of input z
zijt =log of input z
A firm’s TFP is the deviation of its output from average output in that year, along with how average output in that year differs from the base year, minus the deviation of the firm’s inputs from
average inputs in that year, along with how average inputs in that year differ from the base year.
Inputs include labor, capital, and material input; inputs and output are measured and deflated as
discussed in Section 3.1. Bars over variables indicate average values within a particular industry
and year. Revenue shares for labor and material input are calculated as the share of each input in
total revenue; capital’s revenue share is assumed to be one minus the sum of the other two shares.

4.2

Overall TFP Growth

We begin by looking at productivity changes for the entire manufacturing industry from 1985 to
2004. To do so, we first calculate aggregate TFP in year t, ΦAGG
, by taking the sum of each firm’s
t
productivity φit , weighted by its market share ψit . Olley and Pakes (1996) show that this measure
of aggregate TFP can be decomposed into two components:
13

≡
ΦAGG
t

X

ψit φit

i

= φt +

X

[ψit − ψt ][φit − φt ]

i

≡

ΦUt

+ Rt

where φt and ψt are unweighted average productivity and market share, respectively. The first
component, ΦUt , is unweighted average productivity. The second component, Rt , measures the
covariance between firm productivity and market share; changes in this measure represent a reallocation of market share between firms of different productivity levels. The new trade theory
suggests that trade liberalization should cause the reallocation component to rise, as output is reallocated from less productive to more productive firms. In addition, it is important to note that
using this decomposition, the average productivity component can change not only due to changes
in productivity among existing firms, but also due to firm entry or exit. Therefore, the new trade
theory suggests that the average productivity component is also likely to increase as the least productive firms exit in response to competition from trade.
We begin by constructing these measures at the all-India level. To make the results representative of the population of firms, and consistent over time, we pre-multiply each observation by the
sampling weight provided in the ASI. Furthermore, to make the results more comparable with our
later regression results, we consider only firms in state-industry groups that exist over the entire
period.10
Figure 2 and Table 3 present results. Following Pavcnik (2002), we normalize productivity
values to be zero in 1985, so that changes in productivity levels can be interpreted as growth since
1985. Between 1985 and 2004, aggregate productivity grew by 19%. This increase in productivity
implies an annual increase of slightly less than 1% per year, which is within the range of previous
10

We have confirmed that including all firms makes little difference to the overall results.

14

studies.11
When we consider the time period as a whole, nearly all of this increase (17.1%) can be attributed to growth in average productivity, rather than reallocation. However, Figure 2 and Table 3
suggest that there are three distinct phases between 1985 and 2004. First, from 1985 to 1990, average productivity rose by over 8%, while the reallocation component actually fell by more than 6%,
indicating that more productive firms lost market share to less productive firms. Starting in 1991,
this trend was reversed: average productivity fell, while reallocation productivity rose sharply. By
1998, however, average productivity improvements were once again the more important driver of
aggregate productivity growth. Reallocation productivity remained at approximately the level it
achieved between 1992 and 1993, but rose no further.
Our results suggest that market-share reallocations did play an important role in aggregate
productivity growth, but only during the few years immediately following the start of the 1991 reforms. Over the longer time horizon, average productivity improvements remained more important
in explaining the increase in aggregate TFP.

4.3

TFP Changes and Policy Reforms

To what extent can the increase in productivity be attributed to the trade and other policy reforms
that occurred during the 1990’s? To answer this question, we exploit the variation in those policies
across industries to examine whether changes in the individual components of productivity were
systematically related to specific reforms.
In order to use the policy variation across industries, we re-create our aggregate, average, and
reallocation TFP measures at the state-industry level. We use the state-industry level because this
level of disaggregation allows us to consider variations in policies and other characteristics across
both industries and states, and because the ASI survey is designed to be representative at this level.
11

There has been an extensive debate about TFP growth in the organized Indian manufacturing sector, particularly
during the 1980’s; Goldar (December 7, 2002) provides a summary of a number of TFP growth estimates, and discusses
many of the measurement issues involved. It is important to note that our TFP estimates are based on a gross output,
rather than value-added, production function; value-added TFP growth rates tend to be much higher than gross output
growth rates.

15

We construct these measures for each state-industry group, and Figure 3 and Table 4 present the
average results across all groups, weighting each group by the total number of firms that appear in
that group across all years. Doing so ensures that the results are more comparable to the all-India
results, since larger state-industry groups are given more weight.
Note that this weighting scheme ensures that average productivity is nearly the same at the
state-industry and all-India levels. However, the reallocation component is lower across most
years at the state-industry level. The reason is that at this level, we can only measure reallocation
within state-industry groups. For example, suppose that the steel industry is more productive than
the chemical industry, and that all firms in the steel industry increase output by 10%, while all
firms in the chemical industry reduce output by 10%. The all-India reallocation measure will
increase, but the state-industry reallocation measure will not. While it would be ideal to capture
between-industry as well as within-industry market-share reallocations, our identification strategy
(described below) does not allow us to use an all-India measure of productivity. Nonetheless,
despite some differences, the reallocation component at the state-industry level follows the same
basic pattern as the all-India measure.
We exploit the fact that the trade, licensing, and FDI reforms occurred differentially across
industries to isolate the impacts of each policy on each productivity measure. Consider the relationship between our outcomes of interest and the reforms:

I
d
Y
jst = β1 τj,t−1 + β2 τj,t−1 + β3 Delicj,t−1 + β4 F DIj,t−1 + αjs + αt + εjst

(2)

d
AGG
U
\
d
d
where Y
jst is estimated aggregate TFP (Φjst ), average TFP (Φjst ), or reallocation (Rjst ) for inI
dustry j and state s at time t, τj,t−1 and τj,t−1
are final goods tariffs and input tariffs, Delicj,t−1

is a dummy variable equal to one if any products in an industry are delicensed, zero otherwise,
F DIj,t−1 is a dummy variable equal to one if any products in an industry are FDI-liberalized, zero
otherwise; and αjs and αt are state-industry and year dummy variables, respectively. Since our
firm data are annual, and policy changes occurred throughout the year, we lag all policy variables
16

by one year. We employ a fixed-effects estimator to estimate Equation 2, and cluster all standard
errors at the state-industry level. We use the balanced panel of state-industries in order to avoid
confounding within-group effects with the entry and exit of certain industries in particular states,
and we weight all observations using the total number of firms in each state-industry group over
all years. This ensures that industries (and states) with large firm populations will receive higher
weight in the analysis, and will make the results more representative of the all-India level.12
Table 5 presents baseline results for the entire period from 1986 to 2004.13 Column (1) indicates that the trade liberalization is strongly correlated with aggregate productivity increases. The
coefficient on final goods tariffs (-0.055) indicates that a 10 percentage point reduction in final
goods tariffs yields an 0.55% increase in aggregate productivity. The impact of input tariffs is an
order of magnitude larger, with a 10 percentage point reduction in input tariffs yielding a 5.6%
increase in aggregate productivity. Moreover, FDI liberalization increases aggregate productivity
by 2.4%.
Columns (2) and (3) present results for the average and reallocation components of productivity, respectively. Column (2) indicates that 10 percentage point declines in final goods and input
tariffs raise average productivity by 0.44% and 5.5%, respectively, though the coefficient on final
goods tariffs is no longer statistically significant at the 10% level. FDI liberalization increases
average productivity by 4.9%. However, Column (3) shows that the variation in individual polices
cannot explain the increase in reallocation. The only statistically significant result, for FDI reform,
indicates that liberalization would lower rather than raise reallocation productivity.
In Table 6, we show the extent to which the policy changes that occurred during the 1990’s can
explain overall productivity growth. In particular, we multiply the coefficients from the baseline
results by the average policy change, to estimate the productivity growth implied by each reform.
The results suggest that trade liberalization, in particular the decline in input tariffs, is largely responsible for aggregate and average productivity growth. The decline of 60 percentage points in
final goods tariffs implies an aggregate productivity increase of 3.2%, and an average productivity
12
13

The results are robust to not including these weights; see Section 4.6.
We exclude 1985 because we do not have lagged policy variables for this year.

17

increase of 2.6% (though the related regression coefficient is not statistically significant). Meanwhile, the decline of 40 percentage points in input tariffs implies aggregate and average productivity increases of nearly 22%. The FDI liberalization also plays a role, implying a 4.6% increase
in average productivity.14 As discussed above, the variation in policies across industries cannot
explain the gains in reallocation productivity that were observed in the initial years following the
reforms. However, the policies do explain the gains in average productivity, which was the more
important driver of aggregate productivity growth during this period.

4.4

Panel Results

We now use the panel we have constructed to examine the results on average productivity in more
detail. As discussed above, the average productivity measure we use can increase either because
existing firms increase their productivity, or because less productive firms exit, or more productive
firms enter.
The panel allows us to explore this issue by isolating within-firm productivity improvements.
We estimate the following equation at the firm level:

I
φd
ijst = β1 τj,t−1 + β2 τj,t−1 + β3 Delicj,t−1 + β4 F DIj,t−1 + αi + αt + εijst

(3)

We use a fixed-effects estimator, which allows us to identify within-firm changes in productivity.
We then compare our results to the results for the population. To make our population and panel
results more comparable, we remove the sampling multipliers from the population data.
Table 7 presents results. In Column (1), we include all firms that were used in the state-industry
level analysis. This specification includes industry and year dummy variables. The coefficients on
the policy variables are similar to the average productivity results at the state-industry level.
Column (2) also presents results for the population, but includes only the firms that appear in
the panel for at least two years. We call these “population” results because we include only industry
14

In fact, the average policy changes can explain somewhat more than the total increase in productivity during this
time period. In the regression framework, the coefficients on several year dummies are negative, implying that in the
absence of the policy reforms, productivity would have fallen.

18

and year dummy variables, rather than firm fixed effects. Therefore, changes in productivity can be
attributed not only to within-firm productivity changes, but also to firm entry and exit. The results
for this sample of firms are similar to the results for the full sample.
In Column (3), we present results for the panel. The panel specification includes firm fixed effects, thus isolating within-firm changes in productivity. The panel results are qualitatively similar
to the population results, but the impacts are different in magnitude. The coefficient on final goods
tariffs is somewhat larger (-0.041 instead of -0.035). In contrast, in the population, a 10 percentage
point decline in input tariffs raises average productivity by 5.4%; in the panel, the same decline
raises average productivity by only 1.7%. Similarly, the effect of FDI liberalization on average
productivity is reduced from 5.6% to 3.1% in the panel.
These results suggest that a large fraction of the impact of the trade and FDI reforms on average productivity occurs not through productivity improvements among existing firms, but through
firm entry and exit. This finding presents an interesting contrast to earlier work by Topalova and
Khandelwal (forthcoming), who find that nearly all of the productivity gains among 4,100 large
Indian firms occurred because of within-firm improvements. Our contrasting findings are likely
due to the fact that we consider a broader set of firms, including small firms that are more likely to
exit.

4.5

State and Industry Characteristics

We also explore the extent to which the effects of the reforms varied across states or industries with
different pre-reform characteristics. First, we consider the role of labor regulations. Although India
reformed a number of its industrial policies in the 1990’s, labor regulations remained stringent.
Besley and Burgess (2004) show that Indian states with stricter labor regulations had lower output
than states with less stringent labor regulations. Building on their work, Aghion et al. (2008)
demonstrate that the effects of delicensing on output growth were lower in states with stricter labor
regulations. We explore the extent to which state-level labor regulations may have affected each
of component of productivity growth. One important aspect of the labor regulations is that large
19

firms must obtain government permission to shut down or to lay off workers; this requirement may
have affected productivity by making it difficult to achieve the optimal input mix or to shut down.
We use two measures of labor regulations. First, we use the measure developed by Besley and
Burgess (2004), who classify state amendments to India’s Industrial Disputes Act (IDA) as “proworker” or “pro-employer”. This measure of labor regulations exhibits very few changes during
the time period we consider, and only one state moves from one category to another. Therefore,
we classify states as neutral, pro-worker, or pro-employer based on their cumulative score in 1985,
and interact all policy variables in Equation 2 with an indicator for whether the state was proworker or pro-employer in 1985. The inclusion of state-industry fixed effects controls for timeinvariant, state-level characteristics. In addition to this de jure measure of labor regulations, we
have developed a de facto measure of how easy it is for firms to adjust their size or shut down
based on court outcomes. We gathered data from various publications of the Ministry of Labor
that provided the number of times a firm requested permission to close down or to lay off workers
between 1988 and 1992, as well as the number of cases in which permission was granted or denied.
We calculated the fraction of cases in which permission was granted, and constructed a dummy
variable equal to one for states in which the fraction granted was above the median.
Tables 8 and 9 present results for the two measures of labor regulations.15 Both tables indicate
that the effects of all of the policy reforms were largely similar across states, regardless of labor
regulations. In Table 8, the coefficients on the interaction terms between final goods tariffs and
pro-employer states are negative and statistically significant for aggregate and reallocation productivity, but are an order of magnitude smaller than the coefficients on final goods tariffs. Similarly,
the interaction term between input tariffs and pro-employer states is positive and statistically significant for reallocation productivity, but is much smaller than the coefficient on input tariffs alone.
In Table 9, the only statistically significant interaction term indicates that the impact of FDI reform
on average productivity was smaller in states in which it was relatively easy to lay off workers.
Another factor that may have influenced the impact of liberalization on firm productivity is
15

The samples we use are restricted to states for which we have data on labor regulations, and are therefore smaller
than the baseline sample.

20

exposure to trade. We use three measures as proxies for trade exposure. First, firms located close
to ports may have been more affected by trade liberalization, particularly in the short run. We
create a dummy variable that is equal to one if a state-industry group is located in a state with a
port, zero otherwise. We also develop measures of the extent to which particular industries might
have been more or less exposed to competition from imports, or to export opportunities. To so do,
we use data from the COMTRADE database to estimate total exports and total imports for each
industry in 1990. We then calculate the shares of imports and exports in output for each industry.
Our importing (exporting) variable is a dummy equal to one if the industry has an import (export)
share in output that is above the median, zero otherwise.
The advantage of using the 1990 measure is that it captures pre-reform industry characteristics.
However, this means that we lose variation across time, so we interact our measures of trade
exposure with the reforms. In addition, if certain industries became relatively more exposed to
trade as a result of the reforms, and were thus further impacted by trade, then we will not capture
this effect.
Table 10 shows the results of interacting each of these measures with our policy change variables. The interaction terms between tariff reforms and trade exposure, although statistically significant in some cases, are economically insignificant compared to the coefficients on the tariff
reforms themselves. Interestingly, delicensing is now associated with increased average productivity, but decreased reallocation productivity, in states that do not have a port. In addition, delicensing
is correlated with increased aggregate and average productivity among non-importing industries.
Furthermore, the impacts of FDI reform on average productivity appear to be concentrated in nonexporting industries.

4.6

Robustness of the Baseline Results

In Tables B.1 through B.8, we present results from several robustness tests. We begin by examining our measure of productivity, which is calculated using an index number method. First, we
winsorize the top and bottom 1% of the firm-level TFP values to ensure that the results are not be21

ing driven by extreme outliers. Table B.1 confirms that the results are nearly unchanged. Second,
we re-calculate our measure of TFP using cost shares instead of revenue shares. The challenge in
using cost shares is that the rental rate of capital must be estimated. If we assume that firms must
borrow money in order to purchase capital, then we can use the interest rate as a proxy for the cost
of capital. Table B.2 indicates that using cost shares yields similar results as using revenue shares.
Third, we use OLS rather than an index number method to calculate TFP. Table B.3 indicates that
the effects of final goods and input tariffs on aggregate and average productivity are similar to the
baseline results, though the effect of FDI reforms becomes statistically insignificant.
Measuring capital also presents a challenge to estimating TFP. In our baseline specification, we
deflated the book value of capital by the WPI for machinery. However, book values of capital may
have little to do with the actual productive value of capital. Therefore, we also measure capital
using the perpetual inventory method suggested by Harrison (1994) and adapted by Sivadasan
(2009) for the cross-sectional setting.16 Table B.4 confirms that using this alternate measure of
capital makes little difference to the coefficient estimates.
As discussed in Section 2, our analysis of the relationship between pre-reform trends in industry
characteristics and reforms indicates that selection bias is unlikely to be a major factor in our
results. However, we can also focus on the reforms during India’s Eighth Five-Year Plan (19921997), which were largely formulated during the 1991 crisis, thus reducing the likelihood for
political selection even further. In Table B.5, we present results for 1986 to 1998 only; since we
are using lagged policy variables, this allows us to capture policy changes through 1997. The
coefficients on final goods tariffs, input tariffs and FDI reform are somewhat smaller in magnitude
than the results for the overall time period, but are qualitatively similar.
In Table B.6, we re-compute input tariffs using only manufacturing industries, which allows
us to avoid assigning tariff rates of zero to non-traded goods, but requires us to assume that only
manufacturing inputs are used in production. The results for input tariffs are substantially larger in
16

We start with the total 1985 book value of capital in industry j. We construct the real capital stock in each
subsequent year as Kjt = Kj,t−1 [1 − δ] + Ijt where Ijt is real investment (nominal investment deflated by the WPI
for machinery in year t) and we assume a depreciation rate (δ) of 10%. The capital price deflator is then given by
dividing nominal capital by real capital.

22

magnitude, but qualitatively similar, to the baseline results.
Next, we remove the two industries (the blending of spirits and the production of wine) for
which the tariff reforms did not fit the pattern shown in Figure 1. In Table B.7, we show that the
results are robust to excluding these two industries. Finally, as discussed in Section 4, we weight
our baseline results by the total number of firms in a state-industry group over all years. Table B.8
shows that the results are similar when we place an equal weight on each state-industry.

5

Conclusion

Our results confirm that the market-share reallocations predicted by the new trade theory were important in increasing India’s productivity growth during the years immediately following the start
of the major trade reforms. We document three distinct periods during the years from 1985 to
2004. First, from 1985 to 1990, increases in aggregate (output-weighted) productivity were nearly
exclusively due to increases in average (unweighted) productivity, while reallocation productivity
actually fell. Between 1991 and 1994, reallocation productivity rose sharply while average productivity initially fell, then rose more slowly. Finally, from 1998 onwards, reallocation productivity
stagnated, while average productivity improvements once again became more important.
We also document that the increases in aggregate productivity are linked to the trade and FDI
liberalization that took place during the 1990’s. Our main specification indicates that the average
declines in final goods and input tariffs were associated with aggregate productivity increases of
3.2% and 21.8%, respectively. Meanwhile, the FDI reforms implied an aggregate productivity
increase of 2.2%.
We then construct a panel of firms from 1985 to 2004 to examine the extent to which the
increase in average productivity was driven by within-firm productivity improvements. We find
much smaller productivity effects, particularly for the input tariff and FDI reforms, when controlling for firm fixed effects. This finding suggests that while within-firm productivity improvements
did play a role in average productivity growth, the impacts of input tariffs and FDI reform on firm

23

entry and exit were also important.
Our results lend support to the importance of market-share reallocations in increasing productivity. In the case of India, however, we show that such reallocations were only important at the
beginning of the major trade liberalization period, and that over the 20-year period from 1985 to
2004, average productivity improvements played a larger role in determining aggregate productivity growth.

References
Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen Redding, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “The Unequal Effects
of Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India,” The American
Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4), 1397–1412.
Amiti, Mary and Jozef Konings, “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity:
Evidence from Indonesia,” The American Economic Review, December 2007, 97 (5),
1611–1638.
Arkolakis, Costas, “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International
Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Aw, Bee Yan, Xiaomin Chen, and Mark J. Roberts, “Firm-level evidence on productivity
differentials and turnover in Taiwanese manufacturing,” Journal of Development Economics,
2001, 66 (1), 51–86.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, and Peter K. Schott, “Trade Costs, Firms and Productivity,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53, 917–937.
, J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. S. Kortum, “Plants and Productivity in International Trade,” The
American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (4), 1268–1290.
Berthou, Antoine and Lionel Fontagne, “How do Multi-Product Exporters React to a Change in
Trade Costs?,” April 2010. Working Paper.
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess, “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic Performance?

24

Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2004, 119 (1), 91–134.
Corden, W. Max, Trade Policy and Economic Welfare, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974.
Debroy, B. and A.T. Santhanam, “Matching Trade Codes with Industrial Codes,” Foreign Trade
Bulletin, July 1993, 24 (1), 5–27.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz, “An Anatomy of International Trade:
Evidence from French Firms,” December 2008. NBER Working Paper 14610.
Fernandes, Ana M., “Trade policy, trade volumes and plant-level productivity in Colombian
manufacturing industries,” Journal of International Economics, 2007, 71 (1), 52–71.
Goldar, Bishwanath, “TFP Growth in Indian Manufacturing in 1980s,” Economic and Political
Weekly, December 7, 2002, pp. 4966–4968.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991.
Harrison, Ann, “Productivity, imperfect competition and trade reform: Theory and evidence,”
Journal of International Economics, 1994, 36, 53–73.
, “Causes and Consequences of the ‘Missing Middle’: Informality, Productivity, and the Size
Distribution of Manufacturing Firms in India,” January 2009. NSF Grant National Science
Foundation Grant No. 0922332.
Hasan, Rana, Devashish Mitra, and K. V. Ramaswamy, “Trade Reforms, Labor Regulations, and
Labor Demand Elasticities: Empirical Evidence from India,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, August 2007, 89 (3), 466–481.
Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign Trade: Increasing
Returns, Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy, Cambridge: The MIT Press,
1985.
, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple, “Export Versus FDI with Heterogeneous Firms,” The
American Economic Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 300–316.
Manova, Kalina and Zhiwei Zhang, “Export Prices across Firms and Destinations,” November
2010. Working Paper.

25

Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Menezes-Filho, Naercio Aquino and Marc-Andreas Muendler, “Labor Reallocation in Response
to Trade Reform,” November 2007. Working Paper.
Nataraj, Shanthi, “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity and Firm Size: Evidence
from India’s Formal and Informal Manufacturing Sectors,” September 2010. Working Paper.
Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Producticity in the Telecommunications
Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263–1297.
Pavcnik, Nina, “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
Chilean Plants,” Review of Economic Studies, 2002, 69 (1), 245–276.
Sivadasan, Jagadeesh, “Barriers to Competition and Productivity: Evidence from India,” The B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2009, 9 (1 (Advances)), Article 42.
Topalova, Petia and Amit Khandelwal, “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of
India,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Trefler, Daniel, “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,” The American
Economic Review, September 2004, 94 (4), 870–895.
Tybout, James and M. Daniel Westbrook, “Trade liberalization and the dimensions of efficiency
change in Mexican manufacturing industries,” Journal of International Economics, 1995, 39,
53–78.

26

Figure 1: Trade Reforms
Change in Tariffs versus Pre−Reform Tariffs

Final Goods Tariffs (Ad Valorem)
0
50
100
150
200

Final Goods Tariff Rates
Change in Final Goods Tariff, 1985−1997
−200
−150
−100
−50
0

04

03

20

02

20

00

01

20

20

99

20

97

98

19

19

96

19

94

95

19

19

93

19

91

92

19

19

90

19

88

89

19

19

87

19

86

19

19

19

85

1985−2004

year
5th Percentile
50th Percentile
95th Percentile

25th Percentile
75th Percentile

0

(a) Final Goods Tariffs

50

100
1985 Final Goods Tariff

150

200

(b) Change in Tariffs vs. Pre-Reform Tariffs, 19851997
Change in Final Goods versus Input Tariffs

1985−2004

1985−2004

Change in Final Goods Tariff, 1985−2004
−200
−150
−100
−50
0

Change in Final Goods Tariff, 1985−2004
−200
0

Change in Tariffs versus Pre−Reform Tariffs

0

50

100
1985 Final Goods Tariff

150

200

−60

(c) Change in Tariffs vs. Pre-Reform Tariffs, 19852004

−40
−20
Change in Input Tariff, 1985−2004

0

(d) Changes in Final Goods versus Input Tariffs, 19852004

Panel (a) shows the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 95th percentiles of final goods tariffs by 3-digit
National Industrial Classification (NIC) code in each year. Panels (b) and (c) show the relationship
between 1985 final goods tariffs and the changes in final goods tariffs through 1997 and 2004,
respectively. Panel (d) shows the relationship between the changes in final goods and input tariffs
between 1985 and 2004. Source: Authors’ calculations based on TRAINS and various publications
of the Government of India.

27

Table 1: Trade, FDI, and Licensing Reforms
Year Final Goods Tariffs
1985
0.89
1986
0.96
1987
0.95
1988
0.95
1989
0.96
1990
0.96
1991
0.96
1992
0.64
1993
0.64
1994
0.64
1995
0.53
1996
0.42
1997
0.34
1998
0.35
1999
0.36
2000
0.35
2001
0.34
2002
0.31
2003
0.31
2004
0.31

Input Tariffs
0.58
0.61
0.59
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.40
0.39
0.37
0.30
0.23
0.18
0.19
0.20
0.21
0.21
0.19
0.19
0.19

FDI Reform
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.36
0.36
0.36
0.36
0.36
0.36
0.43
0.43
0.43
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93

Delicensing
0.34
0.35
0.35
0.35
0.36
0.36
0.84
0.84
0.85
0.85
0.85
0.85
0.89
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.93

Mean values of policy variables from 1985 to 2004. Final goods and input tariffs variables are
fractions, with 1 representing an ad valorem tariff of 100%; FDI Reform is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if any products within the industry are liberalized, 0 if not; and Delicensing is a dummy
variable equal to 1 if any products within the industry are delicensed, 0 if not. Source: Authors’
calculations based on various publications of the Government of India, as well as the TRAINS
database.

28

Table 2: Summary Statistics for the Firm-Level Data

Firm-years
Firms per year, mean
Census firm-years
Census firms per year, mean
Unique firm series
Output, mean (million Rs.)
Output, median (million Rs.)
Capital, mean (million Rs.)
Capital, median (million Rs.)
Material Inputs, mean (million Rs.)
Material Inputs, median (million Rs.)
Labor, mean (no. employees)
Labor, median (no. employees)

Estimated
population

Sampled
firms

Panel

1,422,398
83,670
275,552
16,209

587,303
34,547
275,552
16,209

415,701
24,453
250,186
14,717
138,278

25.6
2.6
7.0
0.4
16.6
1.9
77
21

48.1
3.5
13.1
0.5
30.9
2.6
140
31

64.2
5.3
17.5
0.8
41.1
3.8
181
44

In panel, as fraction of total in sampled population:
Output
Capital
Labor
Firm-years >100 employees
Firm-years >200 employees
Firm-years
Census firm-years

0.94
0.95
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.71
0.91

Summary statistics for the estimated population (using sampling weights), for the sampled population (not using sampling weights), and for firms that appear for two or more years in the panel.
Only open firms with positive values of key variables are included. “Firm-years” indicates the total number of observations, while “Census firm-years” indicates the number of observations in the
census sector. Mean and median values are averages across all years used in the analysis (19851994 and 1998-2004). Output, material inputs and capital have been deflated to 1985 values and
are expressed in millions of rupees. Fractions of output, capital, etc. that appear in panel are given
in relation to the sampled (rather than the estimated) population.

29

Figure 2: All-India Total Factor Productivity

03
04
20

20

01
02
20

20

99
00
20

19

97
98
19

19

95
96
19

19

93
94
19

19

91
92
19

19

89
90
19

19

87
88
19

19

19

19

85
86

−.1

0

TFP

.1

.2

All−India Total Factor Productivity

Year
Aggregate
Reallocation

Average

Total factor productivity (TFP) decompositions for the population of firms, conducted at the all-India level. “Aggregate” indicates market-share weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted mean productivity, and
“Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity.

Table 3: Aggregate Total Factor Productivity

1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

Aggregate
0.000
0.001
0.023
0.030
0.017
0.014
0.033
0.042
0.094
0.061
0.161
0.137
0.160
0.176
0.176
0.167
0.190

Average
0.000
0.026
0.027
0.074
0.075
0.081
0.094
0.057
0.070
0.074
0.124
0.131
0.127
0.137
0.158
0.155
0.171

Reallocation
0.000
-0.025
-0.004
-0.044
-0.058
-0.066
-0.061
-0.015
0.024
-0.013
0.036
0.007
0.033
0.039
0.018
0.012
0.019

Total factor productivity (TFP) decompositions for the population of firms, conducted at the all-India level. “Aggregate” indicates market-share weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted mean productivity, and
“Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity.

30

Figure 3: State-Industry Total Factor Productivity

03
04
20

20

01
02
20

20

99
00
20

19

97
98
19

19

95
96
19

19

93
94
19

19

91
92
19

19

89
90
19

19

87
88
19

19

19

19

85
86

−.1

0

TFP

.1

.2

State−Industry Total Factor Productivity

Year
Aggregate
Reallocation

Average

Total factor productivity (TFP) decompositions for the population of firms, conducted at the state-industry level.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted mean productivity,
and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity.

Table 4: State-Industry Total Factor Productivity

1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

Aggregate
0.000
-0.005
0.015
0.019
0.010
0.008
0.018
0.019
0.065
0.041
0.076
0.071
0.093
0.104
0.107
0.104
0.117

Average
0.000
0.027
0.027
0.066
0.079
0.087
0.096
0.064
0.074
0.079
0.133
0.144
0.136
0.144
0.165
0.160
0.175

Reallocation
0.000
-0.033
-0.012
-0.048
-0.069
-0.079
-0.078
-0.045
-0.008
-0.039
-0.057
-0.073
-0.044
-0.039
-0.058
-0.057
-0.058

Total factor productivity (TFP) decompositions for the population of firms, conducted at the state-industry level.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted mean productivity,
and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity.

31

Table 5: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Aggregate
(1)
-.055

Average
(2)
-.044

Reallocation
(3)
-.011

(.026)∗∗

(.030)

(.015)

-.560

-.556

-.005

(.104)∗∗∗

(.115)∗∗∗

(.061)

.024

.049

-.025

(.013)∗

(.014)∗∗∗

(.010)∗∗∗

-.007

.004

-.011

(.017)

(.017)

(.011)

Obs.
17074
17074
17074
2
R
.086
.083
.014
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted
mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year
dummies. Each observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across
all years, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level.

Table 6: Productivity Increases Implied by Policy Changes

Aggregate
Within
Between

Final Goods Tariffs
3.2%
2.6%
0.6%

Input Tariffs
21.8%
21.7%
0.2%

FDI Liberalization
2.2%
4.6%
-2.3%

Delicensing
-0.4%
0.2%
-0.6%

Implied increases in aggregate, average, and reallocation productivity. Results are based on regression coefficients and average policy changes. Bold font indicates that the underlying regression
results are statistically significant at the 10% level.

32

Table 7: Firm-Level Productivity

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Population
(1)
-.034

Population
(2)
-.035

Panel
(3)
-.041

(.020)∗

(.019)∗

(.008)∗∗∗

-.563

-.538

-.169

(.088)∗∗∗

(.086)∗∗∗

(.035)∗∗∗

.053

.056

.031

(.013)∗∗∗

(.011)∗∗∗

(.004)∗∗∗

-.006

-.005

-.002

(.013)

(.013)

(.005)

Obs.
528127
385666
385666
R2
.054
.058
.002
Each observation is a firm. Dependent variable is total factory productivity (TFP). Column (1)
includes all firms that were part of the state-industry level analysis; Columns (2) and (3) include
only firms that appear in the panel for at least two years. Columns (1) and (2) include industry and
time dummies, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. Column (3) includes
year dummies and firm fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

33

34

.003
(.032)

(.033)

(.020)

.012

.014

(.019)

(.001)

.020

-.0008

(.001)

(.0007)

.002

-.00009

-.001

(.032)

(.020)

.002

(.017)∗∗∗

.045

(.121)∗∗∗

-.526

(.034)

Average
(4)
-.049

(.0005)∗

-.019

(.034)

(.019)

-.015

-.012

(.018)

(.001)

-.028

.0003

(.001)

(.0006)

-.0006

.0003

(.019)

.010

(.0005)

(.020)

(.015)∗∗∗

.054

(.122)∗∗∗

-.550

(.039)∗

.0004

-.010

(.019)

(.015)

-.0008

.019

.035
(.014)∗∗

-.570
(.112)∗∗∗

-.500
(.108)∗∗∗

(.031)

(.029)∗∗∗

Average
(3)
-.065

(.022)

.004

(.015)

-.016

(.0007)

-.001

(.0003)

.0001

(.013)

-.011

(.011)∗

-.019

(.065)

.050

(.022)

Reallocation
(5)
-.013

(.022)

.008

(.017)

.006

(.0008)∗∗∗

.002

(.0004)∗∗

-.0009

(.012)

-.012

(.011)∗∗

-.026

(.065)

-.044

(.016)

Reallocation
(6)
.013

Obs.
14962
14962
14962
14962
14962
14962
2
R
.079
.079
.082
.081
.016
.018
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column. “Aggregate” indicates market-shareweighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between
market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year dummies. Each
observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across all years, and standard errors are clustered at the
state-industry level. “Pro-employer” and “pro-worker” are dummies based on Besley and Burgess (2004).

Pro-Employer X Delicensed

Pro-Employer X FDI Reform

Pro-Employer X Input Tariff

Pro-Employer X Final Goods Tariff

Pro-Worker X Delicensed

Pro-Worker X FDI Reform

Pro-Worker X Input Tariff

Pro-Worker X Final Goods Tariff

Delicensed

FDI Reform

Input Tariff

Final Goods Tariff

Aggregate
(2)
-.035

Aggregate
(1)
-.078

Table 8: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: Pro-Worker versus Pro-Employer States

35

-.040
(.031)

(.031)

(.023)

-.024

-.008

(.019)

(.001)

-.012

-.0009

(.001)

(.0007)

.0001

.0007

(.0005)

(.032)

.0001

-.006

(.031)

(.022)

.003

(.015)

-.003

.017

-.044
(.020)∗∗

(.0007)

.0004

(.0003)

-.0003

(.017)

-.009

(.011)∗∗

-.027

(.090)

-.073

(.020)

Reallocation
(5)
.013

(.019)

(.001)

(.022)

.032

(.021)∗∗

.046

(.146)∗∗∗

-.483

(.048)∗

Average
(4)
-.088

-.028

-.0009

(.001)

(.0006)

-.0005

.0006

(.024)

.011

(.0005)

(.021)

(.022)

(.019)∗∗∗

.070

(.153)∗∗∗

-.482

(.038)∗∗

.0003

.015

.002

.032
(.018)∗

.043
(.018)∗∗

-.590
(.139)∗∗∗

-.555
(.138)∗∗∗

(.037)

(.038)∗∗

Average
(3)
-.087

(.022)

.016

(.016)

-.004

(.0007)

.001

(.0004)

-.0006

(.017)

-.018

(.013)

-.014

(.080)

-.108

(.027)

Reallocation
(6)
.027

Obs.
11993
11993
11993
11993
11993
11993
2
R
.087
.087
.087
.086
.015
.015
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column. “Aggregate” indicates market-shareweighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between
market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year dummies. Each
observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across all years, and standard errors are clustered at the stateindustry level. “Ease of Layoff” (“Ease of Closure”) is a dummy variable equal to one if the state is above the median in granting
requests by large firms to lay off workers (close).

Ease of Closure X Delicensed

Ease of Closure X FDI Reform

Ease of Closure X Input Tariff

Ease of Closure X Final Goods Tariff

Ease of Layoff X Delicensed

Ease of Layoff X FDI Reform

Ease of Layoff X Input Tariff

Ease of Layoff X Final Goods Tariff

Delicensed

FDI Reform

Input Tariff

Final Goods Tariff

Aggregate
(2)
-.062

Aggregate
(1)
-.074

Table 9: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: Ease of Laying Off Workers and Closing

36

.012

Delicensed

(.0005)∗

.014
(.030)

-.038

.033
(.031)

Exporting industry X FDI Reform

Exporting industry X Delicensed

-.046

(.017)∗∗∗

.008

(.019)

.019

(.014)

Obs.
17074
17074
17074
17074
17074
17074
17074
17074
17074
R2
.087
.098
.091
.084
.09
.086
.015
.015
.015
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column. “Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are
fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year dummies. Each observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across
all years, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. “Port in state” is a dummy variable equal to one if the state-industry group is located in a state
with a port, zero otherwise. “Importing” (“Exporting”) is a dummy variable equal to one if the industry’s share of imports (exports) in total output is greater than
the median, zero otherwise.

(.016)∗∗

.0004

(.0003)

.0001

(.014)

-.020

-.027

(.012)∗∗

(.0007)

(.025)

-.037

(.016)

-.008

-.002

(.0006)∗∗

.0007

(.0003)∗∗

(.015)

-.003

-.022

(.013)∗

(.069)

-.009

(.022)

Reallocation
(9)
-.021

.001

(.019)

.029

(.014)

-.005

.001

(.0006)∗

(.0003)

-.0005

-.031

(.015)∗∗

-.021

(.012)∗

.079
(.066)

(.068)

(.027)

Reallocation
(8)
-.044

-.078

(.026)

Reallocation
(7)
.025

(.001)

.002

(.0009)∗∗

Exporting industry X Input Tariff

(.0006)∗

-.001

-.0009

(.040)∗∗∗

-.140

(.024)

-.002

.075

(.018)∗∗∗

-.586

(.106)∗∗∗

(.028)

Avg
(6)
.004

Exporting industry X Final Goods Tariff

(.044)∗∗∗

-.177

(.017)

Importing industry X Delicensed

.001
(.020)

-.007

(.001)

Importing industry X FDI Reform

.00004

(.0005)

(.0005)
(.0009)∗

-.0009

-.0002

-.058

.054

(.020)∗∗∗

.050

(.019)∗∗∗

-.567

(.111)∗∗∗

(.032)

Avg
(5)
.004

-.001

(.028)

(.027)∗∗

(.020)

-.029

-.003

(.016)

(.001)

-.008

-.0006

.0004
(.0009)

.0003

.042

(.021)∗∗
(.0006)

(.025)

-.022

.051

(.019)∗∗∗

-.506

(.121)∗∗∗

(.045)

Avg
(4)
-.068

(.0005)

.051

(.018)∗∗∗

.048

(.018)∗∗∗

-.595

(.094)∗∗∗

(.025)

Aggregate
(3)
-.016

-.0002

(.020)

.028

(.017)∗

-.488

(.108)∗∗∗

(.019)∗∗

Aggregate
(2)
-.039

Importing industry X Input Tariff

Importing industry X Final Goods Tariff

Port in state X Delicensed

Port in state X FDI Reform

Port in state X Input Tariff

Port in state X Final Goods Tariff

.030

FDI Reform
(.016)∗

-.583

(.113)∗∗∗

(.035)

Input Tariff

Final Goods Tariff

Aggregate
(1)
-.043

Table 10: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: Trade Exposure

Table A.1: Changes in Reforms and Pre-Reform Trends in Industry Characteristics

∆ log(wage)
∆ Production Share
∆ log(K/L Ratio)
∆ log(Employment)
∆ log(Firm Size)
∆ log(Output)
∆ TFP (Total)
Observations

∆Final Goods Tariffs ∆Input Tariffs
0.024
-0.046

∆Delicensing ∆FDI Reform
0.024
-0.017

(0.19)

(0.051)

(0.13)

(0.26)

-0.092

-0.15

0.28

0.89

(0.92)

(0.25)

(0.63)

(1.27)

-0.12

0.0077

0.052

0.051

(0.080)

(0.022)

(0.055)

(0.11)

-0.051

-0.025

-0.036

-0.049

(0.060)

(0.016)

(0.041)

(0.083)

-0.10

-0.033

0.044

-0.0098

(0.12)

(0.032)

(0.080)

(0.16)

-0.038

-0.0086

0.024

-0.00079

(0.040)

(0.011)

(0.028)

(0.055)

0.038

-0.0066

0.062

0.014

(0.072)

(0.020)

(0.047)

(0.099)

137

137

137

137

Results are coefficients from regressions of the change in reforms (final goods tariffs, input tariffs,
delicensing, FDI reform) from 1990 to 2004 on changes in industry characteristics from 1985 to
1989. Each value represents a result from a separate regression.

37

Table B.1: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: Winsorized Productivity

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Aggregate
(1)
-.053

Average
(2)
-.047

Reallocation
(3)
-.007

(.025)∗∗

(.028)

(.013)

-.549

-.546

-.003

(.099)∗∗∗

(.109)∗∗∗

(.053)

.030

.049

-.019

(.011)∗∗∗

(.013)∗∗∗

(.008)∗∗

-.008

.002

-.010

(.016)

(.016)

(.009)

Obs.
17074
17074
17074
2
R
.119
.11
.016
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted
mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year
dummies. Each observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across
all years, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. The top and bottom 1% of
TFP have been winsorized.
Table B.2: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: Cost Shares Productivity

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Aggregate
(1)
-.055

Average
(2)
-.045

Reallocation
(3)
-.010

(.025)∗∗

(.028)

(.016)

-.553

-.542

-.011

(.099)∗∗∗

(.107)∗∗∗

(.059)

-.0004

.023

-.023

(.010)

(.010)∗∗

(.008)∗∗∗

-.002

.003

-.004

(.015)

(.016)

(.011)

Obs.
17074
17074
17074
2
R
.192
.158
.013
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted
mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year
dummies. Each observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across
all years, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. TFP is estimated using a
chain-linked index number method, where input shares are calculated as the share of input cost in
total cost.

38

Table B.3: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: OLS Productivity

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Aggregate
(1)
-.063

Average
(2)
-.058

Reallocation
(3)
-.006

(.024)∗∗∗

(.026)∗∗

(.012)

-.473

-.413

-.060

(.095)∗∗∗

(.102)∗∗∗

(.053)

-.0006

.011

-.012

(.010)

(.009)

(.007)

-.009

.011

-.020

(.014)

(.015)

(.010)∗∗

Obs.
17074
17074
17074
R2
.133
.166
.021
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted
mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year
dummies. Each observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across
all years, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. TFP is estimated using OLS.

Table B.4: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: Alternative Measure of Capital

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Aggregate
(1)
-.049

Average
(2)
-.039

Reallocation
(3)
-.011

(.025)∗

(.030)

(.015)

-.498

-.494

-.005

(.104)∗∗∗

(.115)∗∗∗

(.061)

.016

.040

-.025

(.013)

(.013)∗∗∗

(.010)∗∗∗

-.006

.005

-.011

(.016)

(.016)

(.011)

Obs.
17074
17074
17074
R2
.092
.086
.014
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted
mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year
dummies. Each observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across all
years, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. An alternative method of deflating capital, based on the perpetual inventory method of Harrison (1994), as modified by Sivadasan
(2009), is used.

39

Table B.5: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: 1986- 1998

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Aggregate
(1)
-.040

Average
(2)
-.041

Reallocation
(3)
.0009

(.022)∗

(.023)∗

(.015)

-.250

-.268

.018

(.108)∗∗

(.104)∗∗∗

(.074)

.023

.034

-.010

(.014)∗

(.011)∗∗∗

(.012)

-.0006

-.003

.002

(.014)

(.011)

(.012)

Obs.
10666
10666
10666
2
R
.035
.045
.02
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted
mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year
dummies. Each observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across all
years, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. Only firm-level data from 1986
to 1998 (policy variables from 1985 to 1997) are included.
Table B.6: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: Alternative Measure of Input Tariffs

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Aggregate
(1)
.010

Average
(2)
.035

Reallocation
(3)
-.025

(.016)

(.024)

(.019)

-.902

-.991

.089

(.110)∗∗∗

(.108)∗∗∗

(.061)

.020

.043

-.024

(.013)

(.014)∗∗∗

(.009)∗∗

-.015

-.003

-.012

(.016)

(.015)

(.011)

Obs.
17074
17074
17074
2
R
.105
.104
.014
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted
mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year
dummies. Each observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across
all years, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. Input tariffs are constructed
based on the manufacturing sector only.
40

Table B.7: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: Removing Outlying Tariff Changes

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Aggregate
(1)
-.057

Average
(2)
-.046

Reallocation
(3)
-.011

(.026)∗∗

(.030)

(.015)

-.552

-.549

-.003

(.105)∗∗∗

(.115)∗∗∗

(.061)

.023

.047

-.025

(.014)∗

(.014)∗∗∗

(.010)∗∗

-.008

.003

-.011

(.017)

(.017)

(.011)

Obs.
16898
16898
16898
R2
.087
.083
.014
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted
mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year
dummies. Each observation is weighted by the total number of firms in the state-industry across
all years, and standard errors are clustered at the state-industry level. The two industries that do
not fit the overall pattern shown in Figure 1 are excluded.

Table B.8: Productivity Decompositions and Policy Changes: Without State-Industry Weights

Final Goods Tariff
Input Tariff
FDI Reform
Delicensed

Aggregate
(1)
-.059

Average
(2)
-.050

Reallocation
(3)
-.009

(.018)∗∗∗

(.020)∗∗

(.015)

-.712

-.673

-.039

(.089)∗∗∗

(.098)∗∗∗

(.064)

.050

.069

-.020

(.011)∗∗∗

(.012)∗∗∗

(.009)∗∗

-.026

-.023

-.003

(.012)∗∗

(.013)∗

(.010)

Obs.
17074
17074
17074
R2
.056
.048
.003
Each observation is a state-industry. Dependent variable names are given at the top of each column.
“Aggregate” indicates market-share-weighted mean productivity, “Average” indicates unweighted
mean productivity, and “Reallocation” indicates the covariance between market share and productivity. All specifications are fixed-effects analyses at the state-industry level, and include year
dummies. Each observation is given equal weight, and standard errors are clustered at the stateindustry level.

41

