NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IF DRUG TREATMENT WORKS SO WELL, WHY ARE SO MANY DRUG USERS
IN PRISON?
Harold Pollack
Peter Reuter
Eric L. Sevigny
Working Paper 16731
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16731

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

We thank Holly Nguyen for capable research assistance. We thank Jonathan Caulkins, Steven Raphael,
and the conference organizers for excellent comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Harold Pollack, Peter Reuter, and Eric L. Sevigny. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

If Drug Treatment Works So Well, Why Are So Many Drug Users in Prison?
Harold Pollack, Peter Reuter, and Eric L. Sevigny
NBER Working Paper No. 16731
January 2011
JEL No. G18
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the effectiveness of drug courts to reduce the size of the incarcerated drug-offending
population using data from the Survey of Inmates in State Correctional Facilities and the Survey of
Inmates in Local Jails. We find that very few of those entering state prison in 2004 or jail in 2002 would
have been eligible for drug diversion through state drug courts. The policy implication is that drug
courts and other diversion programs require substantial redesign if they are to contribute to a reduction
in the incarcerated population.

Harold Pollack
University of Chicago
haroldp@uchicago.edu
Peter Reuter
University of Maryland
preuter@umd.edu

Eric L. Sevigny
1305 Greene St.
Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice
University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC 29208
sevigny@mailbox.sc.edu

Drug use, and drug sales, play central roles in the history of American crime. One cannot
discuss crime in America in the 1970s without reference to the heroin epidemic nor in the 1980s
and early 1990s without reference to powder and crack cocaine. The highly punitive regime in
place now for drug offenders is largely a response to the association of these epidemics with
crime waves.
Yet these drug epidemics unfolded a long time ago, with apparently low rates of initiation
into drug dependence in recent years. From the vantage point of 2011, one might think that that
these drugs no longer matter much, and that dependent drug use plays a smaller role in crime and
criminal justice policy than it did ten or twenty years ago. In fact, however, data from many
sources (some described below) indicate that those arrested or incarcerated within the American
criminal justice system remain heavily involved in the consumption of illicit drugs.
There is abundant evidence that inducing criminal offenders to halt or reduce their
substance use would reduce crime. Policymakers, researchers, and advocates have long argued
that broader provision of substance abuse treatment could reduce the number of Americans
behind bars.
In fact, however, a major component of the relentless growth in the U.S. incarcerated
population over the last 35 years has been the rising number of people imprisoned for drug
offenses, (Blumstein et al. 1999) a figure that rose from 42,000 in 1980 to 481,000 in 2002
(Caulkins and Chandler 2006). Most of this incarceration burden falls on people who were
involved in supplying drugs, albeit sometimes in minor roles (Sevigny and Caulkins 2004). In
addition, a large number of those incarcerated for both drug and nondrug offenses appear to
satisfy screening criteria for drug use disorders. Many are dependent on cocaine, heroin, or

methamphetamine; there is reasonable evidence that their drug use has a causal role in their
criminality (MacCoun et al. 2003).
Substance abuse treatment provides a highly imperfect response to these problems.
During any given treatment episode, the typical client is likely to continue some level of
substance use. Relapse is the norm rather than the exception as a treatment outcome. Even so, at
the individual level, there is compelling evidence that treatment markedly reduces both drug use
and related criminal offending. Imperfect treatment works. This is just as well, since it describes
the treatment we have.
An array of programs have developed over the last twenty years based on this evidence
base, and more broadly on the well-documented premise that reducing drug use leads to large
reductions in the individual offender’s crime rate. The list of programs includes drug courts,
other forms of diversion from the criminal justice system into treatment (e.g., Prop 36 in
California), intensive supervision probation, and in-prison treatment. All these aim to reduce the
extent of criminality among those who have already developed drug abuse or dependency by
encouraging/coercing offenders into treatment. A substantial research literature shows that
treatment does reduce both drug use and associated criminal activity. In addition to such
programs, there is growing recent interest in “coerced abstinence” or “mandated desistance”
interventions, whereby drug-involved offenders under criminal justice supervision in
noncustodial settings (parole, probation, and pre-trial supervision) are subject to short,
immediate, and graduated penalties for detected drug use (Kleiman 2009).
Despite this array of efforts, there has been no decline in the incarceration of drug users
for either drug offenses or for other criminal activities. The number incarcerated for drug
offenses has increased every year since 1980 (Caulkins and Chandler 2006). We show later in

this paper that the number of state prisoners with drug problems also increased substantially
from 1986 to 2004, extending analyses of CASA (2002) and Mumola and Karberg (2006),
(Mumola and Karberg 2006; Belenko et al. 2002). We find strikingly similar patterns within the
increasingly important population incarcerated in local jails.
Both of these findings are rather surprising, since the number of individuals with
expensive illegal drug habits who are not incarcerated was estimated to have declined in the
period 1988-2000, the most recent year for which a published estimate is available, (Office of
National Drug Control Policy 2001) and there are some indicators that the decline may have
continued. This would suggest that there are fewer sellers as well as fewer users to lock up.
Why has the U.S. achieved such limited success in getting criminal offenders to curtail
their drug use? Put slightly differently, why is it so difficult to replicate at the population level
the substantial reductions in drug use and criminal offending that treatment appears capable of
achieving for individual offenders. Why aren't more offenders in treatment? And why have
diversion programs such as California's Proposition 36 and drug courts proved relatively
disappointing in achieving their stated goals?
We hypothesize that there are two main reasons for the continued large numbers of drug
users flowing into, and remaining within, the correctional system:
First, eligibility criteria for diversion programs, particularly for drug courts, are
restrictive. Although the various programs are effective and even cost-effective in serving the
specific clients they recruit, they make only a small contribution at the population level. The
diverted offenders are at low risk of going to prison or even jail (following sentencing, as
opposed to pre-trial) in the absence of the drug court intervention. Given limited capacity and the

relatively low-risk populations actually served, the currently-deployed model of drug courts is
unlikely to notably reduce prison populations.
A second, related pattern also hinders the effectiveness of these interventions. There is a
systematic mismatch between sentencing practices and actual criminal careers among druginvolved offenders. As individual criminally-active drug users get older, the system treats them
increasingly harshly for each successive offense. They have longer criminal histories, longer
records of unsuccessful treatment, and worse employment histories. Thus, not only are they less
eligible for diversion programs, these offenders also receive longer sentences, increasing the
share of the incarcerated population with drug problems.
The empirical contribution of this paper primarily concerns the first of these conjectures.
In particular, we examine what share of those currently incarcerated would have been eligible for
drug courts with the least restrictive entry criteria. We have not been able to find data that allows
testing of the effect of the potentially lengthening criminal careers of dependent drug users.
To test the hypothesis about the ineffectiveness of drug courts to reduce the size of the
incarcerated drug-offending population, we make use of the Survey of Inmates in State
Correctional Facilities (SISCF) and the Survey of Inmates in Local Jails (SILJ), two Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS) occasional surveys. Both provide self-reports on, inter alia, criminal
activity and substance use from nationally representative samples of inmates; the Prison survey
has been conducted six times between 1974 and 2004 (with federal inmates surveyed only in the
1997 and 2004 studies), while the Jail survey has been conducted six times between 1972 and
2002. We find that, indeed, very few of those entering state prison in 2004 or jail in 2002 would
have been eligible for diversion through state courts. That this is true for local jails is much more

surprising than the prison finding. This pattern provides a reminder that, even late in the
incarceration boom, it is not so easy to get incarcerated, conditional on arrest.
There are two reasons for the findings about drug courts. First, many entering prison and
jail (whether drug users or not) were on supervised release (parole or probation) at the time of
their latest arrest, which automatically made them ineligible for most drug court interventions.
Second, and more interestingly, most of those who were arrested do novo and who had drug use
patterns making them potential clients for drug court, had long, relatively serious criminal
records that would have made them ineligible under current conditions. Drug use itself may lead
to more intense or longer criminal careers. Moreover, many of those dependent on expensive
drugs (cocaine, crack, heroin and methamphetamine) became drug users a long time ago. These
populations are aging, which is not true of nondrug-using criminal offenders. In effect, what we
are seeing is two distinct trends in the incarcerated population, separated by drug use.
We also present three other policy-relevant descriptive findings:
First, it is useful to compare the number of dependent drug users entering treatment with
the number entering prison. Both in 1986 and 2004, these figures are approximately comparable;
the U.S. is locking up about as many drug addicts as it is treating, a troubling observation about
the nation’s drug policies.
Second there are indications that drug dependence is less prevalent among younger
offenders than in cohorts that are twenty years older. Absent a new drug epidemic or a newly
invigorated drug war, there is a predictable end in sight to the growth of drug-related prisoners.
Third, for drug using prisoners, the probability of a violent offense declines sharply with
age after 35.

This last observation leads us to our principal policy suggestion, which needs further
investigation. Diversion programs of all kinds require substantial redesign if they are to
contribute to a reduction in the incarcerated population. Experienced drug users, who account for
an increasing share of drug-related crime, are not attractive (or eligible) candidates for many
current efforts. However if one is willing to take a very long-term social welfare perspective, it
may be worth introducing courts specifically designed for the long-term user. Our finding that
aging drug users commit relatively few violent crimes is helpful here. The risks associated with
treatment-oriented community supervision of older offenders are therefore less than one likely
encounters in younger drug-using cohorts.
The paper begins with three review sections. Section 1 describes the changing patterns of
drug misuse in the U.S. over the last forty years, which is necessary to understand the challenge
now facing the criminal justice system. Section 2 follows with a review of what is known about
the effectiveness of drug treatment in reducing crime at the individual level. Section 3 briefly
discusses interventions aimed at diverting drug-involved offenders from incarceration, such as
drug courts, Prop 36 (the largest diversion program in operation, even though it is restricted to
California alone), and coerced abstinence/mandated desistence in Hawaii. Section 4 presents our
empirical analysis of the surveys of jail and state prison inmates, showing the limited potential
impact of drug courts under current eligibility rules. Section 5 presents our conclusions.

1. Background: The Changing Demography of Drug Misuse
The dynamics of drug-related incarceration in the U.S. should be examined in light of
broader societal trends in drug use and dependence over the last forty years. The characteristics

of the drug using population, particularly those dependent on expensive drugs, has changed in
ways that complicate the task of keeping criminally active drug users out of prison.

Drug Epidemics
The nation has experienced four major drug-specific epidemics in that period; heroin (ca.
1968-73), cocaine powder (ca. 1975-1985), crack cocaine (ca. 1982-1988), and
methamphetamine (ca. 1990-2000). In an epidemic process, rates of initiation rise sharply as new
and socially contagious users of a drug initiate friends and peers, a model first well developed by
Hunt and Chambers (1976).
In the case of heroin, there is much evidence of a sudden elevation of initiation rates
during the late 1960s and early 1970s, followed by a rapid incidence decline over the 1970s and
1980s (Kozel and Adams 1986; Rocheleau and Boyum 1994). A study of an early 1990s sample
of street heroin users also found evidence of sharply peaked initiation rates in the late 1960s and
early 1970s. For cocaine powder the rise was similarly rapid but decline was not so pronounced
as with heroin (Everingham 1994). For crack cocaine the epidemic was still later, starting
between about 1982 and 1986, depending on the city (Cork 1999). Caulkins et al. (2004)
reported estimates of annual cocaine initiation using the NHSDA and a variety of methods; all
show a peak in 1980 followed by a decline of two thirds in the next five years.
A new class of epidemiologic models has been developed by Caulkins and collaborators,
(Caulkins et al. 2004; Caulkins 2007) which use diverse data to document the long trajectory of
drug epidemics. After the peak, the initiation rate does not return to its original zero level but
falls to a rate well below the peak. Under reasonable assumptions, the result is a flow of new
users who do not fully replace those lost through desistance, death, or incarceration. Thus, the

number of active users declines gradually over time. Moreover, the drug-using population ages
with corresponding changes in the health, employment, and crime consequences of substance
use.
Some evidence for this characterization can be seen in the changing characteristics of
drug users in TEDS (the Treatment Episode Data System) which includes data on admissions to
treatment programs that receive federal funds. We do not report changes in the National
Household Survey on Drug Abuse/National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NHSDA/NSDUH)
because these include so few dependent users.1
For TEDS we are able to compare the admission cohort of 1992 with that of 2006; these
two years are the earliest and latest for which detailed data are available. By 1992 all but the
methamphetamine epidemics had run their course but the cocaine and crack epidemics were
relatively recent, so many of the users showing up for treatment were still young adults. Figure 1,
computed using 1992 and 2006 TEDS data, displays changes in the age distribution of adult
clients admitted into substance abuse treatment who reported cocaine-related disorders.
Insert Figure 1 here
In the 1992 data, 40% of clients were under the age of 30. By 2006, that figure had
dropped to 26%. The fraction of clients over the age of 40 rose from 15% to 47% over the same
period. This was not the consequence of an epidemic of new use among older individuals; rather
it represented the aging of those who were caught in the earlier epidemics.
We observed a more complex pattern within the population of admitted heroin users. As
shown in Figure 2, the over-45 population displayed a similar pattern to that found in the
population of cocaine users. Yet there was also a substantial population of admitted heroin users
below the age of 30.

Insert Figure 2 here
The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) shows similar patterns of the aging of
cocaine and heroin users appearing in emergency departments or as overdoses examined by
medical examiners, through 2002.
The result of this epidemiology is that the demography of drug misuse changed
substantially between the early 1990s and the 2000s. The average age of drug users increased
markedly, with a more diverse set of primary drugs of abuse.
These data suggest that current service utilization reflects the long-term reverberation of
specific epidemics of cocaine and heroin use in the United States. They also matter for the
criminal justice system.
The only published estimates, distributed by the Office of National Drug Control Policy
in 2001, of the numbers of dependent cocaine and heroin users cover the period 1988-2000
(Office of National Drug Control Policy 2001). Figure 3 presents these figures, which rely
heavily on ADAM, showing a substantial decline, about one-third for each drug, over these 12
years. Both the data and the estimation methodology are weak, as indicated by the frequent
adjustment in single year estimates in successive series published by the same research group
over the period 1995-2000. For example, ONDCP’s immediate preceding version of the
estimates had shown an increase in heroin use in the early 1990s, followed by a rapid decline
(Office of National Drug Control Policy 2000).
Insert Figure 3 here
Some of the decline in these estimates may represent the consequence of increased
incarceration, since those in prison are not eligible for the ADAM sampling frame. Assume for
the purposes of a rough calculation that the share of state prison inmates who would be classified

as cocaine- or heroin-dependent prior to entering prison rose from 40% of the 557,000 in 1988 to
50% of the 1,182,000 in 20002. That would have removed roughly 300,000 dependent cocaine
and heroin users from the pool on which these estimates are based. Other trends may also
account for some of the observed decline. For example, almost 200,000 injection drug users have
died of HIV/AIDS.
Although these trends are important for many reasons, they account for less than onethird of the total decline (from 5.2 million in 1988 to 3.3 million in 2000). The best interpretation
of the available data is that the number of individuals dependent on or abusing expensive drugs
has been declining for a long period for a variety of reasons. The population of such users has
aged, presumably reducing their involvement in violent crime.

2. Drug Treatment
Though the research has been critiqued by the National Research Council, (Manski et al.
2001), a substantial body of evidence indicates that substance abuse treatment is associated with
large reductions in drug use and crime, especially during the period in which the individual drug
user is in treatment. U.S. and British observational cohort studies document the strong
association between treatment receipt and increased employment, improved health outcomes,
and reduced criminal offending.
For example, Godfrey, Stewart, and Gossop (2004) reported two-year outcome data for
549 drug users enrolled in the British National Treatment Outcome Research Study (NTORS)
(Godfrey et al. 2004). Expenditures on substance abuse treatment for these individuals totaled
7.3 million British pounds. Economic valuation of treatment-associated crime reduction totaled
27.4 million pounds for the same group. A 4-5 year follow-up indicated reductions in the

frequency of heroin, street methadone, and benzodiazepines (Gossop et al. 2003). Crack cocaine
and alcohol use were not significantly different after 4-5 years from the corresponding values at
intake. Analyzing the same data, Gossop, Trakada, Stewart, and Witton (2005) found substantial
reductions in acquisitive, drug selling, and violent crimes. Crime reductions were associated with
reduced regular heroin use, simple aging, and living in stable housing.
Similar results were observed with U.S. data collected by the Drug Abuse Treatment
Outcome Study (DATOS). Hubbard et al. (1997) reported that clients able to remain in long-term
residential treatment for at least six months exhibited a 50% reduction in illegal activity and a
10% increase in full-time employment. Koenig et al. (2005) and Ettner et al. (2006) observed
similar patterns among treatment clients in Cuyahoga County, Ohio and California, respectively.
Both of the latter papers reported strongly positive net benefits from treatment, with reductions
in criminal offending accounting for the majority of the observed economic benefit associated
with treatment intervention.
Prendergast and colleagues provide one widely-cited meta-analysis of these effects
(Predergast et al. 2002). These authors examined results from 78 studies completed between
1965 and 1996. Twenty-five of these analyses also examined crime outcomes; 46 featured
randomized study designs. These authors found that treatment was associated with reduced drug
use (effect size = 0.30) and reduced crime (effect size = 0.13).
In examining the impact of treatment on crime, reduced substance use appeared to be the
critical mediating variable, with reduced substance use inducing lower rates of acquisitive crime.
The average age of participating drug users was the only significant predictor of effect size, with
treatment having a larger absolute impact in reducing crime among young adults (who are the
most criminally active) than among older drug users.

Some of the strongest findings for outpatient treatment arise in the arena of methadone
maintenance therapy. For example, Amato et al. (2005) found that methadone maintenance
therapy reduces criminality by as much as 60%. The findings from a long-term cohort study of
heroin users by Hser and colleagues finds similar results for a particularly recalcitrant heroinusing population (Hser et al. 2001).
Retention and treatment outcomes among opiate users appear sensitive to specific quality
measures (D’Aunno and Pollack 2002). For example, methadone maintenance clients were
markedly more likely to remain in treatment (AOR = 1.72) when methadone doses exceeded 60
mg/day (Bao et al. 2009).
Many studies of opiate substitution therapy (OST) indicate a strong negative correlation
between treatment engagement and retention on the one hand and criminal offending on the
other. Campbell et al. (2007) examined arrest rates among Washington State opiate users. These
authors found significantly reduced probability of arrest among treatment participants. Burdon et
al. (2004) found quite similar results among California offenders participating in prison aftercare.
Given these strong relationships, both state and federal prisons sought to increase
treatment provision to drug-involved offenders (Grella et al. 2007; Taxman et al. 2007). Most
such services are low-intensity education and counseling services, which probably have a limited
impact on criminal offending or drug use. More intensive residential modalities have also been
implemented in prison, with greater evidence that treatment participants achieved better
outcomes than comparison group members (Prendergast et al. 2004). However, because
motivated individuals are more likely to enter and remain in treatment, many of the observed
differences between treatment and comparison groups probably reflect favorable selection into
treatment.

Given the possibility—indeed the reality—of strong selection effects, randomized trials
are especially important in evaluating the causal impact of treatment interventions. In one recent
Australian study, Dolan et al. (2005) compared reincarceration, treatment mortality, and hepatitis
C infection rates among opiate-dependent prison inmates randomly assigned to methadone
maintenance and to a control group. Members of the treatment group displayed lower incidence
of hepatitis C. Yet assignment to the treatment group appeared to provide little benefit in terms
of long-term treatment retention.
In several recent papers, Gordon et al. (2008) and Kinlock and colleagues examined drug
and crime outcomes of 211 heroin-dependent Baltimore prisoners who were randomly assigned
to methadone maintenance or a control-group counseling intervention (Gordon et al. 2008;
Kinlock et al. 2007; Kinlock et al. 2008; Kinlock et al. 2009). Offenders offered methadone
maintenance shortly after release were significantly less likely to use heroin/cocaine or engage in
criminal activity compared to those assigned to the control group.
A randomized trial by McMillan et al. (2008) yielded less favorable findings. Offering
opiate-dependent inmates methadone maintenance within the jail setting appeared to confer little
benefit absent an effective post-release intervention.
Outside the arena of opiate substitution therapy, the strongest evaluation results arise in
establishing the benefits of therapeutic communities. For example, McCollister et al. (2005)
conducted a five-year follow-up study examining the Amity in-prison therapeutic community
and an accompanying Vista aftercare program for criminal offenders in southern California
(McCollister et al. 2004).
The average cost of addiction treatment over the baseline and five-year follow-up period
was $7,041 for the intervention group and $1,731 for the control group. However, the treatment

group experienced 81 fewer incarceration days than was observed within the control group. This
13 percent reduction in incarceration more than offset the additional costs of the relatively
intensive intervention.3
Evaluations of outpatient drug-free interventions yield more mixed results. In the case of
cocaine, a meta-analysis of research on interventions aimed at dependent users of a variety of
drugs, few of whom were in methadone maintenance, found that those in treatment were about
20% more likely to have positive outcomes with respect to criminality than those who did not
enter treatment (Prendergast and Burdon 2002). Even though most who enter treatment will
relapse to drug use and/or fail to complete their treatment, it is still true that treatment can make
a large difference in the lifetime drug use and criminality of a dependent user.
These large differences in criminal offending lead to correspondingly large impacts in
cost-benefit analyses of substance abuse treatment. Substance abuse treatment is associated with
many economic benefits. Yet crime reduction is consistently the largest single component of the
economic benefit of treatment (Dismuke et al. 2004; Sindelar et al. 2004; French et al. 2002;
McCollister and French 2003). Indeed the economic benefits of treatment-associated crime
reductions are often larger than all other estimated benefits, combined.
The economic valuation of treatment-related crime reduction frequently exceeds, by
itself, the entire cost of providing substance abuse treatment. In one prominent analysis of
cocaine-dependent clients, Flynn et al. (1999) examined treatment clients’ self-reported crime
before and after treatment, finding that the economic value of an associated reduction in crime
far exceeded the associated treatment costs.
Such findings are doubly striking because most studies in the empirical treatment
literature understate the true social benefits associated with reduced crime. Most studies consider

the tangible costs of crime—its direct costs to victims and to the health care and the criminal
justice systems. The tangible cost approach provides a valuable lower bound to the benefits of
crime reduction. However, such costs are a small fraction of the overall social costs of crime
(Rajkumar and French 1997). Flynn et al. (1999) cite tangible costs of $1,304 per burglary. By
contrast, Cohen et al. (2004) obtain a per burglary cost estimate of $31,000 using contingent
valuation methodologies that capture a broader range of crime consequences and societal
preferences (Cohen et al. 2004).
Basu et al. (2008) perform a (non-experimental) pre-post analysis of U.S. treatment data
from the National Treatment Improvement and Evaluation Study (NTIES) that illustrates the
importance of these valuation measures. Using conservative econometric specifications that were
biased against a finding of treatment effectiveness, these authors show that the monetized value
of treatment-related reductions in armed robbery more than offset the cost of the entire treatment
intervention. This finding is especially striking when one considers that less than 7% of NTIES
respondents reported committing an armed robbery in the year before treatment admission.
Moreover, only 32% of these robbery offenders reported ever being arrested for using a weapon
or force to steal from a victim.
In terms of absolute numbers, substance abuse treatment providers serve a large and
diverse population of substance users. As shown in Table 1, the number of individuals in drug
treatment for cocaine or heroin abuse has risen slightly since 1997; e.g. TEDS data indicate
admissions of 235,000 in 1997 for heroin, compared to 246,000 in 2005. Given that the
estimated size of the population of dependent users has if anything shrunk, this indicates that the
treatment fraction has increased. The figure for methamphetamine admissions almost tripled
during the same period.

Insert Table 1 here

3. Drug Use and Crime
The criminally active population continues to show high rates of drug misuse, another
indication that treatment has, at the population level, failed to reduce the connection between
crime and drug use.
For this population, ADAM provides the major source for insights into the connection
between crime and drug use. ADAM includes data on drug use, both through interview and
urinalysis, from a sample of arrestees in a number of counties around the country. Prior to 1998
we must rely on DUF (the Drug Use Forecasting) system, a statistically more primitive version
of ADAM but one which turns out to provide data of comparable quality. When ADAM was
operating most broadly, from 1998 to 2003, the data were collected in 35 counties. Data were not
collected from 2003 to 2006, and since 2007 have been collected in only 10 counties (Office of
National Drug Control Policy 2009). Thus ADAM provides an incomplete depiction of drug use
among the arrested population nationally, particularly since 2003; city-level comparisons are
more appropriate for comparing trends over time.
The most recent ADAM results (for 2008) show that use of cocaine, heroin, and
methamphetamine continues to be common among arrestees in most cities. The percentage
testing positive for cocaine varied between a high of 44% and a low of 17%. Figures for heroin
were lower, but were still as high as 29% for Chicago, twice as much as the next highest city.
For our purposes the more relevant comparisons are between 1986 and 2004, the era
covered by the two inmate surveys we analyzed. DUF started collecting data in 1987 in just 21
cities (Wish and Gropper 1991). More complete and consistent data are available from

Washington, DC, which has collected urinalysis on all adult arrestees since 1984 and on all
juvenile arrestees since 1988. The adult data (Figure 4) show that the percentage of all arrestees
testing positive for any drug excluding marijuana declined from 73% in 1987 to 49% in 1991,4
with a stable trend over the following 15 years.
Insert Figure 4 here
For juvenile arrestees (Figure 5) what is striking is how few have tested positive for any
drug other than marijuana and PCP since the early 1990s; whereas in 1987 23% tested positive
for cocaine, that figure has hovered around 7% since 1993.
Insert Figure 5 here

Getting Offenders into Treatment
As already noted, the insight that drug treatment could reduce both crime and the
demands on the criminal justice system has animated policy for a long time, not just in the
United States but in other countries. For example, the United Kingdom saw a near doubling of
the population in treatment between 1998 and 2006, largely as a consequence of a large variety
of criminal justice diversion programs (Reuter and Stevens 2007). We identify here just the
major interventions.
Drug courts aim to use the coercive power of the criminal justice system, particularly the
authority of a judge, to persuade drug-involved offenders to cease their drug use rather than face
penalties for violating the terms of their release. Drug court clients are encouraged to seek
treatment, and continued participation in treatment may be a condition for staying out of jail. The
evaluation literature, though not technically strong, has generally found positive effects on
recidivism, the usual outcome measure (Belenko and Peugh 2005; Wilson et al. 2006).

Even though the drug court movement is almost 20 years old and over 2,300 separate
programs have been created, (BJA Drug Court Clearinghouse Project 2009), a 2008 study
estimated that only 55,000 drug involved defendants were processed in such courts in the middle
of this decade; the same study estimated that over one million such defendants entered the
criminal justice system each year (Bhati et al. 2008). Despite the rapid expansion of drug courts,
the number of defendants who pass through such programs remain relatively low.
This small number of enrollees arises from several factors. Many jurisdictions lack
administrative capacity to implement drug courts at-scale. Fifty-two percent of adult drug courts
responding to one survey reported they cannot accept some eligible clients due to capacity
constraints (Bhati et al. 2008). Bhati and colleagues estimate the current number of drug court
"slots" at approximately 55,000. Given this constraint, there are strong administrative and
political incentives for drug courts to cream-skim by serving relatively low-risk populations most
likely to achieve successful outcomes rather than high-risk populations that would experience the
greatest net reduction in criminal offending from drug court interventions.
Even if such administrative capacity were available, enrollment would remain sharply
constrained by current eligibility restrictions. Despite the pervasiveness of the drug treatment
court model, drug courts routinely exclude most of the drug-using offenders. A 2005 survey of
adult drug courts found that “only 12% of drug courts accept clients with any prior violent
convictions. Individuals facing a drug charge, even if the seller is drug-dependent, are excluded
in 70% of courts for felony sales and 53% of courts for misdemeanor sales. Other charges that
routinely lead to exclusion include property crimes commonly associated with drug use (theft,
fraud, prostitution), and current domestic violence cases (only 20% accept domestic violence
cases) (Rossman et al. 2008). An earlier study conducted by the Government Accountability

Office (1997) found that only 6% of drug courts accept offenders whose current conviction
included a violent offense.
A study of drug courts in six Washington state counties found substantial variation in
eligibility requirements (Cox et al. 2001). In King County, for example, only defendants facing
drug possession charges were eligible; whereas in Pierce County a long list of property crimes
were also eligible. Similarly, Florida’s Dade County accepts offenders with mainly possession or
purchase of a controlled substance charges. Marion County stipulates that eligible offenders must
be charged with nonviolent drug offenses, with some drug sale and domestic violence cases
considered (Florida Supreme Court Task Force on Treatment-Based Drug Courts 2004). Among
the seven drug courts in New York City, three accept offenders facing drug sales charges; four
do not. Only one court of the seven accepts defendants with nondrug felony charges.
Drug courts originally targeted first-time offenders who were arrested for possession or
selling to support their habit. Some programs, however, are expanding to include repeat
offenders and a few are accepting violent offenders (Porter 2001). Nevertheless, programs with
flexible eligibility criteria are rare. Table 2 presents eligibility criteria for four drug courts in
major jurisdictions.
Insert Table 2 here
More difficult to determine are the eligibility rules with respect to substance abuse. Bhati
et al. (2008) report that “eligibility based on drug use severity is applied inconsistently—16% of
drug courts exclude those with a drug problem that is deemed too serious, while 48% reject
arrestees whose problems are not severe enough. Almost 69% exclude those with co-occurring
disorders. Even among eligible participants, more than half of drug courts (52%) report they

cannot accept some clients who are eligible for participation due to capacity constraints” (p.8)
(Bhati et al. 2008).
These eligibility rules seem likely to exclude most experienced users of cocaine, heroin,
and methamphetamine. The few cohort studies of cocaine and heroin users (e.g. by Hser and
colleagues) show that long-term users have accumulated long histories of convictions for
property and violent crimes and that many—perhaps most—have co-occurring disorders or are
polydrug users (Hser et al. 2001; Hser 2007; Hser et al. 2007).
Estimating the potential effect of relaxing eligibility requirements is a major research
challenge. Existing effectiveness findings reflect these tight eligibility requirements. Drug courts
choose certain clients, and exclude more serious offenders, in the belief that defendants with
longer and more serious criminal histories are more likely to have poor outcomes in drug courts.
They may be correct; without evaluations of the effects with these other client groups, the
research strategies for making projections are inherently speculative. We take this up in more
detail in the paper’s conclusion.
California’s Proposition 36 provides the largest instance of diversion from the criminal
justice system. Under Prop 36 (formally the Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention Act
(SACPA)), first- or second-time drug possession arrestees with no record of violent offenses are
subject to a drug abuse assessment to determine appropriate referral to a drug treatment program.
Parolees or probationers who violate the drug conditions of their release or are arrested for drug
possession are also eligible for Prop 36 sentencing to treatment or counseling. Participation in
Prop 36 is contingent on pleading guilty to the possession charge. The majority of those arrested
for simple possession of marijuana had more attractive legal options, which did not involve
pleading guilty and thus did not enter Prop 36. Passed in 2000 by popular referendum, in its fifth

year of operation (July 1, 2005 to June 30, 2006) it processed 52,000 individuals, (Urada et al.
2008) almost as many as the national drug court movement.
Given that Prop 36 is focused on individuals early in their criminal careers, it would
appear to have little prospect of reducing prison populations. Yet it appears to have had a sizable
effect. For example, Ehlers and Ziedenberg (2006) argue that Prop 36 accounted for a decline in
the projected California prison population. Whereas the population had been projected increase
from 162,000 to 180,000 between 2000 and 2005, the actual figure ended at only 164,000.
Moreover, the rate of prison commitments for drug possession offenses in California fell from 80
per 100,000 on June 1, 2001 (date of implementation) to 57 per 100,000 four years later.
The state has funded a series of detailed evaluations of the effects of Prop 36 (Urada et al.
2008; University of California, Los Angeles Integrated Substance Abuse Programs 2007). A 42month follow-up of the first wave of Prop 36 arrestees found that the measure substantially
reduced the levels of jail and prison incarceration of eligible Prop 36 offenders. The comparison
was made between those deemed eligible for Prop 36 in the year before enactment and those who
were eligible under Prop 36 in its first year. For state prisons, it appears that offenders who
would have been eligible for sentencing under Prop 36 prior to its passage spent 100 days in state
prison, whereas those who were sentenced under Prop 36 terms spent only about 60 days in
prison.5 For county jails, the figures were similar; the average length of time in jail over 42
months fell from approximately 95 days to 65 days.6 The evaluations do not provide information
on how much of that difference was accounted for by the initial incarceration spell, and how
much was due to subsequences differences in reincarceration.
Almost three quarters of those who were processed under SACPA entered treatment.
Substantial fractions drop out at various points in the process. The end result is that only one-

third (one quarter of the initial intake) were discharged as having completed treatment. That
figure is consistent with other studies of outcomes of treatment episodes resulting from criminal
justice referrals. Given that Prop 36 clients are under much less threat of reincarceration than
those entering through drug court referrals, for example, this is a surprising and encouraging
finding, though it underscores the challenge of retaining criminally active populations in
treatment interventions.
The Prop 36 population has some unexpected characteristics. For example, though this
option is only available for first or second convictions on drug possession charges, it is a
relatively old population with an average age of 34.8 years. Half have never entered treatment
before. A substantial percentage have lengthy criminal records, even though this cannot include
conviction for a violent offense.
Perhaps the inclusion of parolees among Prop 36 eligibles is an important source of the
reduction in the prison and jail populations. However, only 13% of the clients in the most recent
year of the evaluation entered from parole, and that figure had been as low as 8% in the first year
of the program.
Over half of those sentenced under Prop 36 were charged with possession of
methamphetamine, a drug associated with high levels of criminality. However, ADAM data
show a low prevalence of methamphetamine in most U.S. cities (Office of National Drug Control
Policy 2009); so the California reductions in incarceration may not generalize to other states.
On their face, the Proposition 36 findings are more encouraging than drug courts as a
method for reducing drug-related incarceration at the population level. The California
assessments consistently suggest that the use of noncriminal penalties has not produced increases
in crime rates, either as a result of higher recidivism or of reduced deterrence. Though high-risk

arrestees, primarily those with many prior arrests, fare less well than others, treatment oriented
diversion aimed at non-marijuana possession arrestees may generate a meaningful reduction in
total incarceration. There are however some concerns that the state sponsored evaluation, which
is complex and not always clear, does not capture all the problems of implementation. For
example, Hawken presents an analysis which finds that at the 30 month mark, arrests for all
groups of Prop 36 arrestees (treatment completers, treatment drop-outs and treatment refusers)
are higher than for the control group (Hawken 2009).
Coerced abstinence/mandatory desistence, a twenty year crusade by UCLA’s Mark
Kleiman, (Kleiman 2009; Kleiman 1997; Kleiman and Hawken 2008) is a program that takes
advantage of simple findings from behavioral economics, psychology, and public policy. A large
number of offenders are under community supervision at any one time, whether it be pretrial
release, probation, or parole. Because they have been arrested or convicted, the government can
subject these individuals to random drug tests and indeed does from time to time.
Coerced abstinence involves making sanctions certain, immediate, and relatively mild
rather than (as is normally the case) random, delayed, and severe. Such interventions have not
received widespread evaluation. The small number of existing studies have found that such
programs have the predicted effects on recidivism (Harrell et al. 1998). So far, there have been
no efforts to implement them on a large scale.
Recently, Hawaii's Opportunity Probation with Enforcement (HOPE) program has
implemented the approach for the entire probation population. The results of a random
assignment evaluation (Kleiman and Hawken 2008; Hawken and Kleiman 2009 have been very
promising. Very few of those enrolled in the program fail more than twice and the recidivism
rates have been dramatically lower than for the probation population previously. For example,

only 21% of HOPE subjects were rearrested in the 12 month evaluation window, compared to
46% amongst those on routine probation conditions (Hawken and Kleiman 2009).
These results and a clear articulation of the theory underlying the model by Mark
Kleiman and others have given this intervention a great deal of political and professional
prominence. HOPE-like experiments are being launched in a number of states. It offers the
prospect of a large scale intervention that could be implemented relatively rapidly and without
requiring the development of a new expertise in the probation community.
However, for those interested in promoting drug treatment as a major intervention to
reduce the incarcerated population, it is striking that coerced abstinence does not necessarily
involve treatment. Probation officers want their clients to desist from drug use, and this program
gives them the tools to motivate and monitor abstinence. Many drug-involved offenders do not
satisfy screening criteria for actual dependence. It is unclear that many of the successful clients
entered drug treatment programs or that these individuals needed such services. The adverse
consequences of a failed urine test have been enough to generate abstinence. Whether abstinence
will continue post-supervision is an open question but in making a judgment about the utility of
coerced abstinence, it is important to note that relapse is the common experience post-treatment.
The HOPE evaluation involved experienced offenders at risk of jail or prison.
Probationers assigned to HOPE were significantly less likely to produce positive drug tests or to
be arrested over a 12-month study period. These offenders spent about one-half as many days in
prison on revocations or new convictions. (See Table 3 below, reproduced from Hawken and
Kleiman (2009)).
Insert Table 3 here
If HOPE were implemented on a wide scale, it might cut prison time substantially.

4. Incarceration and Drug Courts
This section presents a new analysis of data on the incarcerated population, including
both state prisons and local jails. First, we show that offenders with drug use problems continue
to be a large share of those in jail and prison, and that recent entering cohorts of drug-using
inmates are considerably older on average than late-1980s cohorts. Second we assess whether
under the usual eligibility rules, an expansion of drug courts could substantially reduce the
numbers of drug users locked up.

Data and Analytic Framework
We analyzed two waves of data each from the Survey of Inmates in State Correctional
Facilities (SISCF) and the Survey of Inmates in Local Jails (SILJ), comparing changes in the
standing local jail and state prison populations from the latter part of the 1980s to the early part
of the 2000s. Specifically, the prison data are drawn from the 1986 and 2004 waves of the
SISCF, and the jail data are drawn from the 1989 and 2002 waves of the SILJ. For the prison
population, our analyses focus only on state inmates since the federal inmate survey was only
added in 1997. Moreover, federal prisons account for fewer than 10% of all those incarcerated on
any given day.
In both surveys, all data, including key indicators on prior offenses and on substance use,
are based on inmate self-report. There is a substantial literature on such self-reporting in
correctional settings both for criminal involvement (Horney and Marshall 1992) and substance
use (Farabee and Fredlund 1996); this research suggests that the self-report methodology is a
valuable data collection approach that provides an acceptable level of accuracy for both domains.

The nationally representative inmate surveys employ a stratified two-stage sampling
design, first selecting facilities and then inmates within the selected facilities. Total response
rates across the four surveys ranged between 84% and 92%. As shown in Table 4, the late 1980s
prison and jail surveys completed interviews with more than 19,000 inmates, generalizing to a
standing incarcerated population of roughly 846,000. In comparison, the early 2000s prison and
jail surveys completed interviews with more than 21,000 inmates, generalizing to a standing
incarcerated population of about 1.86 million.
Insert Table 4 here
For purposes of our analyses, we focus on the past-year admission cohort of convicted
inmates. Prior cross-period analyses of the inmate surveys (Mumola and Karberg 2006; Belenko
et al. 2002) have made comparisons for the entire incarcerated populations. Since many inmates
at each survey were incarcerated long before the survey itself, indeed were potential participants
in an earlier wave, comparisons of the total stock population do not describe well the changing
dynamics of incarceration. Thus we identify in each case an admission cohort of newly
incarcerated offenders consisting of those inmates who entered prison or jail in the twelve
months preceding the date of their interview.7 The resulting sample sizes and reference
populations used for the present study are also presented in Table 4. All analyses were performed
using Stata 11.0, with reported estimates weighted to account for the complex survey design.

Measuring Drug Misuse
We examined changes among inmate populations in the problematic use of heroin,
cocaine, and methamphetamine. For each substance, we operationalized drug abuse as selfreported daily or near-daily use in the month prior to arrest. We also defined “cocaine” to

include both powder and crack cocaine, and “methamphetamine” to include the more general
class of amphetamines.8 Other possible indicators were less valid measures of drug abuse (e.g.,
any drug use in the month prior to arrest, intoxication at the time of the offense) or were entirely
incommensurate across survey years (e.g., substance abuse and/or dependence).

Results
Drug Misuse among the Newly Incarcerated
Our first finding is that frequent drug use continues to be prevalent among recent entering
inmate cohorts. Indeed, the percentage of newly incarcerated prison and jail inmates who
reported daily or near-daily use of any of the three drugs increased by one-quarter and one-fifth,
respectively, between the 1980s and the 2000s. In absolute numbers, this amounts to an overall
increase of roughly 129,000 convicted, drug-using offenders entering prison or jail. Of note, this
increase appears to be exclusively driven by the rise in methamphetamine use, as the share of
heroin and cocaine users declined slightly to moderately across the two periods.
Insert Table 5 here

The Changing Age-by-Drug Distributions of the Newly Incarcerated
To capture the changing age profiles of drug-involved offenders, we compared the age
distributions of newly-incarcerated drug-using inmates for the 1986 and 2004 prison surveys and
the 1989 and 2002 jail surveys. Again, by newly incarcerated, we mean admitted to prison within
the past year; and by drug abuse, we mean daily or near-daily use in the month prior to arrest.
Figures 6-8 compare the age group distributions (in five-year increments) for cocaine, heroin,
and methamphetamine, respectively.

As shown in Figure 6, the cocaine-using cohorts aged considerably between the 1980s
and 2000s. Reflecting a seven-year increase in the median age from 27 to 34, just 12.1% of
newly-incarcerated cocaine-abusing prison inmates were 35 or older in 1986 compared to 47.3%
in 2004. Among entering jail inmates, similar increases in the median age (27 to 36) and
proportion of those 35 or older (17.0% to 56.4%) were found between 1989 and 2002.
Insert Figure 6 here
As shown in Figure 7, we found sizable but relatively smaller increases in population
aging across the heroin-using cohorts, with equivalent four-year increases in the median ages of
both newly-incarcerated prison (30 to 34) and jail (32 to 36) inmates. Examining the age
distributions, we found that the percentage of newly-incarcerated heroin-abusing prison inmates
who were 35 or older increased from roughly one-quarter to one-half (25.6% to 48.7%) between
1986 and 2004. A comparable percentage point increase (from 38.6% to 57.2%) in those 35 or
older occurred among the heroin-abusing jail cohort. Of note, however, there was considerable
parity across all survey years in the proportion of young (i.e., under 25) heroin abusers.
Insert Figure 7 here
For methamphetamine abusers, the median age rose from 26 to 30 among entering prison
inmates and from 28 to 31 among entering jail inmates. In the late 1980s, just 8.0% and 11.0% of
newly-incarcerated methamphetamine-abusing prison and jail inmates, respectively, were 35 or
older (see Figure 8). By the 2000s, one-third or more of incoming methamphetamine-abusing
prison (32.9%) and jail (36.0%) inmates exceeded this age.
Insert Figure 8 here
The remainder of the inmate cohorts—i.e. new entrants who did not report daily or neardaily use of any of the three expensive drugs in the month before arrest—showed much smaller

aging patterns across survey years (see Figure 9). Median ages for entering cohorts of prison and
jail inmates rose 3 and 2 years, respectively. In addition, unlike the drug-abusing inmates, the
age distributions of the two non drug-abusing cohorts were virtually similar across time.
Insert Figure 9 here
The shifting age distribution of drug-involved offenders is especially important given the
declining age profile of violent offenses in this population. The probability that offenders will
satisfy criteria that disqualify them from diversion programs increases with age, even as the
probability of violent offending declines.
The implications of these age patterns are shown below in Figure 10. Roughly one in four
entering inmates below the age of 25 were sentenced for a violent offense, a percentage that
steadily declined with age. Yet older offenders were markedly more likely to be labeled habitual
offenders or to face sentencing enhancements that would exclude them from typical drug
diversion programs.9
Insert Figure 10 here

Drug Court Calculations
In addition to examining age distributions, we examined the proportion of incoming
prisoners with problematic drug use who would be eligible for drug court diversion.
We classified inmates—first with the entering cohort and then with the entire
incarcerated population—by characteristics that affect eligibility for drug courts. In Table 6,
those characteristics that frequently disqualify the individual for drug court are italicized; those
that make individuals likely candidates are in plain text.
Insert Tables 6 and 7 here

As shown in Table 6, virtually all newly-incarcerated inmates are likely to be deemed
ineligible for drug court intervention. Results are even sharper within the entire (not just the
newly-incarcerated) population of drug-involved state prison inmates, as shown in Table 7.
Authors’ calculations indicate that more than 85% have current or past sentences for a serious
felony or a gun violation. Non-incident inmates are twice as likely as incident inmates to be
serving current sentences for violent offenses.
This pattern illustrates a point that arises in many contexts from unemployment to
welfare reform. The stock population of incarcerated offenders are a “length-biased” sample.
Compared with new entrants to prison in a given year, incarcerated offenders are more likely to
be long-term offenders in the midst of long incarceration spells, and are more likely to satisfy
other criteria of serious offending. As in the case of welfare cash assistance (Ellwood 1989), new
entrants to prison/TANF are a distinct population from those who are long term
prisoners/welfare recipients. Thus, programs that significantly affect the flow of new prison
entrants may have a much more modest impact on the stock of incarcerated prisoners. We return
to this point in the Conclusions section.
The patterns in Table 7 illustrate the central challenge in reducing the prison population
through drug courts and other diversion programs. Problematic drug use was common among
state prison inmates. The 2004 prison sample included almost 300,000 convicted prison inmates
who had used cocaine, heroin, or amphetamine in the month prior to their admission to prison.
More than 90% of these drug-involved inmates satisfied screening criteria for abuse or
dependence. For the 2002 jail inmates, about 94,000 (of the 448,000 convicted inmates) used
heroin, cocaine, or methamphetamine in the month prior to their admission. Similarly, more than
90% met criteria for substance abuse or dependence in the year prior to arrest. Thus a rough

estimate is that in 2004 (projecting no change in the jail figure between 2002 and 2004) the
number of drug dependent individuals entering jail and prison as convicted offenders was
approximately 400,000.
To put these numbers into perspective, we compared our descriptive statistics with the
2005 Treatment Episode Data System (TEDS), an administrative data set that captures at least
80% of all known treatment admissions in the United States in 2004. TEDS data yield 680,775
treatment admissions for which cocaine, amphetamine, or heroin was the primary substance of
misuse. The incarcerated drug-dependent populations in prisons and jails rival the substance
abuse treatment system in the size of the drug-using population receiving services on any given
day.
Yet only a small minority of inmates are likely to be eligible for drug courts or similar
interventions. Among newly-incarcerated inmates, approximately one-fifth were under a current
sentence for minor (that is, non-trafficking) drug offenses—the archetypal offense promoted as
suitable for drug court intervention. An even smaller fraction were incarcerated for such crimes
and had no current or prior record for disqualifying offenses. Minor drug offenders account for
an even smaller fraction of the overall state prison population.
If one broadens the universe from minor drug crimes to include other offenses, diversion
programs would have a slightly larger population to draw from. Approximately one-fifth of
inmates reported no history or current sentences for serious felonies.10
Perhaps our most surprising descriptive findings concerned inmates in local jails. Based
on our 2002 data, a very small fraction of sentenced jail inmates would be eligible for drug
courts based on the eligibility criteria cited above.

Prior criminal history factors exclude the largest share of offenders with current drug
problems from drug court eligibility. More than 70 percent of heroin, cocaine, and
methamphetamine users would be drug court-ineligible on the basis of being under criminal
justice supervision at the time of arrest or of being a habitual offender. Virtually none of these
inmates would be eligible for drug courts that applied every common exclusionary criterion.
Setting aside important considerations of program capacity, this suggests that relaxing eligibility
criteria, especially for offenders with active or long criminal histories, would expand the pool of
criminal offenders eligible for drug court and related interventions.

5. Conclusions
We began this paper by noting that diverting drug-involved offenders from the criminal
justice system, in particular getting them into treatment rather than jail or prison, has long been a
major concern of the criminal justice system. The drug court movement has been a prominent
and important innovation, almost universally praised by policy makers at every level of the
criminal justice system. Other innovations, such as Proposition 36 in California and intensive
supervision probation in various jurisdictions have pursued the same goal.
Notwithstanding that, we have documented that the numbers of drug-involved individuals
in the U.S. state prison and local jail systems have risen substantially in the last twenty years,
both in absolute numbers and as a percentage of the total. When we confine comparisons to those
entering the prison system or jails de novo (our incident cohort) during the 1980s and after the
year 2000, we see evidence that the entering drug-involved inmates are aging for the three drugs
(cocaine, heroin and methamphetamine) in contrast to a much slighter increase in the age of
those not involved with drugs.

Prior studies, in particularly Bhati et al. (2008), have shown that drug courts have made
little difference to the criminal justice system because they handle such small numbers of
criminal defendants. Our paper adds to these findings with the observation that drug courts, as
currently structured, have little potential to make a difference to incarceration totals because so
few of those entering jail or prison would meet the eligibility requirements of the current courts.
This importantly reflects the observed aging of the populations involved with the three
drugs we examined. A large share of drug-involved offenders entering correctional facilities
have accumulated long criminal careers that make them unattractive clients for the drug court
movement. It is especially discouraging that this statement applies to inmates in local jails, as
well as state prisons.
Ironically, the aging of the drug using offenders has another consequence. They are now
much less likely to be convicted of a new violent offense, the principal public concern about
criminal offenders under community supervision. There has been growing interest in the time to
“redemption” for those with a criminal history, i.e. the number of years after an arrest or
conviction at which an individual is no longer much more likely to commit a new offense than
someone who has never been arrested/convicted (Blumstein and Nakamura 2009). The policy
question for drug courts is whether it is possible that a more careful analysis of the criminal
careers of long-term drug users will allow the selection of some candidates for diversion
programs with acceptable risks of committing a serious crime while under the supervision of a
drug court or intensive probation.
Our results suggest other potential insights for policy. Reducing prison populations by
diverting drug-involved offenders before incarceration seems more difficult than one might
suspect. If diversion is unexpectedly difficult at the front end, other strategies may prove more

effective. Greater attention and focus on the drug problems of recently-released offenders,
parolees, and probationers seems especially fruitful.
The results of Proposition 36 are intriguing. Though it is a well known innovation, we are
unaware of any study that has examined its potential to reduce prison and jail populations if
taken up nationally.
Mandated desistence programs such as the Hawaii HOPE program yield impressive early
results. These seem especially promising for individuals who abuse alcohol or illicit substances,
but who may not be dependent or who use substances for which available substance abuse
treatment appears relatively ineffective.
For opiate-dependent offenders, strengthening the immediate linkages into post-release
opioid maintenance treatment also appears promising. Similar linkages of drug-involved
offenders into long-term residential treatment and therapeutic communities also appear to be
associated with reduced rates of subsequent reoffending.
Finally, more effective treatment interventions for young drug users who are not under
criminal justice supervision appears especially promising. Young men receiving substance abuse
treatment services display strikingly higher rates of criminal offending, particularly violent
offending, than do others involved in the treatment system. Some of these young men present to
the treatment system under implicit or explicit pressure from the criminal justice system. Others
seek services for other reasons.
Although young adults are often more difficult treatment clients and may display poor
outcomes by traditional clinical criteria, focusing resources on this key population is likely to
yield high dividends for crime control and prevention policy.

Endnotes
1

For example, in 2000, self-reported prevalences among NHSDA respondents imply that 1.2 million

individuals had used cocaine in the previous month. By comparison, more broad-based estimates that
included ADAM estimated a total of approximately 2 million that met the more stringent requirement of
having used the drug more than 8 times in the 30 days prior to the interview. The differential for heroin
was similar (Boyum and Reuter, 2005; p.18).
2

The calculation is done only for state prisoners because (a) jail inmates serve short terms on average and

are eligible within the year for rearrest and ADAM inclusion, and (b) federal inmates include a large
fraction of nonresident offenders.
3

Analysis that accounted for the social benefits of averted crime would likely find even more striking

benefits of substance abuse treatment.
4

Most of the late 1980s decline was the result of an abrupt reduction in the percentage testing positive for

PCP, a drug that has been much more prevalent in Washington than any other city, even after the decline.
5

This is based on dividing the estimated state prison costs provided in the report by the reported daily

cost of a prison stay.
6

The report does not offer a figure for the cost of a day in jail; these calculations assume that it is $62.50,

a figure cited by Ehlers and Zeidenberg (2006). Ehlers and Ziedenberg estimate the number of jail days
saved per client per year to be approximately 12, which is roughly consistent with the 30 days estimated
in the above calculation.
7

Because the SILJ does not ask unconvicted jail detainees pertinent questions on offender substance use

and other key indicators, our analyses are by necessity restricted to convicted inmates.
8

We note, however, that the 1986 SISCF and 1989 SILJ collected data only on the use of

“amphetamine,” whereas the 2004 SISCF and 2002 SILJ asked separate questions about “amphetamine”
and “methamphetamine.” Similarly, the 1986 SISCF employed a single measure of “cocaine,” the 1989
SILJ a single measure of “cocaine or crack,” and the 2004 SISCF and 2002 SILJ separate measures of

“crack” and “cocaine other than crack.” Accordingly, the earlier surveys likely provide more conservative
estimates of cocaine and methamphetamine use as we have defined it.
9

Current violent offense measures any current conviction offense, not just a controlling violent offense.

Habitual offender enhancement is defined as receiving a sentence enhancement for a second- or thirdstrike offense.
10

Homicide, manslaughter, kidnapping, armed robbery, unarmed robbery, burglary, aggravated assault,

assault on a police officer, arson, blackmail, extortion, sex crimes, drug trafficking, other violent crimes.

References

Amato, Laura, Marina Davoli, Carlo A. Perucci, Marica Ferri, Fabrizio Faggiano, and Richard P.
Mattick. 2005. “An Overview of Systematic Reviews of the Effectiveness of Opiate Maintenance
Therapies: Available Evidence to Inform Clinical Practice and Research.” Journal of Substance
Abuse Treatment 28(4): 321–9.

Bao, Yan-ping, Zhi-min Liu, David Epstein, Cun Du, Jie Shi, and Lin Lu. 2009. “A MetaAnalysis of Retention in Methadone Maintenance by Dose and Dosing Strategy.” American
Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 35(1): 28–33.

Basu, Anirban, A. David Paltiel, and Harold A. Pollack. 2008. “Social Costs of Robbery and the
Cost-effectiveness of Substance Abuse Treatment.” Health Economics 17(8): 927–46.

Belenko, Steven, Jordan Peugh, Daniel Mendez, Courtney Petersen, Jeffrey Lin, and Jennie
Hauser. 2002. Trends in Substance Abuse and Treatment Needs Among Inmates. National
Criminal Justice Reference Service. New York: National Center on Addiction and Substance
Abuse at Columbia University.

Belenko, Steven, and Jordon Peugh. 2005. “Estimating Drug Treatment Needs among State
Prison Inmates.” Drug and Alcohol Dependence 77(3): 269–81.

Bhati, Avinash Singh, John K. Roman, and Aaron Chalfin. 2008. To Treat or Not to Treat:
Evidence on the Prospects of Expanding Treatment to Drug-Involved Offenders. Washington,
D.C.: Urban Institute.

BJA Drug Court Clearinghouse Project. 2009. Summary of Drug Court Activity by State and
County, July 14, 2009. Washington, D.C.: BJA Drug Court Clearinghouse Project at American
University.

Blumstein, Alfred, and Allen J. Beck. 1999. “Population Growth in U.S. Prisons, 1980-1996.” In
Crime and Justice: A Review of the Research, Prisons (volume 26), edited by Michael Tonry and
Joan Petersilia, 17–61. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Blumstein, Alfred, and Kiminori Nakamura. 2009. “Redemption in the Presence of Widespread
Criminal Background Checks.” Criminology 47(2): 327–59.

Burdon, William M., Nena P. Messina, and Michael L. Prendergast. 2004. “The California
Treatment Expansion Initiative: Aftercare Participation, Recidivism, and Predictors of
Outcomes.” Prison Journal 84(1): 61–80.

Campbell, Kevin M., Dennis Deck, and Antoinette Krupski. 2007. “Impact of Substance Abuse
Treatment on Arrests among Opiate Users in Washington State.” American Journal on
Addictions 16(6): 510–20.

Caulkins, Jonathan P. 2007. “The Need for Dynamic Drug Policy.” Addiction 102(1): 4–7.

Caulkins, Jonathan P., Doris A. Behrens, Claudia Knoll, Gernot Tragler, and Doris Zuba. 2004.
“Markov Chain Modeling of Initiation and Demand: The Case of the U.S. Cocaine Epidemic.”
Health Care Management Science 7(4): 319–29.

Caulkins, Jonathan P., and Sara Chandler. 2006. “Long-Run Trends in Incarceration of Drug
Offenders in the United States.” Crime and Delinquency 52(4): 619–41.

Cohen, Mark A., Roland T. Rust, Sara Steen, and Simon T. Tidd. 2004. “Willingness-to-Pay for
Crime Control Programs.” Criminology 42(1): 89–110.

Cork, Daniel. 1999. “Examining Space-time Interaction in City-level Homicide Data: Crack
Markets and the Diffusion of Guns among Youth.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 15(4):
379–406.

Cox, Gary, Linda Brown, Charles Morgan, and Michelle Hansten. 2001. NW HIDTA / DASA
Washington State Drug Court Evaluation Project: Final Report. July 13. Seattle: Alcohol and
Drug Abuse Institute, University of Washington.

D'Aunno, Thomas, and Harold A. Pollack. 2002. “Changes in Methadone Treatment Practices:
Results from a National Panel Study, 1988-2000.” Journal of the American Medical Association
288(7): 850–6.

Dismuke, Clara E., Michael T. French, Helena J. Salomé, Mark A. Foss, Chris K. Scott, and
Michael L. Dennis. 2004. “Out of Touch or On the Money: Do the Clinical Objectives of
Addiction Treatment Coincide with Economic Evaluation Results?” Journal of Substance Abuse
Treatment 27(3): 253–63.

Dolan, Kate A., James Shearer, Bethany White, Jialun Zhou, John Kaldor, and Alex D. Wodak.
2005. “Four-Year Follow-Up of Imprisoned Male Heroin Users and Methadone Treatment:
Mortality, Re-incarceration and Hepatitis C Infection.” Addiction 100(6): 820–8.

Ehlers, Scott, and Jason Ziedenberg. 2006. Proposition 36: Five Years Later. Washington, D.C.:
Justice Policy Institute.

Ellwood, David T. 1989. Poor Support: Poverty in the American Family. New York: Basic
Books.

Ettner, Susan L., David Huang, Elizabeth Evans, Danielle Rose Ash, Mary Hardy, Mickel
Jourabchi, and Yih-Ing Hser. 2006. “Benefit-Cost in the California Treatment Outcome Project:
Does Substance Abuse Treatment ‘Pay for Itself’?” Health Services Research 41(1): 192–213.

Everingham, Susan S., and C. Peter Rydell. 1994. Modeling the Demand for Cocaine. Santa
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Farabee, David, and Eric Fredlund. 1996. “Self-reported Drug Use among Recently Admitted
Jail Inmates: Estimating Prevalence and Treatment Needs.” Substance Use & Misuse 31(4): 423–
35.

Florida Supreme Court Task Force on Treatment-Based Drug Courts. 2004. Florida's Adult Drug
Court: Recommended Practice. Tallahassee, FL: Florida Supreme Court Task Force. Accessed
May 25, 2010. http://www.flcourts.org/gen_public/family/bin/dcreport.pdf.

Flynn, Patrick M., Patricia L. Kristiansen, James V. Porto, and Robert L. Hubbard. 1999. “Costs
and Benefits of Treatment for Cocaine Addiction in DATOS.” Drug and Alcohol Dependence
57(2): 167–74.

French, Michael T., Helena J. Salomé, Jody L. Sindelar, and A. Thomas McLellan. 2002.
“Benefit-cost Analysis of Addiction Treatment: Methodological Guidelines and Empirical
Application using the DATCAP and ASI.” Health Services Research 37(2): 433–55.

Godfrey, Christine, Duncan Stewart, and Michael Gossop. 2004. “Economic Analysis of Costs
and Consequences of the Treatment of Drug Misuse: 2-year Outcome Data from the National
Treatment Outcome Research Study (NTORS).” Addiction 99(6): 697–707.

Gordon, Michael S., Timothy W. Kinlock, Robert P. Schwartz, and Kevin E. O'Grady. 2008. “A
Randomized Clinical Trial of Methadone Maintenance for Prisoners: Findings at 6 Months Postrelease.” Addiction 103(8): 1333–42.

Gossop, Michael, John Marsden, Duncan Stewart, and Tara Kidd. 2003. “The National
Treatment Outcome Research Study (NTORS): 4-5 Year Follow-up Results.” Addiction 98(3):
291–303.

Gossop, Michael, Katia Trakada, Duncan Stewart, and John Witton. 2005. “Reductions in
Criminal Convictions after Addiction Treatment: 5-year Follow-up.” Drug and Alcohol
Dependence 79(3): 295–302.

Grella, Christine E., Lisa Greenwell, Michael Prendergast, David Farabee, Elizabeth Hall,
Jerome Cartier, and William Burdon. 2007. “Organizational Characteristics of Drug Abuse
Treatment Programs for Offenders.” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 32(3): 291–300.

Harrell, Adele, Shannon Cavanagh, and John Roman. 1998. Findings from the Evaluation of the
D.C. Superior Court Drug Intervention Program. Final Report. Washington, D.C.: Urban
Institute.

Hawken, A. 2009. “Managing Drug-involved Offenders: Comparing Diversion Programs and
Hawaii’s HOPE Probation.” June 15. Washington D.C.: Office of National Drug Control Policy.

Hawken, Angela, and Mark Kleiman. 2009. “Managing Drug Involved Probationers with Swift
and Certain Sanctions: Evaluating Hawaii's HOPE.” Washington, D.C.: National Institute of
Justice.

Horney, Julie, and Ineke Haen Marshall. 1992. “An Experimental Comparison of Two SelfReport Methods for Measuring Lambda.” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 29(1):
102–21.

Hser, Yih-Ing, Valerie Hoffman, Christine E. Grella, and M. Douglas Anglin. 2001. “A 33-year
Follow-up of Narcotics Addicts.” Archives of General Psychiatry 58(5): 503–8.

Hser, Yih-Ing. 2007. “Predicting Long-term Stable Recovery from Heroin Addiction: Findings
from a 33-year Follow-up Study.” Journal of Addictive Diseases 26(1): 51–60.

Hser, Yih-Ing, David Huang, Chih-Ping Chou, and M. Douglas Anglin. 2007. “Trajectories of
Heroin Addiction: Growth Mixture Modeling Results Based on a 33-year Follow-up Study.”
Evaluation Review 31(6): 548–63.

Hubbard, Robert L., S. Gail Craddock, Patrick M. Flynn, Jill Anderson, and Rose M. Etheridge.
1997. “Overview of 1-year Follow-up Outcomes in the Drug Abuse Treatment Outcome Study
(DATOS).” Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 11(4): 261–78.

Hunt, L.G., and C.D. Chambers. 1976. The Heroin Epidemic: A Study of Heroin Use in the U.S.,
1965-1975 (Part II). New York: Spectrum.

Kinlock, Timothy W., Michael S. Gordon, Robert P. Schwartz, Kevin O'Grady, Terrence T.
Fitzgerald, and Monique Wilson. 2007. “A Randomized Clinical Trial of Methadone
Maintenance for Prisoners: Results at 1-month Post-release.” Drug and Alcohol Dependence
91(2-3): 220–7.

Kinlock, Timothy W., Michael S. Gordon, Robert P. Schwartz, and Kevin O'Grady. 2008. “A
Study of Methadone Maintenance for Male Prisoners: 3-month Post-release Outcomes."
Criminal Justice and Behavior 35(1): 34–47.

Kinlock, Timothy W., Michael S. Gordon, Robert P. Schwartz, Terrence T. Fitzgerald, and
Kevin E. O'Grady. 2009. “A Randomized Clinical Trial of Methadone Maintenance for
Prisoners: Results at 12 months Postrelease.” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 37(3): 277–
85.

Kleiman, Mark A.R. 1997. “Coerced Abstinence: A Neopaternalistic Drug Policy Initiative.” In
The New Paternalism: Supervisory Approaches to Poverty, edited by Lawrence M. Mead, 182–
218. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

Kleiman, Mark A.R. 2009. When Brute Force Fails: How to Have Less Crime and Less
Punishment. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Kleiman, Mark A.R., and Angela Hawken. 2008. “Fixing the Parole System.” Issues in Science
and Technology 24(4): 45–.

Koenig, Lane, Jonathan M. Siegel, Henrick Harwood, Jawaria Gilani, Ying-Jun Chen, Peter
Leahy, and Richard Stephens. 2005. “Economic Benefits of Substance Abuse Treatment:
Findings from Cuyahoga County, Ohio.” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 28(2) supp. 1:
S41–S50.

Kozel, N.J., and E.H. Adams. 1986. “Epidemiology of Drug Abuse: An Overview.” Science
234(4779): 970–4.

MacCoun, Robert, Beau Kilmer, and Peter Reuter. 2003. “Research on Drugs-Crime Linkages:
The Next Generation." In Toward a Drugs and Crime Research Agenda for the 21st Century,
edited by Henry H. Brownstein and Christine Crossland, 65–95. Washington, D.C.: National
Institute of Justice.

Manski, Charles F., John V. Pepper, and Carol V. Petrie, editors. 2001. Informing America's
Policy on Illegal Drugs: What We Don't Know Keeps Hurting Us. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.

McCollister, Kathryn E., and Michael T. French. 2003. “The Relative Contribution of Outcome
Domains in the Total Economic Benefit of Addiction Interventions: A Review of First Findings.”
Addiction 98(12): 1647–59.

McCollister, Kathryn E., Michael T. French, Michael L. Prendergast, Elizabeth Hall, and Stan
Sacks. 2004. “Long-term Cost Effectiveness of Addiction Treatment for Criminal Offenders.”
Justice Quarterly 21(3): 659–79.

Mumola, Christopher J., and Jennifer C. Karberg. 2006. “Drug Use and Dependence: State and
Federal Prisoners, 2004.” Special Report, NCJ 213530. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Justice
Statistics.

Office of National Drug Control Policy. 2000. “What America's Users Spend on Illicit Drugs
1988-1998.” Washington, D.C.: White House Office of National Drug Control Policy.

Office of National Drug Control Policy. 2001. “What America's Users Spend on Illicit Drugs
1988-2000.” Washington, D.C.: White House Office of National Drug Control Policy.

Office of National Drug Control Policy. 2009. ADAM II: 2008 Annual Report. Washington,
D.C.: White House Office of National Drug Control Policy.

Porter, Rachel. 2001. Treatment Alternatives in the Criminal Court: A Process Evaluation of the
Bronx County Drug Court. New York: Vera Institute of Justice.

Prendergast, Michael L., and William M. Burdon. 2002. “Integrated Systems of Care for
Substance-Abusing Offenders.” In Treatment of Drug Offenders: Policies and Issues, edited by
Carl G. Leukefeld, Frank Tims, and David Farabee, 111–26. New York: Springer.

Prendergast, Michael L., Deborah Podus, Eunice Chang, and Darren Urada. 2002. “The
Effectiveness of Drug Abuse Treatment: A Meta-analysis of Comparison Group Studies.” Drug
and Alcohol Dependence 67(1): 53–72.

Prendergast, Michael L., Elizabeth A. Hall, Harry K. Wexler, Gerald Melnick, and Yan Cao.
2004. “Amity Prison-based Therapeutic Community: 5-year Outcomes.” Prison Journal 84(1):
36–60.

Rajkumar, Andrew S., and Michael T. French. 1997. “Drug Abuse, Crime Costs, and the
Economic Benefits of Treatment.” Journal of Quantitative Criminology 13(3): 291–322.

Reuter, Peter, and Alex Stevens. 2007. An Analysis of UK Drug Policy A Monograph Prepared
for the UK Drug Policy Commission. London: UK Drug Policy Commission.

Rocheleau, Ann Marie, and David Boyum. 1994. Heroin Users in New York, Chicago, and San
Diego. Washington, D.C.: White House Office of National Drug Control Policy.

Rossman, S.B., J. Zweig, and J. Roman. 2008. A Portrait of Adult Drug Courts. Washington,
D.C.: Urban Institute.

Sevigny, Eric L., and Jonathan P. Caulkins. 2004. “Kingpins or Mules: An Analysis of Drug
Offenders Incarcerated in Federal and State Prisons.” Criminology and Public Policy 3(3): 401–
34.

Sindelar, Jody L., Mireia Jofre-Bonet, Michael T. French, and A. Thomas McLellan. 2004.
“Cost-effectiveness Analysis of Addiction Treatment: Paradoxes of Multiple Outcomes.” Drug
and Alcohol Dependence 73(1): 41–50.

Taxman, Faye S., Matthew L. Perdoni, and Lana D. Harrison. 2007. “Drug Treatment Services
for Adult Offenders: The State of the State.” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 32(3): 239–
54.

UCLA Integrated Substance Abuse Programs. 2007. Evaluation of the Substance Abuse and
Crime Prevention Act: Final Report. Los Angeles: UCLA Integrated Substance Abuse Programs.

Urada, Darren, Angela Hawken, Bradley T. Conner, Elizabeth Evans, M. Douglas Anglin, Joy
Yang, Cheryl Teruya, Diane Herbeck, Jia Fan, Beth Rutkowski, Rachel Gonzales, Richard
Rawson, Christine Grella, Michael Prendergast, Yih-Ing Hser, Jeremy Hunter, and Annie Poe.
2008. Evaluation of Proposition 36: The Substance Abuse and Crime Prevention Act of 2000,
2008 Report. Los Angeles: Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs California Health and
Human Services Agency.

Wilson, David B., Ojmarrh Mitchell, and Doris L. MacKenzie. 2006. “A Systematic Review of
Drug Court Effects on Recidivism.” Journal of Experimental Criminology 2(4): 459–87.

Wish, Eric D., and Bernard A. Gropper. 1991. "Drug Testing by the Criminal Justice System.” In
Crime and Justice: Drugs and Crime, (volume 13), edited by Michael J. Tonry and James Q.
Wilson, 109–58. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Table 1: Treatment Admissions for Cocaine, Heroin, Marijuana and Methamphetamine, TEDS
1997 and 2006
1997 (N)

1997 (%)

2006 (N)

2006 (%)

Cocaine

236,770

15

250,135

14

Heroin

235,143

15

245,984

14

Marijuana

197,840

12

289,988

16

Methamphetamine

53,694

3

149,415

8

Note: Each admission is classified according to primary drug of abuse but may involve polydrug
abuse. Reported percentages are based on treatment admissions for all substances, including
alcohol.

Table 2: Eligibility Requirements for Four Major Drug Courts
County
Dade county, FL

Program Type
Adult pretrial

Capacity Eligibility
1,450
No history of violent crime
No arrest for drug sale or trafficking
No more than two previous felony convictions

Brooklyn, NY

Post-plea

NA

No prior felony conviction
No charges involving drug sale near school
No prior felony convictions

San Francisco, CA

Pre-plea

440

No drug court failures in previous five years
No convictions for sales in previous eight
years
No current conviction for violent or serious
felony

Broward, FL

Pretrial and postconviction

2,649

No prior felony or conviction
No current sales/trafficking conviction

Table 3
HOPE

Control

9%

23%

Positive urine tests (average of tests per probationer)

13%

46%

New arrest rate (probationers rearrested)

21%

47%

Revocation rate (probationers revoked)

7%

15%

Incarceration (days sentenced)

138 days

267 days

No-shows for probation appointments (average of appointments
per probationer)

Table 4: Sample Sizes and Reference Populations for the Four Inmate Surveys
Late 1980s

Early 2000s

1986 Prison

1989 Jail

2004 Prison

2002 Jail

Survey

Survey

Survey

Survey

Stock Inmate Population
Sample n
Population N

13,711

5,675

14,499

6,982

450,416

395,554

1,226,171

631,241

5,270

2,656

5,033

4,582

161,597

180,022

395,865

415,354

Newly Incarcerated Inmates
Sample n
Population N

Table 5: Percentage of Newly Incarcerated Convicted Inmates Reporting Daily or Near-Daily
Substance Use, by Drug Type and Survey Year

Drug Typea

1986 State

1989 Local

2004 State

2002 Local

Prison Inmates

Jail Inmates

Prison Inmates

Jail Inmates

Heroin

7.5%

5.1%

5.3%

4.5%

Cocaine

13.7%

13.7%

13.4%

12.0%

5.1%

2.8%

11.8%

7.7%

21.5%

17.8%

27.0%

21.4%

161,597

180,022

395,865

415,354

Methamphetamine
Any of the Three
N

a

Percentage calculations are based on nonmissing data, the amount of which varies by indicator.

Table 6: Drug Court Screening and Exclusion Criteria Among Newly-Incarcerated Convicted
Inmates by Reported Abuse of Heroin, Cocaine, or Methamphetamine, 2002 Jail and 2004 Prison
Surveys

Drug Court Criteriaa
Screening/Eligibility Criteria
Current Drug Conviction
Drug-Related Revocationb
Positive Drug Test after Arrestc
Screened for Drug Abused
Screened for Drug Dependencee
Met Any Screening/Eligibility Criteria
Exclusion Criteria
Current Trafficking Conviction
Current Violent Conviction
Current Weapon Involvementf
Habitual Offender Enhancementg
Prior Incarceration Sentence
Prior Violent Conviction
Criminal Justice Status at Arresth
Current or Prior Violent Conviction
Met Any Exclusion Criteria
Mean Age in Years
N

2002 Entering Jail Cohort
2004 Entering Prison Cohort
Reported Daily or Near-Daily Use in Month Prior to Arrest
Yes
No
Yes
No
48.2%
13.8%
16.4%
92.0%
85.9%
97.1%

26.5%
7.9%
6.6%
43.8%
24.5%
58.5%

46.6%
16.3%
18.2%
92.2%
83.7%
97.7%

29.8%
7.0%
7.9%
42.6%
24.4%
60.4%

17.9%
17.2%
7.7%
5.4%
77.2%
27.8%
77.5%

9.6%
28.1%
7.5%
6.3%
60.6%
27.6%
67.7%

32.6%

39.1%

96.2%
32.9
87,174

91.3%
31.7
328,180

22.4%
17.2%
10.5%
16.2%
62.5%
27.4%
59.0%
36.6%
93.0%
34.0
104,005

14.8%
30.7%
11.3%
13.2%
46.3%
23.8%
48.2%
45.1%
88.4%
32.1
291,860

a

Percentage calculations are based on nonmissing data, the amount of which varies by indicator.

b

Revoked or facing revocation for a positive drug test, possessing drugs, or missing a drug test.

c

Received positive drug test at booking or shortly after admission to prison or jail

d

Met the survey’s criteria based on DSM for drug abuse in past year prior to arrest

e

Met the survey’s criteria based on DSM for drug dependence in past year prior to arrest

f

Revocation for possessing gun, receiving firearm sentence enhancement, having any current

weapon conviction, or having gun seized by police at arrest.
g

Habitual offender enhancement is defined as receiving a sentence enhancement for a second- or

third-strike offense
h

On probation, parole, or escape

Table 7: Drug Court Screening and Exclusion Criteria Among All Convicted Inmates by Reported Abuse
of Heroin, Cocaine, or Methamphetamine, 2002 Jail and 2004 Prison Surveys

Drug Court Criteriaa
Screening/Eligibility Criteria
Current Drug Conviction
Drug-Related Revocationb
Positive Drug Test after Arrestc
Screened for Drug Abused
Screened for Drug Dependencee
Met Any Screening/Eligibility Criteria
Exclusion Criteria
Current Trafficking Conviction
Current Violent Conviction
Current Weapon Involvementf
Habitual Offender Enhancementg
Prior Incarceration Sentence
Prior Violent Conviction
Criminal Justice Status at Arresth
Current or Prior Violent Conviction
Met Any Exclusion Criteria
Mean Age in Years
N

2002 Jail Inmates
2004 Prison Inmates
Reported Daily or Near-Daily Use in Month Prior to Arrest
Yes
No
Yes
No
47.3%
13.6%
16.4%
92.5%
85.9%
97.3%

27.1%
7.6%
6.9%
43.6%
24.5%
58.8%

37.0%
11.2%
22.9%
91.2%
83.1%
97.0%

20.2%
4.6%
10.8%
40.2%
22.1%
54.6%

18.0%
18.7%
7.6%
5.7%
77.0%
28.3%
75.7%
33.5%
96.1%
33.0
94,017

10.4%
29.2%
7.5%
6.7%
60.2%
27.8%
66.4%
40.1%
91.3%
31.8
354,219

19.5%
34.5%
16.5%
24.8%
65.4%
31.4%
50.9%
51.8%
95.2%
35.7
278,374

11.1%
55.0%
17.7%
17.4%
46.8%
25.7%
40.8%
64.7%
93.1%
35.2
947,797

a

Percentage calculations are based on nonmissing data, the amount of which varies by indicator.

b

Revoked or facing revocation for a positive drug test, possessing drugs, or missing a drug test.

c

Received positive drug test at booking or shortly after admission to prison or jail

d

Met the survey’s criteria based on DSM for drug abuse in past year prior to arrest

e

Met the survey’s criteria based on DSM for drug dependence in past year prior to arrest

f

Revocation for possessing gun, receiving firearm sentence enhancement, having any current

weapon conviction, or having gun seized by police at arrest.
g

Habitual offender enhancement is defined as receiving a sentence enhancement for a second- or

third-strike offense
h

On probation, parole, or escape

Chapter 3: Harold Pollack et al.

Figure 1: Age Distribution of TEDS Cocaine Admissions, 1992 and 2006

Figure 2: Age Distribution of TEDS Heroin Admissions, 1992 and 2006

Figure 3: Number of Chronic Cocaine and Heroin Users (in thousands), 1988-2000
Source: What America’s Users Spend on Illicit Drugs 1988-2000

Figure 4: Arrestees Testing Positive for Various Drugs in the District of Columbia, 1984-2007
Source: Pretrial Services Agency

Figure 5: Drug Use among Arrestees Under Age 18, the District of Columbia, 1987-2007
Source: Pretrial Services Agency

Figure 6: Age Distributions of Newly-Incarcerated Inmates Reporting Cocaine Abuse

Figure 7: Age Distributions of Newly-Incarcerated Inmates Reporting Heroin Abuse

Figure 8: Age Distributions of Newly-Incarcerated Inmates Reporting Methamphetamine Abuse

Figure 9: Age Distributions of Newly-Incarcerated Inmates Reporting No Drug Abuse

Figure 10: Violent and Habitual Offending by Age Group, Newly-Incarcerated Drug-Abusing
Inmates, 2002/4

Figure 1: Age Distribution of TEDS Cocaine Admissions, 1992 and 2006

100,000
90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
18-20

21-24

25-29

30-34
1992 TEDS

35-39

40-44

2006 TEDS

45-49

50-54

55+

Figure 2: Age Distribution of TEDS Heroin Admissions, 1992 and 2006

40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
18-20

21-24

25-29

30-34
1992 TEDS

35-39

40-44

2006 TEDS

45-49

50-54

55+

Figure 3: Number of Chronic Cocaine and Heroin Users (in thousands), 1988-2000
4,500
4,000
3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
Cocaine

Heroin (X3)

Source: What America’s Users Spend on Illicit Drugs 1988-2000, ONDCP (2001)

Figure 4: Arrestees Testing Positive for Various Drugs in the District of Columbia, 1984-2007
80

Percent testing positive

70
60
Any drug except marijuana
50
40
30

PCP

Cocaine

20
10

Heroin

0
1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006

Source: Pretrial Services Agency

Figure 5: Drug Use among Arrestees Under Age 18, the District of Columbia, 1987-2007

70

Percent testing positive

60
Marijuana

50
40
30

Any drug

20
PCP

10
0
1987

Cocaine

1989

1991

Source: Pretrial Services Agency

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2006

Figure 6: Age Distributions of Newly-Incarcerated Inmates Reporting Cocaine Abuse
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
min-19

20-24

25-29

1986 Prison

30-34

35-39

1989 Jail

40-44

45-49

2004 Prison

50-54

55-max

2002 Jail

Figure 7: Age Distributions of Newly-Incarcerated Inmates Reporting Heroin Abuse
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
min-19

20-24

25-29

1986 Prison

30-34

35-39

1989 Jail

40-44

45-49

2004 Prison

50-54

55-max

2002 Jail

Figure 8: Age Distributions of Newly-Incarcerated Inmates Reporting Methamphetamine Abuse
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
min-19

20-24

1986 Prison

25-29

30-34
1989 Jail

35-39

40-44

45-49

2004 Prison

50-54

55-max

2002 Jail

Figure 9: Age Distributions of Newly-Incarcerated Inmates Reporting No Drug Abuse
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
min-19

20-24

1986 Prison

25-29

30-34

35-39

1989 Jail

40-44

45-49

2004 Prison

50-54

55-max

2002 Jail

Figure 10: Violent and Habitual Offending by Age Group, Newly-Incarcerated Drug-Abusing
Inmates, 2002/4
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
min-19

20-24

25-29

30-34

Current Violent Offense

35-39

40-44

45-49

50-54 55-max

Habitual Offender Enhancement

