                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MISALLOCATION, ECONOMIC GROWTH, AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS

                                            Charles I. Jones

                                         Working Paper 16742
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16742


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2011




Presented at the 10th World Congress of the Econometric Society in Shanghai, China. I am grateful
to Antonio Ciccone, Bob Hall, John Fernald, and Pete Klenow for helpful comments and discussions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Charles I. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Misallocation, Economic Growth, and Input-Output Economics
Charles I. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 16742
January 2011
JEL No. E2,O1

                                               ABSTRACT

One of the most important developments in the growth literature of the last decade is the enhanced
appreciation of the role that the misallocation of resources plays in helping us understand income differences
across countries. Misallocation at the micro level typically reduces total factor productivity at the macro
level. Quantifying these effects is leading growth researchers in new directions, two examples being
the extensive use of firm-level data and the exploration of input-output tables, and promises to yield
new insights on why some countries are so much richer than others.


Charles I. Jones
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-4800
and NBER
chad.jones@stanford.edu
2                                       CHARLES I. JONES



1. Introduction

One of the most important developments in the growth literature of the last decade
is the enhanced appreciation of the role that the misallocation of resources plays
in helping us understand income differences across countries. Given an economy’s
stock of physical capital, labor, human capital, and knowledge, the way in which
those aggregate quantities of inputs are allocated across firms and industries — and
even potentially within firms — determines the economy’s overall level of produc-
tion. The best allocation will maximize welfare and, in a sense that can be made pre-
cise, output itself in the long run. Other allocations result in lower levels of output
and therefore show up in the aggregate as a lower level of total factor productivity
(TFP).
        In some broad sense, this is an old idea with many antecedents. In the real busi-
ness cycle literature, for example, it is commonly appreciated that tax distortions or
regulations may show up as TFP shocks. Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2007) follows
in this tradition.
        In the literature on growth and development, Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) ex-
plicitly analyze a model of misallocation among heterogeneous plants to quantify
the effect on aggregate TFP. Banerjee and Duflo (2005) argue that the marginal prod-
uct of capital differs widely among firms in India, potentially reducing overall out-
put. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) present empirical evidence that misallocation across
plants within 4-digit industries may reduce TFP in manufacturing by a factor of two
to three in China and India. A large literature surrounding these papers considers
various mechanisms through which misallocation can lead to income differences.1
        This paper provides my own idiosynchratic perspective on misallocation and
presents three basic points. First, I begin with an overview of misallocation. A
simple toy model illustrates how misallocation can reduce TFP, and I outline sev-
eral questions related to misallocation that might be considered in future research.

    1
    Examples include Parente and Prescott (1999), Caselli and Gennaioli (2005), Lagos (2006), Al-
faro, Charlton and Kanczuk (2008), Buera and Shin (2008), Guner, Ventura and Xu (2008), La Porta
and Shleifer (2008), Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2009), Vollrath (2009), Midrigan and Xu
(2010), Moll (2010), and Syverson (2010).
                   MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                          3


Second, I suggest one way in which the effects of misallocation can be amplified:
through the input-output structure of the economy. Because the outputs of many
firms are used as the inputs of other firms, the effects of misallocation can be ampli-
fied. Finally, I provide an overview of the input-output structure of the United States
and 34 other economies, albeit at a fairly high level of aggregation. In addition to
supporting the basic point that the amplification associated with input-output eco-
nomics can be quantitatively important, this overview suggests what I think is a
remarkable similarity in the input-output structures of diverse economies. Under-
standing whether this really is the case, why it may be so, and what implications it
entails is another useful area for future research.



2. Misallocation

This section provides an overview of the consequences of the misallocation of re-
sources.


2.1. Misallocation and TFP

We begin by presenting a simple example that illustrates the basic point of the mis-
allocation literature: misallocation reduces TFP.
   Consider an economy in which the two key produced goods are steel and lattes:


              Production:             Xsteel = Lsteel , Xlatte = Llatte

              Resource constraint:          Lsteel + Llatte = L̄

                                                      1/2   1/2
              GDP (aggregation):             Y = Xsteel Xlatte

   One unit of labor can produce either a unit of steel or a cup of latte. The econ-
omy is endowed with L̄ units of labor. And we assume lattes and steel combine in a
Cobb-Douglas fashion to generate a final good. This last equation could be replaced
by a utility function, but then one would have to specify prices in order to aggregate
the two goods; the approach here is simpler.
4                                  CHARLES I. JONES



    Obviously, the only allocative decision that has to be made is how much labor to
employ producing steel versus lattes. Let x ≡ Lsteel /L̄ denote the allocation of labor.
This could be determined by perfectly competitive markets, by a social planner, by
markets distorted by taxes, or in any number of different ways.
    Solving for GDP given the allocation yields


                                     Y = A(x)L̄,


where TFP, A(x), is given by
                                          p
                                 A(x) =    x (1 − x).

These two equations summarize in a simple way one of the key points of the recent
literature on misallocation: the misallocation of resources reduces TFP. As is clear
given the symmetry of the setup, the optimal allocation of labor in this simple econ-
omy features x∗ = 1/2. Any departure from this allocation — putting either too little
or too much labor into making steel — reduces TFP and therefore GDP. More gen-
erally, if the exponents in the production function were σ and 1 − σ instead of 1/2,
then TFP would simply be A(x) = xσ (1 − x)1−σ ; this expression will be useful later.
The effects of misallocation are shown graphically in Figure 1.
    This figure illustrates another key point: small departures from the optimal al-
location of labor have tiny effects on TFP (an application of the envelope theorem),
but significant misallocation can have very large effects. Given the large income
differences that we see across countries, this possibility is appealing.
    However, more careful consideration of Figure 1 indicates that this simple model
has what may be an important limitation: in the presence of significant misalloca-
tion, a small improvement in the allocation of resources will have a large impact on
TFP.
    Contrast this with a hypothetical example like that in Figure 2. The dashed line
in the figure repeats the effect of misallocation on TFP from Figure 1, while the new
solid line depicts an alternative. It seems to me that the alternative better captures
the world we live in. As before, small misallocation has small effects and large mis-
                    MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                          5



                        Figure 1: Misallocation Reduces TFP

        Total factor productivity, A(x)



        1/2




          0
              0                           1/2                             1
                                                            Fraction of labor
                                                             making steel, x


allocation has large effects. Now, however, an intermediate degree of misallocation
can have large effects as well (e.g. if the allocation of labor has x = 1/4, TFP is less
than 1/4 rather than larger than 1/4). Moreover, with a large degree of misalloca-
tion, the effect on TFP of an improved allocation of resources is small: reforms in
many cases would have small effects. Growth miracles would be less common in the
second world and would be more likely to occur among countries with an interme-
diate degree of distortions than a large degree of distortions. This kind of structure
may even help explain the “twin peaks” structure of the world income distribution
emphasized by Quah (1996).
   One of the challenges going forward in models of misallocation is — perhaps
— to ensure that they capture some of the features of Figure 2 rather than some of
the limitations in Figure 1. Jones (2011) explores the possibility that the O-ring style
complementarity of Kremer (1993) may help in this regard.
   This simple example is useful in illustrating how misallocation reduces TFP, but
it fails to capture one of the points emphasized in the recent literature on misalloca-
6                                 CHARLES I. JONES




                 Figure 2: An Alternative Model of Misallocation?

       Total factor productivity, A(x)



        1/2




         0
             0                           1/2                            1
                                                          Fraction of labor
                                                           making steel, x


tion. In the example, misallocation is across sectors: we may have too much or too
little steel relative to what is optimal. The recent literature often emphasizes mis-
allocation at a more microeconomic level: within the steel sector, there are some
plants that are good at making steel and others that are less good. Misallocation
may involve giving the less efficient plants too many resources. Clearly both kinds
of misallocation (across and within sectors) can be important. One might even push
this insight further: Why are some plants more productive than others? Maybe be-
cause of the misallocation of resources within plants. Organizing a plant and pro-
ducing output involve an enormous number of decisions, and these decisions may
be distorted or made incorrectly because of misallocation: maybe the plant man-
ager is not the best person for the job (Caselli and Gennaioli, 2005), maybe the most
talented workers within the plant are not promoted to the appropriate positions,
maybe the incentives for the workers to produce efficiently are not present (Lazear,
2000), maybe unionization and job protection leads the firm to use too much labor
inappropriately (Schmitz, 2005) and so on.
                       MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                      7


2.2. Misallocation and Ideas


Next, I wish to consider the interaction between two key themes of the literature on
economic growth, the most recent theme of misallocation and the older theme of
ideas. Much of the recent literature studies misallocation in neoclassical models in
which all inputs are rival. Yet it is surely the case that efforts toward creating and
using ideas are distorted as well. How can one think about this?
   One useful starting place is the Romer (1990) variety model. The economy uses
a range of capital goods — whose measure is At — to produce. Misallocation can
take two forms: the capital goods could be used in the wrong amount or the range
of goods that are available may be incorrect. Of course, this second form can be
viewed as a special case of the first form, where the quantity used is set equal to
zero. In fact, Romer (1994) explored this latter option and argued that it could have
large effects.
   A clear advantage of this approach is that the variety framework is straightfor-
ward to analyze, and misallocation in the presence of ideas turns out to be not that
different from misallocation with rival inputs.
   A puzzle is that when calibrated, the variety approach tends to yield relatively
small effects. In particular, it is common to calibrate the elasticity of substitution
among varieties to markups. With small markups, this elasticity is often large. And
when varieties are good substitutes, it is just not that costly to be using the “wrong”
variety. A recent example along these lines is Broda and Weinstein (2006). They
use a variety model to study the welfare gains from imports of new varieties be-
tween 1972 and 2001. Over this thirty year period, they estimate that the number of
imported product varieties increased by a factor of three, but the gain to U.S. con-
sumers from having access to these varieties was just 2.6 percent of GDP. (Of course,
given the relatively small import share in the United States, this number may not be
so small after all.)
   An open question for future research is the extent to which misallocation and
ideas interact in important ways. It may be that a quality-ladder approach a la
Aghion and Howitt (1992) and Grossman and Helpman (1991) can yield better re-
8                                       CHARLES I. JONES



sults.



2.3. Key Questions

At some basic level, there are only two fundamental reasons for income differences
across countries in the long run. Either economies have different production pos-
sibilities or they have different allocations. In the case of production possibilities,
once we have endogenized ideas, the only remaining reason for differences is geo-
graphic. Maybe some pieces of land are more conducive to production than others.
While there is probably something to this explanation, my current understanding
is that these effects are small relative to the large income differences we see across
countries. Probably the single most persuasive evidence on this point is the classic
Mancur Olson (1996) argument: the large income difference that has emerged be-
tween North and South Korea over the last half century, for example, is surely not
due to geography.2
    This leaves differences in the allocation of resources to explain the bulk of in-
come differences across countries. Given the production possibilities, allocations
can then differ for two reasons: differences in preferences and misallocation. Again,
there is probably something to the preference story (this seems like a plausible part
of the explanation for the difference between the European and American alloca-
tion of resources). But at some basic level, people are people and any difference in
preferences is probably itself an endogenous outcome.
    This argument, then, suggests that all that is left, fundamentally, to explain dif-
ferences in incomes across countries is misallocation, working both through tra-
ditional inputs like capital and labor and also through ideas. Income differences
across countries result almost entirely from the misallocation of resources.
    And yet to say misallocation is everything is perhaps not to say very much after
all. In particular, three additional questions seem pertinent:

    1. What is the nature of the misallocation? Are certain inputs misallocated more

  2
    Obviously, there is a large literature debating this question; for example, see Gallup, Sachs and
Mellinger (1999) and Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002).
                MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                           9


  than others? Is the misallocation related to ideas special in any way relative
  to the misallocation of traditional inputs? How significant is misallocation
  within sectors or between sectors or even within plants? How much misal-
  location is there in the richest countries?

2. How precisely does the misallocation of resources lead to 50-fold income dif-
  ferences? A simple version of this question is illustrated by the differences we
  saw back in Figures 1 and 2. In the first case, large income differences required
  extreme forms of misallocation, and small improvements in the allocation of
  resources would have large effects on income. In the second, neither of these
  points is necessarily true. Why does a given amount of misallocation lead to
  such large income differences? And why are income differences across coun-
  tries generally rising over time?

3. Why is there misallocation, and what can be done about it? This last question
  takes us into the realm of political economy. The literature on political econ-
  omy and growth/development has been extremely active in the last decade;
  see Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005) for an excellent overview. The
  state-of-the-art in that literature suggests that misallocation is the equilibrium
  outcome of a political process interacting with institutions and the distribu-
  tion of resources (including physical capital, human capital, ideas, and natu-
  ral resources). It is, evidently, not in the economic interests of the ruling elite
  to improve the allocation of resources, despite the potentially enormous in-
  crease in the size of the economic pie that is possible in the long run.

  The distinction between Figures 1 and 2 is helpful in this respect and illus-
  trates the important interaction that occurs between the production possibil-
  ities of the economy and the political process. In Figure 1 it is harder to under-
  stand why improvements in the allocation of resources would not take place
  in the most distorted countries because the immediate gains are so large. Such
  failures are easier to comprehend in an economy like Figure 2, where the im-
  mediate gains may be much smaller.

The remainder of this paper takes a much narrower focus and explores one di-
10                                              CHARLES I. JONES



mension of these key questions about misallocation. In particular, it focuses on the
production possibilities and seeks to understand why a given amount of misalloca-
tion can lead to large income differences rather than small income differences.



3. Input-Output Economics

Modern economies involve very sophisticated input-output structures. Goods like
electricity, financial services, transportation, information technology and health-
care are both inputs and outputs. A wide range of intermediate goods are used to
produce most goods in the economy, and these goods in turn are often used as in-
termediates.
         Despite our intuitive recognition of this point, standard models of macroeco-
nomics and economic growth typically ignore intermediate goods.3 The conven-
tional wisdom seems to be that as long as we are concerned about overall value-
added (GDP) in the economy, we can specify the model entirely in terms of value-
added and ignore intermediate goods. Hence the neoclassical growth model.
         This conventional wisdom is incorrect, and the remainder of this paper explores
some of the implications of the input-output structure of the economy for eco-
nomic growth and development.
         The first insight that emerges from thinking about intermediate goods is that
they are very similar to capital. In fact, the only difference between intermediate
goods and capital is one of short-run timing: intermediate goods can be installed
more quickly than capital and “depreciate” fully during the course of production,
while capital takes a bit longer to install and only partially depreciates during pro-
duction. From the point of view of the long run — the perspective relevant in most
of this paper — intermediate goods and capital are essentially the same. In particu-
lar, both are produced factors of production.
         The key implications of intermediate goods for economic growth, development,
and macroeconomics arise from seeing them as another form of capital. It has long
been recognized that the share of capital in production is a fundamental determi-
     3
         Of course, there is a significant literature of exceptions; these will be discussed below.
                      MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                                  11


nant of the quantitative predictions of macro models. When the capital share is
1/3, the intrinsic propogation mechanism of the neoclassical growth model is weak,
convergence to the steady state is rapid, and the model generates a small multiplier
on changes in productivity or the investment rate. In contrast, when the capital
share is higher, like 2/3, these deficiencies are largely remedied. A fairly large por-
tion of the literature on economic growth can be viewed as an attempt to justify
using a (broad) capital share of 2/3 when the data for (narrow) capital loudly pro-
claim that the right number empirically is only 1/3.4
       As documented carefully below, the intermediate goods share of gross output is
about 1/2 across a large number of countries. The share of capital in value-added is
about 1/3, so its share in gross output is 1/6. Combining these two kinds of capital,
the share of capital-like goods in gross output is our magic number, 1/2 + 1/6 =
2/3. Incorporating intermediate goods into macroeconomic models, then, has the
potential to help us understand a range of economic phenomenon, including the
propogation of business cycle shocks and the speed of transition dynamics. These
applications will not be explored here. Instead, the main application in this paper
will be to the puzzle of understanding why misallocation leads some countries to
be 50 times richer than others, as opposed to only 10 times richer.
       We begin by providing a simple example to illustrate how and why intermediate
goods lead to large multipliers. In this example, a single final output good is used as
the single intermediate good in the economy, so the input-output structure is very
simple. Next, we build an N -sector model of economic activity, where each sector
uses the outputs from the other sectors as intermediate goods. This model is very
similar to the original multi-sector business cycle model of Long and Plosser (1983).
The only technological difference is that we include international trade, allowing
sectors to import intermediate goods from abroad. The substantive difference is in

   4
    For examples of these points in various contexts, see Rebelo (1991), Mankiw, Romer and Weil
(1992), Cogley and Nason (1995), and Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (1997). Mankiw, Romer and Weil
(1992) make many of these points, adding human capital to boost the capital share. Chari, Kehoe and
McGrattan (1997) introduced “organizational capital” for the same reason. Howitt (2000) and Klenow
and Rodriguez-Clare (2005) consider the accumulation of ideas, another produced factor. More re-
cently, Manuelli and Seshadri (2005) and Erosa, Koreshkova and Restuccia (2010) have resurrected
the human capital story in a more sophisticated fashion.
12                                  CHARLES I. JONES



the application to economic growth and development.
     Finally, we connect this model to the wealth of input-output data that exist. Data
from 35 countries — including not only the currently rich countries but also Ar-
gentina, Brazil, China, and India — allows us to quantify the multiplier associated
with the input-output structure of the economy.
     Before continuing, it is worth noting that there is a very important branch of
the economics literature that has studied the impact of intermediate goods. His-
torically, the input-output literature reigned in economics from the 1930s through
the 1960s and is most commonly associated with Leontief (1936) and his follow-
ers. Hirschman (1958) emphasized the importance of sectoral linkages to economic
development, which itself spawned a large literature. Hulten (1978) is also closely
related, showing how intermediate goods should properly be included in growth ac-
counting. More recently, the intermediate goods multiplier shows up most clearly
in the economic fluctuations literature; see Long and Plosser (1983), Basu (1995),
Horvath (1998), Dupor (1999), Conley and Dupor (2003), Gabaix (2005), and Basu,
Fernald, Fisher and Kimball (2010). In the international trade context, Yi (2003)
argues that tariffs can multiply up in much the same way when goods get traded
multiple times during the stages of production. Ciccone (2002) is the first modern
growth paper I know of to develop this insight, deriving a multiplier formula for
a triangular input-output structure. Jones (2011) also emphasizes the importance
of the intermediate goods multiplier, albeit for a relatively restrictive input-output
structure.


3.1. A Simple Example

A simple example is helpful for understanding how intermediate goods generate
a multiplier. Suppose gross output Qt is produced using capital Kt , labor Lt , and
intermediate goods Xt .
                                                  1−σ
                               Qt = Ā Ktα L1−α
                                            t            Xtσ .                      (1)

Gross output can be used for consumption or investment or it can be carried over to
the next period and used as an intermediate good. To keep things simple, assume a
                        MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                                13


constant fraction x̄ is used as an intermediate good:


                                            Xt+1 = x̄Qt .                                       (2)


GDP in this economy is gross output net of spending on intermediate goods: Yt ≡
(1 − x̄)Qt . In a steady state with no growth, it is easy to show that GDP will be given
by
                                       Yt = TFP · Ktα L1−α
                                                       t   ,                                    (3)

where
                                                                1
                                 TFP ≡ (Āx̄σ (1 − x̄)1−σ ) 1−σ .                               (4)

TFP depends on the allocation of resources to intermediate goods. It will be maxi-
mized when x̄ = σ, which is the optimal spending share on intermediates. For any
other spending share, however, TFP will be lower, and this effect will be amplified
the higher is the intermediate goods share.
     Going further, let’s assume a constant fraction s̄ of GDP is invested:


                              Kt+1 = s̄Yt + (1 − δ)Kt ,                                         (5)

                                       = s̄(1 − x̄)Qt + (1 − δ)Kt ,


Assume labor is exogenous and constant.
     This model features a steady state, where the level of GDP per worker yt ≡ Yt /Lt
is                                                                        1
                                                       s̄ α(1−σ)  (1−α)(1−σ)
                        ∗ Y             σ        1−σ
                      y ≡   =        Āx̄ (1 − x̄)                                 .            (6)
                          L                             δ
     A key implication of this result is that the effects of misallocation or basic pro-
ductivity differences get multiplied. In particular, consider the simple allocation
term x̄σ (1 − x̄)1−σ , familiar from our steel-and-latte economy. Now that the misal-
location applies to a produced good, its effects are amplified: there is an exponent
         1
of   (1−α)(1−σ)   > 1 that applies to misallocation.
     To see this more simply, observe that a 1% increase in productivity Ā increases
                                                                   1
output by more than 1% because of the multiplier               (1−α)(1−σ) .   In the absence of in-
14                                        CHARLES I. JONES


                                                                            1
termediate goods (σ = 0), this multiplier is just the familiar             1−α :   an increase in pro-
ductivity raises output, which leads to more capital, which leads to more output,
                                                                                    1
and so on. The cumulation of this virtuous circle is 1 + α + α2 =                  1−α .
         In the presence of intermediate goods, there is an additional multiplier: higher
output leads to more intermediate goods, which raises output (and capital), and so
                                                    1
on. The overall multiplier is therefore         (1−α)(1−σ) .   In fact, this multiplier can also be
                 1
written as      1−β , where β   ≡ σ + α(1 − σ) is the total factor share of produced goods in
gross output, capital and interemediates here.
         Quantitatively, the addition of intermediate goods has a large effect. For exam-
ple, consider the multipliers using conventional parameter values, a capital expo-
nent of α = 1/3 and an intermediate goods share of gross output of σ = 1/2. In
                                                                  1
the absence of intermediate goods the multiplier is              1−α   = 3/2, and a doubling of Ā
raises output by a factor of 23/2 = 2.8. But with intermediate goods, the multiplier
         1            3
is   (1−α)(1−σ)   =   2   · 2 = 3, and a doubling of Ā raises output by a factor of 23 = 8.
As discussed in Jones (2011), if we think of the standard neoclassical factors (like s̄
in the example) as generating a 4-fold difference in incomes across rich and poor
countries, then this 2-fold difference in TFP leads to an 11.3-fold difference in the
model with no intermediate goods, but to a 32-fold difference once intermediate
goods are taken into account, close to what we see in the data.5
         The deeper question in this paper is whether this multiplier carries over into a
model with a rich and realistic input-output structure. Perhaps the input-output
structure in practice does not lead to these large feedback effects. Or perhaps im-
porting intermediate goods dilutes the multiplier substantially in practice. In fact,
the remainder of this paper shows that these concerns are not important in practice.
The simple “one over one minus the intermediate goods share” formula suggested
by this example turns out to be a very good approximation to the true input-output

     5
     An implication of this reasoning that is worthy of further exploration is related to transition dy-
namics. A puzzle in the growth literature is why speeds of convergence are so slow, on the order of 2%
per year; see Hauk and Wacziarg (2004) for a recent summary of the evidence. The standard neoclassi-
cal growth model with a capital share of 1/3 leads to a speed of convergence of about 7% per year. The
presence of intermediate goods would slow this rate down, just as it raises the multiplier. (A difficulty
in quantifying this effect is the question of how long it takes to produce and use intermediate goods:
one week, one month, or one year? That is, how long is a period?)
                    MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                                 15


multiplier in modern economies. Moreover, we introduce distortions explicitly and
show how this same multiplier applies to misallocation.



4. Preliminary Exploration of a Full Input-Output Model

Assume the economy consists of N sectors. Each sector uses capital, labor, domes-
tic intermediate goods, and imported intermediate goods to produce gross output.
In turn, this output can be used for final consumption or as an intermediate good
in production.
   Given this general picture, we specialize to a particular structure with two goals
in mind: analytic tractability and obtaining a model that can be closely connected
to the rich input-output data. To these ends, the model augments the original Long
and Plosser (1983) business cycle model, based on Cobb-Douglas production func-
tions, by embedding it in a model with trade.
   We begin by describing the economic environment and then allocate resources
using a competitive equilibrium with distortions.


4.1. The Economic Environment

Each of the N sectors produces with the following Cobb-Douglas technology:

                            1−σi −λi
         Qi = Ai Kiαi Hi1−αi           dσi1i1 dσi2i2 · ... · dσiNiN mi1 mi2 · ... · mλiNiN
                                                                     λi1 λi2
                                                                                             (7)
                                       |            {z            }|        {z           }
                                           domestic IG                 imported IG

where i indexes the sector. Ai is an exogenous productivity term, which itself is the
product of aggregate productivity A and sectoral productivity ηi : Ai ≡ Aηi . Ki and
Hi are the quantities of physical and human capital used in sector i. Two kinds of
intermediate goods are used in production: dij is the quantity of domestic good j
used by sector i, and mij is the quantity of the imported intermediate good j used
by sector i. (We assume imported intermediate goods are different, so that they are
not perfect substitutes; this fits with the empirical fact that countries both import
and produce intermediate goods in narrow 6-digit categories.) We abuse notation
16                                        CHARLES I. JONES



by assuming there are N different intermediate goods that can be imported and by
indexing these by j as well. The parameter values in this production function satisfy
    P                   PN
σi ≡ N j=1 σij and λi ≡   j=1 λij and 0 < αi < 1, so the production function features
constant returns to scale.
     Each domestically produced good can be used for final consumption, cj , or can
be used as an intermediate good:

                                    N
                                    X
                             cj +         dij = Qj , j = 1, . . . , N.            (8)
                                    i=1


     Rather than specifying a utility function over the N different consumption goods
and performing a formal national income accounting exercise, it is more conve-
nient to aggregate these final consumption goods into a single final good through
another log-linear production function:


                                      Y = cβ1 1 · ... · cβNN ,                    (9)

        PN
where     i=1 βi   = 1.
     This aggregate final good can itself be used in one of two ways, as consumption
or exported to the rest of the world:


                                            C + X = Y.                           (10)


It is these exports that pay for the imported intermediate goods. We think of this
(static) model as describing the long-run steady state of a model, so we impose bal-
anced trade:
                                              N X
                                              X N
                                     X=                 p̄j mij ,                (11)
                                              i=1 j=1

where p̄j is the exogenous world price of the imported intermediate goods.
     Finally, we assume fixed, exogenous supplies of physical and human capital; the
                    MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                              17


effects of endogenizing physical capital in the usual way are well-understood.

                                        N
                                        X
                                               Ki = K,                                   (12)
                                         i=1


                                        N
                                        X
                                               Hi = H.                                   (13)
                                         i=1




4.2. A Competitive Equilibrium with Misallocation

To allocate resources in this economy, we will focus on a competitive equilibrium
with distortions. As in Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2007), Hsieh and Klenow (2009),
Lagos (2006), and Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), distortions at the micro (here sec-
toral) level can aggregate up to provide differences in TFP. For simplicity, we model
these distortions as sector-specific reductions revenue, denoted τi . These distor-
tions could literally be taxes, but they could also represent any kind of policy that
favors one sector over another (regulations, special consideration for credit, and so
on). The additional insight developed here is that the misallocation associated with
these distortions gets amplified by the input-output structure of the economy.



     Definition A competitive equilibrium with misallocation in this envi-
     ronment is a collection of quantities C, Y , X, Qi , Ki , Hi , ci , dij , mij and
     prices pj , w, and r for i = 1, . . . , N and j = 1, . . . , N such that

       1. {ci } solves the profit maximization problem of a representative firm
          in the perfectly competitive final goods market:

                                                                    N
                                                                    X
                                   max cβ1 1   · ...   · cβNN   −         pi ci
                                   {ci }
                                                                    i=1


          taking {pi } as given.

       2. {dij , mij }, Ki , Hi solve the profit maximization problem of a repre-
18                                             CHARLES I. JONES



            sentative firm in the perfectly competitive sector i for i = 1, . . . , N :
                                                           1−σi −λi
                  max            (1 − τi )pi Ai Kiαi Hi1−αi           dσi1i1 dσi2i2 · ... · dσiNiN mi1 mi2 · ... · mλiNiN
                                                                                                    λi1 λi2
            {dij ,mij },Ki ,Hi
                                               N
                                               X                N
                                                                X
                                           −         pj dij −         p̄j mij − rKi − wHi ,
                                               j=1              j=1


            taking {pi } as given (τi , Ai , and p̄j are exogenous).

         3. Markets clear
                                            P
            (a) r clears the capital market: N  i=1 Ki = K
                                           PN
            (b) w clears the labor market: i=1 Hi = H
                                                    P
            (c) pj clears the sector j market: cj + N  i=1 dij = Qj


         4. Balanced trade pins down X:

                                                        N X
                                                        X N
                                                X=                    p̄j mij .
                                                         i=1 j=1



         5. Production functions for Qi and Y :

                                 1−σi −λi
              Qi = Ai Kiαi Hi1−αi           dσi1i1 dσi2i2 · ... · dσiNiN mi1 mi2 · ... · mλiNiN
                                                                          λi1 λi2



                                                 Y = cβ1 1 · ... · cβNN .


         6. Consumption is the residual:


                                                       C + X = Y.


     Counting loosely, there are 12 equilibrium objects to be determined and 12 equa-
tions implicit in this equilibrium definition. Hiding behind the last equation is the
fact that the revenues from distortions are assumed to be rebated lump sum to
households. Because of balanced trade, however, there is no decision for house-
holds to make regarding final consumption C, and it is simply determined as the
                            MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                            19


residual of final output less exports.6


4.3. Solving

In solving for the equilibrium of the model, it is useful to define some notation in-
volving linear algebra. This is summarized in Table 1. Then the following proposi-
tion characterizes the equilibrium (all proofs are given in the appendix):


Proposition 1 (Solution for Y and C) In the competitive equilibrium with misallo-
cation, the solution for total production of the aggregate final good is


                                             Y = Aµ̃ K α̃ H 1−α̃ ǫ,                           (14)


where the following notation applies:
                  β ′ (I−B)−1
         µ′ ≡   1−β ′ (I−B)−1 λ
                                ,    (N × 1 vector of multipliers)

         µ̃ ≡ µ′ 1

         α̃ ≡ µ′ δK
                β ′ ωc +β ′ (I−B)−1 ωq
         ω≡         1−β ′ (I−B)−1 λ

         log ǫ ≡ ω + µ′ η̄.
Moreover, because trade is balanced, GDP for this economy is given by C, which equals
                                                                  
                                               N X
                                               X N
                                    C = Y 1 −     (1 − τi )γi λij  .                        (15)
                                                  i=1 j=1


       There are several points of this proposition that merit discussion. First, and
not surprisingly, our N -sector Cobb-Douglas model aggregates up to yield a Cobb-
Douglas aggregate production function. More interestingly, aggregate TFP depends
on both sectoral TFPs and the underlying distortions. This latter point requires dig-
ging into the ǫ term, where distortions then enter in two places. Distortions enter
   6
    Given Walras’ Law, this equation could be replaced by C = wH + rK + T , where T is the lump
sum rebate of the revenue obtained by the distortion; notice that all production is either consumed
or exported.
20                                        CHARLES I. JONES




                            Table 1: Notation for Solving the Model

                     Typical
Notation             Element              Comment

 Matrices (N × N ):
  B                 σij                   The input-output matrix of intermediate good shares.
  B̄            (1 − τi )σij              The matrix of intermediate good exponents, adjusted for
                                          distortions.
     I                  —                 Identity matrix.

 Vectors (N × 1):
   1                   1                  Vector of ones.
   β                   βi                 Vector of exponents in final goods production.
   γ                   γi                 γ ≡ (I − B̄ ′ )−1 β; “Domar” shares: piYQi = γi
                                                                         PN
   λ                   λi                 Vector of import shares, λi ≡ j=1 λij .
  δK           αi (1 − σi − λi )          Production elasticities for Ki
  δH        (1 − αi )(1 − σi − λi )       Production elasticities for Hi
  θK           PN δKi γi                  Solution: Ki /K = (1 − τi )θKi
                  j=1(1−τ )δ γ
                          j   Kj   j

                PN     δHi γi
     θH                                   Solution: Hi /H = (1 − τi )θHi
                  j=1 (1−τj )δHj γj

     ωK           δKi log θKi             Sectoral allocation term for Ki
     ωH           δHi log θHi             Sectoral allocation term for Hi
            PN
     ωd           σij log(σij γi /γj )    Sectoral allocation term for dij
            Pj=1
              N
     ωm       j=1 λij log(λij γi /p̄j )   Sectoral allocation term for mij
     ωq     ωKi + ωHi + ωdi + ωmi         Sum of allocation terms
     ωc           log(βi /γi )            Consumption allocation term
      η̄        log(ηi (1 − τi ))         Sectoral productivity, adjusted for distortions
                    MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                          21


directly through η̄, which is a vector of sectoral productivities, adjusted for distor-
tion rates; this is the usual sense in which distortions “directly” affect productivity.
Distortions also enter indirectly through the allocation terms, captured by ω. We
will return later to the effect of distortions.
   The second result to note is the presence of the input-output multiplier, re-
flected by µ. According to the proposition, this vector of multipliers is given by

                                           β ′ (I − B)−1
                                 µ′ ≡                       .                        (16)
                                        1 − β ′ (I − B)−1 λ

Let’s break this down piece by piece, since it is one of the essential results of the
paper.
   The matrix L ≡ (I − B)−1 is known as the Leontief inverse. The typical element
ℓij of this matrix can be interpreted in the following way: (ignoring trade for the mo-
ment) a 1% increase in productivity in sector j raises output in sector i by ℓij %. This
result takes into account all the indirect effects at work in the model. For example,
raising productivity in the electricity sector makes banking more efficient and this
in turn raises output in the construction industry. The Leontief inverse incorporates
these indirect effects. (Notice that it is the matrix equivalent of 1/1 − σ.)
   Multiplying this matrix by the vector of value-added weights in β leads to β ′ (I −
       P
B)−1 = N i=1 βi ℓij . That is, we add up the effects of sector j on all the other sectors
in the economy, weighting by their shares of value-added. The typical element of
this multiplier matrix then reveals how a change in productivity in sector j affects
overall value-added in the economy.
   This would be precisely correct if λij were zero — that is, in the absence of trade.
In the presense of trade, this multiplier gets adjusted by the factor 1/(1 − β ′ (I −
B)−1 λ). We will discuss this factor in more detail below, but for now it is enough to
note that this factor is larger than one: trade strengthens the multiplier rather than
attenuating it.
   The elasticity of final output with respect to aggregate TFP is µ̃ ≡ µ′ 1. That is,
we add up all the multipliers in µ since an increase in aggregate TFP affects not just
sector j but all the sectors.
22                                  CHARLES I. JONES



     A final remark about Proposition 1 concerns the capital exponent in the aggre-
gate production function, α̃ ≡ µ′ δK . Recall that δK is the vector of capital exponents
αi (1 − σi − λi ). The aggregate exponent is therefore a weighted average of the sec-
toral capital shares, where the weights depend on the intermediate good shares.
This remark will make even more sense after the next proposition.



5. Special Cases, To Build Intuition

5.1. The Multiplier in a Special Case

The linear algebra formula is a useful theoretical result and will prove convenient
when we apply the model to the rich input-output data that exists. However, ana-
lyzing a special case can be helpful in obtaining intuition for how the model works.
     Consider the following special case. Suppose all sectors have the same cumu-
lative elasticities of output with respect to domestic and imported intermediate
goods, although the composition across sectors is allowed to vary. For example,
one sector may use a lot of electricity and steel, while another sector uses a lot of
financial services and information technology. The composition can vary across
sectors, but suppose each sector spends 50 percent of its revenue on intermediate
goods. What does the multiplier look like in a case like this?
     The following proposition provides the answer. In fact, it allows for imported
intermediate goods as well (where the overall share spent on these goods is the same
in each sector):

                                                                 PN
Proposition 2 (Multiplier in a special case) Assume σi ≡           j=1 σij = σ̂ and λi ≡
PN
  j=1 λij = λ̂ for all i, where σ̂ and λ̂ are positive scalars whose sum is less than one,
and define σ̄ ≡ σ̂ + λ̂ to be the total intermediate goods share. Then

                      ∂ log Y            β ′ (I − B)−1 1     1
                              = µ′ 1 =         ′      −1
                                                         =        .
                      ∂ log A          1 − β (I − B) λ     1 − σ̄

     This special case makes two general points about the model. First, the “sparse-
ness” of the input-output matrix B is not especially important. For example, our
                       MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                                     23


special case includes a “clock” structure, where every sector uses as an input only
the good produced by the sector above it. It also includes the case where every sec-
tor uses only its own output. In both of these cases, the input-output matrix is very
sparse, with zeros almost everywhere. Yet the overall multiplier remains equal to
one over one minus the intermediate goods share. This special case suggests that if
the overall intermediate goods share is about 1/2, we shouldn’t be surprised to find
a multiplier of about 2. This intuition will be confirmed in the next section when we
turn to quantitative results.
       The second key point made in this proposition is that the intuition that imports
would dilute the multiplier is a red herring. In fact, there is no dilution at all: in
the proposition, it is the overall intermediate goods share σ̄ ≡ σ̂ + λ̂ that matters
for the multiplier, and the composition between domestic and imported goods is
completely irrelevant.
       Why is this the case? The answer is that we have imposed balanced trade in
our (long run) model. Therefore exports are used to “produce” imports. A higher
productivity in the domestic computer chip sector raises overall exports, which in
turn increases imports, so the virtuous circle is not broken by the presence of trade.7


5.2. Symmetry and Distortions

Our second special case allows us to study the multiplier associated with distor-
tions. First, we consider a world where the intermediate good shares of production
are the same in every sector and there is a symmetric distortion at rate τi = τ̄ . In
this case, GDP in the economy is given by the following proposition:


Proposition 3 (Symmetry and Distortions) Suppose σij = σ̂/N , λij = λ̂/N , βi =
1/N , αi = α, and τi = τ̄ . Then

                                           σ̄
                 log C = Constant +             log(1 − τ̄ ) + log (1 − σ̄(1 − τ̄ )) ,            (17)
                                         1 − σ̄
   7
     This assumption of balanced trade is the key difference that makes the intuition from the Keyne-
sian business cycle model inappropriate. In the business cycle context, an increase in exports leads to
a trade surplus and does not increase imports.
24                                       CHARLES I. JONES




                Figure 3: Consumption versus the Average Distortion, τ̄

             Consumption, C
               1
               0.9
               0.8
               0.7
               0.6
               0.5
               0.4
               0.3
               0.2
               0.1
                0
                −1                −0.5                  0                 0.5            τ̄ 1

          Note: This example is drawn for σ̄ = 1/2. Notice the similarity to Figure 1.



where σ̄ ≡ (σ̂ + λ̂) denotes the total intermediate goods share, and Constant is a
collection of terms that do not depend on τ̄ . Moreover, consumption is an inverse-U
shaped function of the distortion rate, with a peak that occurs at τ̄ = 0.

     An example of this proposition is shown in Figure 3. Notice that the effect of a
change in the distortion rate on GDP depends essentially on σ̄. If there are no inter-
mediate goods in this economy, output distortions have no effect. This is because
the distortions here represent a violation of the Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) dic-
tum of “no taxation of intermediate goods.” In our (current) setup, K and H are
non-produced factors, so a symmetric tax does not distort the allocation of capital.
     The key distortion is between consumption and intermediate goods. A good that
gets consumed suffers the distortion only once when the good is produced; a good
that is used as an intermediate gets distorted when it is first produced then again
when it is used as an intermediate. Since a constant fraction of output is consumed
and the rest is used as an intermediate good, this process suffers from the vicious
cycle of the multiplier.
                     MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                                25


    Symmetric distortions affect GDP through the two terms in equation (17). The
first term is the direct effect, where distortions enter the model very much like pro-
ductivity: recall that both 1−τi and Ai are subject to the multiplier effect through the
ǫ term in Proposition 1. The second term mitigates this effect somewhat and cap-
tures the indirect effect whereby higher distortions raise consumption (by reducing
the purchase of intermediate goods).


5.3. Symmetry with Random Distortions

Our final special case allows us to consider variation in distortions across sectors.
Suppose everything in the model other than distortions is symmetric, and allow
distortions to be a log-normally distributed random variable:


Proposition 4 (Symmetry with Random Distortions) Suppose σij = σ̂/N , λij = λ̂/N ,
                                                                                            1 2
and βi = 1/N , and let σ̄ ≡ σ̂ + λ̂. Assume log(1 − τi ) ∼ N (θ, v 2 ) and let 1 − τ̄ ≡ eθ+ 2 v
reflect the average distortion. Then

                                                     σ̄
                 plimN →∞ log C =Constant +                · (1 − τ̄ )
                                                   1 − σ̄
                                                                    1   1
                                      + log (1 − σ̄(1 − τ̄ )) −        · · v2 ,
                                                                 1 − σ̄ 2

where Constant is a collection of terms that do not depend on θ or v 2 . Moreover, con-
sumption is maximized when there are no distortions.


    In terms of the mean effect of distortions, this result is identical to the previous
one. Now, however, we have an additional result related to the variance of distor-
tions across sectors. In particular, a higher variance of distortions reduces GDP,
even in the absence of intermediate goods, since random distortions will distort
the allocation of capital and labor across sectors. However, the variance term itself
is subject to the now-familiar multiplier effect associated with 1/1 − σ̄. A higher
variance of distortions is more costly in an economy with intermediate goods. This
makes sense: the first best in this economy is to have no distortions. Either a con-
stant tax or a random tax distorts the allocation of resources and reduces GDP. The
26                                      CHARLES I. JONES




       Figure 4: Consumption versus the Standard Deviation of Distortions

            Consumption, C
              1

              0.9                                             σ=0

              0.8

              0.7
                                                    σ = 1/2
              0.6

              0.5

              0.4


                 0             0.2            0.4          0.6          0.8            1
                                                    Standard deviation of distortions, v

         Note: This example is drawn for τ̄ = 0.




magnitude of the distortion depends on the Diamond-Mirrlees effect: how impor-
tant intermediate goods are in production. An example is illustrated in Figure 4.




5.4. Random Distortions with a General I-O Structure

So far, I have lacked the right combination of time, talent, and insight to derive a
more general result for the effect of log-normal distortions in the presence of the full
input-output structure, though I suspect that good results are possible along these
lines. The intuition from the previous propositions strongly suggests that some-
thing like the general multiplier µ̃ will continue to play a crucial role. For the empir-
ical applications that follow, I will therefore focus on this general multiplier.
                    MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                         27


6. Quantitative Analysis

We now turn to the rich input-output data that exists, both for the United States and
for many other countries. This data allows us to calculate aggregate and sectoral
multipliers and to study the effect of sectoral distortions on aggregate GDP. First,
we use the six-digit level data available from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
for the United States in 1997. Then we turn to the OECD Input-Output Database,
which contains data for 48 industries and 35 countries.


6.1. The U.S. Input-Output Data, 480 Industries

Figure 5 shows something very close to the B matrix for the United States, using
the 480 commodities in the BEA’s 1997 benchmark input-output data. Actually, we
plot the matrix of σij + λij instead, so that the entries show the overall exponents
on intermediate goods used in producing each of the 480 goods. A contour plot
method is used, showing only those shares greater than 2%, 4%, and 8%.
   Three points stand out in the figure. First, there is a strong diagonal. Second, the
matrix is relatively sparse. Finally, there are a few key exceptions to this sparseness:
a few key goods are used by a large number of industries in a significant way. These
include wholesale trade, trucking, management of companies, real estate, paper-
board products, and iron and steel mills.
   Table 2 reports some basic statistics of the U.S. input-output matrix that help put
these visual conclusions in context. Even though the diagonal elements were im-
portant visually, the table makes the point that these elements are typically small:
the mean of them is only 3.3% and the median is only 1.0%. This is true despite
the fact that the typical industry pays a large share of its gross output to intermedi-
ate goods: 56.4% at the mean. The industry at the 75th percentile pays out about
two-thirds of its revenue to intermediate goods, while even the industry at the 25th
percentile pays nearly half. Along these lines, it is worth noting that even though
just 0.13% of the elements of the input-output matrix exceed 10 percent, this is still
288 elements over all — on average about once for every two sectors. Similarly, 83
of the entries are greater than 20 percent. As the bottom of the table shows, the
28                                                                      CHARLES I. JONES




                                Figure 5: The U.S. Input-Output Matrix, 1997 (480 Industries)


                                                                        The good being used
                                            50        100         150     200 250 300            350        400        450

                                50
                                                                                              Wholesale
                                                                                              trade (381)
                                100
                                                                                                            Trucking
                                                                                                            (385)
     Industry using the input




                                150
                                                                                                                       Management of
                                                                                                                       Companies (431)
                                                 Paperboard
                                200              products (125)

                                250

                                300

                                350
                                                                            Iron & Steel
                                400                                           Mills (201)           Real Estate
                                                                                                     (411)
                                450

                                      Ag/Mi/Con | −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−− Manufacturing −−−−−−−−−−−−−−− | −−− Services −−−

     Note: The plot shows the matrix [σij + λij ], that is, the matrix of intermediate good
     shares for 480 industries. A contour plot method is used, showing only those shares
     greater than 2%, 4%, and 8%. Source: BEA 1997 Input-Output Benchmark data.
              MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                          29




Table 2: Statistics of the U.S. Input-Output Matrix, 1997 (480 Industries)


      Properties of the diagonal elements
         Mean:                                                       0.033
         75th percentile:                                            0.045
         50th percentile:                                            0.010
         25th percentile:                                            0.002

      Fraction of all elements that are
         equal to zero:                                             0.510
         below 0.1 percent:                                         0.882
         below 0.5 percent:                                         0.958
         below 1.0 percent:                                         0.979
         below 5.0 percent:                                         0.996
         above 10 percent:                                          0.0013
         above 20 percent:                                          0.0004
         above 50 percent:                                          0.0000

      Mean of σi + λi :                                              0.564
        75th percentile:                                             0.666
        50th percentile:                                             0.558
        25th percentile:                                             0.477

      Aggregate Multipliers
         Domestic, β ′ (I − B)−1 1                                   1.61
         Imports, 1/(1 − β ′ (I − B)−1 λ)                            1.03
        Overall, µ̃                                                  1.65

      Actual intermediate goods share:                               0.434
      “As if” intermediate goods share:                              0.394

      Note: Except where noted, staistics are reported for the overall input-
      output matrix of σij + λij .
30                                    CHARLES I. JONES



overall intermediate goods share for the U.S. economy is about 43.4%: service in-
dustries are more important as a share of value-added, and these industries have
lower intermediate goods shares.
     The last part of the table computes the aggregate multiplier using the 6-digit
input-output data. The overall mutliplier is 1.65. This number is the product of a
domestic multiplier of 1.61 (that would obtain if no intermediate goods were im-
ported), and an import multiplier of 1.03. Imports are relatively unimportant in the
multiplier.
                                     1
     To what extent is the simple   1−σ̄   formula accurate? The multiplier of 1.65 would
result from this formula if the intermediate goods share were 0.394. In fact, the
intermediate goods share using this 6-digit data is 0.434. This simple aggregate for-
mula appears to give a good approximation to the result found by computing the
480x480 Leontief inverse, although there is a small degree of dilution: applying the
formula to the 0.434 share suggests a multiplier that overstates the truth by about
ten percent.



6.2. The OECD Input-Output Data, 48 Industries

The 2006 edition of the OECD Input-Output Database contains input-output data
for 35 countries and 48 industries, typically for the year 2000. In addition to covering
OECD countries, the data also include some poor and middle-income countries,
such as China, India, Argentina, Brazil, and Russia.
     Figure 6 shows the input-output matrix for the United States at this higher level
of aggregation. The pattern at the more detailed level of aggregation of a sparse
matrix with a strong diagonal and just a few goods that are used widely is repeated
at this higher level of aggregation.
     One of the nice features of the OECD data is that we can consider the question of
how much the input-output structure of an economy differs across countries. The
general and perhaps surprising answer that one obtains is “not much.” Figure 7
shows the input-output matrix for two countries, Japan and China, as an example.
     The matrix for Japan looks very much like the matrix for the United States. This
                                  MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                                                 31




                           Figure 6: The U.S. Input-Output Matrix, 2000 (48 Industries)


                                                       The Good Being Used
                                 5     10         15     20     25    30              35        40       45

                            5
                                                                   Wholesale/retail
                                                                    trade (31)
                           10
                                                                                      Land/pipline       Other business
                                                                                      transport (33)     activities (43)
Industry Using the Input




                           15

                           20

                           25
                                                         Radio/telecomm/semi−
                                                                                      F.I.R.E. (38−39)
                                                         conductors (19)
                           30               Office/accounting/
                                            computing mach. (17)
                           35

                           40

                           45

Note: Note: The plot shows the matrix [σij + λij ], that is, the matrix of interme-
diate good shares for 48 industries. A contour plot method is used, showing only
those shares greater than 2%, 5%, 10% and 20%. Source: OECD 2006 database.
32                                                        CHARLES I. JONES




     Figure 7: Input-Output Matrix in Japan and China (48 Industries)



                                                          The Good Being Used
                                          5   10       15   20     25    30        35   40   45

                                      5

                                     10
          Industry Using the Input




                                     15

                                     20

                                     25

                                     30

                                     35

                                     40

                                     45

                                                                  (a) Japan

                                                            The Good Being Used
                                          5   10       15     20     25    30      35   40   45

                                      5

                                     10                         Electricity (26)
       Industry Using the Input




                                     15

                                     20
                                               Metals (13−15)
                                     25

                                     30

                                     35

                                     40

                                     45

                                                                  (b) China
                    MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                            33


is true more generally, especially for the richer countries in the data set. But it is
even true for the poorer countries. The input-output matrix for China is perhaps
the most different from the United States, but the overall structure is still similar.
Electricity shows up as being noticeably more important, and other business activ-
ities (which include advertising, accounting, and legal services) as somewhat less
important. These are the main differences.
   The first column of Table 3 makes these comparisons more systematically. It
shows the fraction of elements in the input-output matrix that differ by more than
0.02 from the corresponding elements in the U.S. input-output matrix. Just over 16
percent of the elements exceed this difference in China’s input-output matrix, while
the corresponding number for Japan is about 9 percent. For this level of the cutoff,
the average across the 35 countries is 11 percent. If we lower the cutoff to 0.01, the
typical country has differences of this magnitude in just over 20 percent of the cells.
If we raise the cutoff to 0.05, the average across countries is 3.9 percent of cells.
   Figure 8 shows the aggregate multipliers, µ̃ for the 35 countries in our sample.
The average value for the multiplier in this sample is about 1.9. It ranges from a high
of 2.53 in China to lows of 1.51 in Greece and 1.59 in India. Interestingly, China and
India are two of the poorest countries in the sample, and they have widely different
multipliers. The multiplier for the United States using this data works out to be 1.77,
slightly higher than what we found in the 6-digit data.
   Table 3 shows these multipliers in more detail, including the contribution from
imported intermediate goods as well as the aggregate intermediate goods share and
the “as if” share that corresponds to the multiplier computed using the Leontief
inverse. The simple approximation of “one over one minus the intermediate goods
share” does a very good job of approximating the true multiplier.



6.3. Take-away from the IO Data

What do we learn from the input-output data? Three things, I think. First, the com-
mon 1/1 − σ̄ formula that emerges from simple models of intermediate goods is
remarkably robust: more careful analysis with full input-output structures across
34                                       CHARLES I. JONES




          Table 3: The Multiplier across a Range of Countries (48 Industries)

                       Fraction                                                Overall        “As If”
                        > .02              —— Multipliers ——                   Interm.       Interm.
Country                Different       Domestic  Import     Total               Share         Share
China                   0.161            2.21      1.14      2.53                0.63          0.61
Czech Republic          0.115            1.75      1.38      2.41                0.62          0.58
Slovak Republic         0.114            1.68      1.38      2.31                0.61          0.57
Hungary                 0.107            1.53      1.38      2.10                0.60          0.52
Korea                   0.109            1.72      1.22      2.10                0.58          0.52
Belgium                 0.104            1.60      1.30      2.09                0.57          0.52
New Zealand             0.114            1.77      1.15      2.03                0.54          0.51
Poland                  0.120            1.73      1.17      2.02                0.53          0.50
Finland                 0.101            1.63      1.21      1.98                0.53          0.50
United Kingdom          0.096            1.72      1.14      1.95                0.51          0.49
Portugal                0.112            1.63      1.18      1.93                0.52          0.48
Australia               0.104            1.71      1.11      1.89                0.49          0.47
Sweden                  0.096            1.57      1.21      1.89                0.51          0.47
Netherlands             0.096            1.54      1.22      1.89                0.51          0.47
Ireland                 0.135            1.35      1.39      1.88                0.53          0.47
Spain                   0.099            1.59      1.17      1.87                0.50          0.46
Italy                   0.094            1.62      1.15      1.86                0.50          0.46
Austria                 0.085            1.51      1.22      1.84                0.48          0.46
Taiwan                  0.104            1.53      1.20      1.83                0.52          0.45
Japan                   0.092            1.75      1.05      1.83                0.48          0.45
Brazil                  0.109            1.69      1.07      1.81                0.48          0.45
Switzerland             0.151            1.54      1.17      1.81                0.49          0.45
Russia                  0.242            1.63      1.11      1.80                0.47          0.45
Germany                 0.104            1.58      1.14      1.80                0.49          0.44
France                  0.104            1.63      1.10      1.79                0.48          0.44
Canada                  0.087            1.52      1.18      1.79                0.48          0.44
United States           0.000            1.68      1.05      1.77                0.46          0.44
Norway                  0.098            1.53      1.15      1.75                0.46          0.43
Indonesia               0.133            1.52      1.14      1.73                0.49          0.42
Denmark                 0.098            1.48      1.15      1.70                0.43          0.41
Israel                  0.106            1.49      1.10      1.63                0.41          0.39
Argentina               0.096            1.53      1.06      1.62                0.42          0.38
Turkey                  0.114            1.43      1.11      1.59                0.41          0.37
India                   0.153            1.49      1.07      1.59                0.44          0.37
Greece                  0.114            1.37      1.10      1.51                0.38          0.34

Average                   0.110           1.61           1.17        1.88        0.50          0.46

 Note: The first column reports the fraction of entries in a country’s input-output matrix that differ
 from those in the U.S. matrix by more than 0.02.
                     MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                                                                35



        Figure 8: The Multiplier across a Range of Countries (48 Industries)


          Total Multiplier
             2.8

              2.6
                           China

              2.4                                               Czech Republic
                                                          Slovak Republic

              2.2
                                                    Hungary            South Korea               Belgium
                                                 Poland                         New Zealand
               2                                                                                  Finland
                                                                       Portugal              U.K.      Australia
                                                                                        Sweden            Ireland
                                                                              Spain                  Japan
                               Brazil                                                 Italy
              1.8                          Russia
                                                                                      France   Germany      Canada
                                                                                                             Norway   U.S.
                          Indonesia
                                                                                                           Denmark
                                                      Argentina             Israel
              1.6      India            Turkey
                                                                   Greece

              1.4
                 0                 0.2                      0.4                  0.6         0.8          1
                                                                                Per capita GDP, 2000 (US=1)

       The figure plots the value of µ̃ computed for each country against 2000 per capita
       GDP from the Penn World Tables.




a range of economies suggest that the basic multiplier from simple models carries
over quite well. Working with simpler models, then, may be appropriate.
   Second, there is a surprising degree of similarity in these matrices across coun-
tries. This is surprising in that one might have expected significant differences both
for technological reasons and for reasons related to misallocation. On the techno-
logical front, countries at different levels of development presumably produce with
different technologies, and one might have expected to see this more strongly in
the input-output structure of these economies. This is particularly true given the
specialization arguments associated with international trade.
   On the misallocation front, it should be appreciated that many distortions that
might be present would show up by changing observed factor shares, even if the un-
derlying technologies were the same. One way to see that is to recall the first-order
condition in a simple neoclassical growth model with Cobb-Douglas production:
          Y
(1 − τ )α K = r. Firms rent capital until the post-distortion marginal product falls
36                                 CHARLES I. JONES



to equal the rental rate. But in this case, rK/Y = α(1 − τ ), so the observed capital
share will differ from the techological parameter by the distortion rate.
     This in turn has important implications. There is a fundamental identification
problem: we see data on observed intermediate goods shares, and we do not know
how to decompose that data into distortions and differences in technologies. This
identification problem is not solved in anything I have done. Instead, I’ve simply
shown that the observed spending shares are remarkably similar across countries.
     My tentative conclusion given this fact is that the misallocation across 4-digit
sectors is not particularly large in this sample of countries. Without solving the basic
identification problem, however, this conclusion must remain tentative. One use-
ful way to check this would be to assume the U.S. input-output structure measures
the true technology for all countries, and to use observed spending shares on inter-
mediate goods to measure the distortions that apply on average across the 4-digit
sectors. This would be a valuable exercise. Of course, one could certainly question
the assumption that the underlying technologies in all countries are the U.S. fac-
tor shares. Moreover, this approach would not measure the distortions that apply
within each sector, which may be quite important in practice. Redoing the Hsieh
and Klenow (2009) analysis using gross output and intermediate goods within sec-
tors for China and India (and other countries) would also be valuable.



7. Conclusion

One of the most exciting directions in the growth literature in recent years has been
the recognition that the misallocation of resources at the micro level can aggregate
up to look like differences in total factor productivity. Quantifying these effects in
novel ways, two examples being the extensive use of firm-level data and the explo-
ration of input-output tables, is yielding new insights on why some countries are so
much richer than others and likely has a promising future.
                            MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                                         37


A Appendix: Proofs of the Propositions

Proof of Proposition 1. Solving for Y and C

   We begin by considering the profit maximization problems for the final goods
and intermediate goods firms. For the final goods firms, recall that the problem is

                                                                           N
                                                                           X
                                          max cβ1 1   · ...   · cβNN   −         pi ci
                                          {ci }
                                                                           i=1


This yields a FOC where the spending shares are the exponents:

                                                      pi ci
                                                            = βi .                                         (18)
                                                       Y

   Next, consider the intermediate firms:
                                                1−σi −λi
       max            (1 − τi )pi Ai Kiαi Hi1−αi           dσi1i1 dσi2i2 · ... · dσiNiN mi1 mi2 · ... · mλiNiN
                                                                                         λi1 λi2
 {dij ,mij },Ki ,Hi
                                   N
                                   X                N
                                                    X
                               −         pj dij −         p̄j mij − rKi − wHi ,
                                   j=1              j=1


The first order conditions for this problem are

                                                                           p i Qi
                                      (1 − τi )αi (1 − σi − λi )                  =r                       (19)
                                                                            Ki

                                                                                 p i Qi
                                   (1 − τi )(1 − αi )(1 − σi − λi )                     =w                 (20)
                                                                                  Hi
                                                                p i Qi
                                              (1 − τi )σij             = pj                                (21)
                                                                 dij
                                                                p i Qi
                                              (1 − τi )λij             = p̄j .                             (22)
                                                                mij
   Now we are ready to use these FOCs to solve for some allocations. Begin with
the resource constraint for sector j:

                                                          N
                                                          X
                                                cj +            dij = Qj .
                                                          i=1
38                                            CHARLES I. JONES



Now use equation (21) to get rid of dij and rearrange slightly to get:

                                           N
                                           X
                                 pj cj +         (1 − τi )σij pi Qi = pj Qj .
                                           i=1


Finally, from the first-order condition for the final goods firm that pj = βj Y /cj . Us-
ing this expression for pj and canceling Y from both sides of the equation gives

                                        N
                                        X              βi Qi   βj Qj
                                 βj +     (1 − τi )σij       =       .                                 (23)
                                                        ci      cj
                                        i=1

                        βj Q j
     Now, define vj ≡    cj      and let v denote the N × 1 vector of vj . Then we can stack
the N equations in (23) to get an equation involving vectors and a matrix:


                                                 β + B̄ ′ v = v                                        (24)


where β is the N × 1 vector of final goods exponents and B̄ is the N × N matrix of
intermediate goods shares adjusted for taxes: a typical element is (1 − τi )σij . This
equation solves easily to give


                                        v ∗ = (I − B̄ ′ )−1 β ≡ γ.                                     (25)


Notice that this defines the solution for βj Qj /cj as γj . It is easy to show in fact that
these elements are also the solution for pj Qj /Y = γj , so that the γj terms are the
“Domar” weights — the ratio of total spending on intermediate good j to Y .
     At this point, we can use this solution to get useful expressions for dij and mij as
                                           pi        βi       cj
well. Equation (18) implies that           pj    =   βj   ·   ci .   Substituting this into the FOC for dij
in (21) leads to
                                                                     γi
                                        dij = (1 − τi )σij              · Qj .                         (26)
                                                                     γj
Similarly, mij satisfies
                                      mij = (1 − τi )λij γi Y /p̄j .                                   (27)
                     MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                                           39


The FOCs for Ki and Hi similarly yield

                          Ki   (1 − τi )(1 − σi − λi )αi γi
                             =P                                ≡ θ̄Ki                                 (28)
                          K     i (1 − τi )(1 − σi − λi )αi γi

and
                     Ki   (1 − τi )(1 − σi − λi )(1 − αi )γi
                        =P                                      ≡ θ̄Hi .                              (29)
                     K     i (1 − τi )(1 − σi − λi )(1 − αi )γi

In this expression, the “bars” over the θs denote that these expressions include the
(1 − τi ) terms in the numerator; this is useful below.
   Now we can substitute the expressions in (26) through (29) back into the main
production function for intermediate goods. Factoring out the 1 − τi terms (and
letting the θKi ≡ θ̄Ki /(1 − τi )) gives

                                           1−σi −αi                           σij                         λij
Qi = Ai (1 − τi ) (θKi K)αi (θHi H)1−αi                · ΠN
                                                          j=1 (σij Qj γi /γj )     · ΠN
                                                                                      j=1 (λij γi Y /p̄j )     .
                                                                                                      (30)
   Taking logs of this expression, stacking into a vector, and using much of the no-
tation in Table 1 gives


                    q = ā + ωq + δK log K + δH log H + Bq + λ log Y,                                 (31)


where q is the vector with typical element log Qi , ā is a vector with typical element
log Ai (1 − τi ), and B is the matrix of σij (see the table for the rest of the notation).
   This equation can be solved to yield


                 q = (I − B)−1 (ā + ωq + δK log K + δH log H + λ log Y )                             (32)


   We will use this expression shortly. First, though, we go back to the final goods
production function. Recall that ci = βi Qi /γi . Taking logs and stacking into a vector,
this gives
                                           c = ωc + q                                                 (33)

where ωc is a vector with typical element log βi /γi and c denotes the vector of log ci .
   Then, from the final goods production function and using the vector notation,
40                                              CHARLES I. JONES



log Y = β ′ c = β ′ ωc + β ′ q.
     We are now at the last step. Substitute (32) into this last expression to get


          log Y = β ′ ωc + β ′ (I − B)−1 (ā + ωq + δK log K + δH log H + λ log Y )          (34)


Let Ai ≡ Aηi . This last equation can then be solved for log Y to yield


                       log Y = µ̃ log A + α̃ log K + (1 − α̃) log H + log ǫ                  (35)


where the notation used is that in Table 1.
     The expression for consumption comes from using balanced trade and the ex-
pression for mij given in (22).


Proof of Proposition 2. The Multiplier in a Special Case

     In matrix notation, the assumption that all sectors have a cumulative domestic
intermediate goods share of σ̂ is simply B1 = σ̂1. This implies the following:


                                (I − B)1 = (1 − σ̂)1

                                        1 = (I − B)−1 1 · (1 − σ̂)

                                  1 = β ′ 1 = β ′ (I − B)−1 1 · (1 − σ̂)
                                                                    1
                                       ⇒      β ′ (I − B)−1 1 =          .
                                                                  1 − σ̂

                                        λ̂
     Similarly, β ′ (I − B)−1 λ =      1−σ̂ .   Therefore

                                   β ′ (I − B)−1 1        1            1
                      µ′ 1 =            ′       −1
                                                   =               =        .
                                 1 − β (I − B) λ     1 − (σ̂ + λ̂)   1 − σ̄



Proof of Proposition 3. Symmetry and Distortions

     The key step in solving the model is to use the same general result as in the
previous proposition: if a matrix X has rows that sum to the same value, x̄, then
                       1
(I − X)−1 1 = 1 ·     1−x̄ .   In this case, this result is used in computing γ = (I − B̄ ′ )−1 β,
                        MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                         41


where βi = 1/N . Because of the symmetry, one obtains

                                                    1/N
                                    γj = γ̂ ≡                  .
                                                1 − σ(1 − τ̄ )

    Substituting this result into the FOCs, one gets


                                      dij = (1 − τ̄ )σ̂Qj /N


                                    mij = (1 − τ̄ )λ̂/N γ̂Y /p̄j

as well as Ki /K = Hi /H = 1/N .
    Using these condition to compute the allocation terms, one obtains


             ωqi = −(1 − σ̂ − λ̂) log(1 − τ̄ ) − λ̂ log(1 − σ̂(1 − τ̄ )) + Constant


where the constant does not depend on τ̄ or on the sector i. In addition, β ′ ωc =
log(1 − σ̂(1 − τ̄ )).
    Following the definitions in Table 1, these expressions can be combined to yield
the allocation term:


                        ω = log(1 − σ̂(1 − τ̄ )) − log(1 − τ̄ ) + Constant


for some other constant that does not depend on τ̄ .
    Substituting this into the definition of ǫ gives

                                                 σ̂ + λ̂
             log ǫ = log(1 − σ̂(1 − τ̄ )) +                   log(1 − τ̄ ) + Constant.
                                              1 − (σ̂ + λ̂)

Furthermore, log Y will have the same form.
    Finally, we need to get the expression for GDP, C. Recall that because of balanced
trade,                                                      
                                         N X
                                         X N
                              C = Y 1 −     (1 − τi )γi λij  .
                                              i=1 j=1
42                                       CHARLES I. JONES



Similar arguments to those above give
                                                                          !
                                              1 − (σ̂ + λ̂)(1 − τ̄ )
                                C=Y                                           .
                                                 1 − σ̂(1 − τ̄ )

     Substituting this into the expression for Y (or rather log ǫ) above completes the
proof.


Proof of Proposition 4. Symmetry with Random Distortions

     This proof follows that for Proposition 3 fairly closely. The main exception turns
out to be in getting the solution for µ′ ℓ, where ℓ denotes the N × 1 vector with typical
element log(1 − τi ). This proceeds as follows. Using the fact that βi = 1/N

                                        1 − σ̂     1
                            µ′ ℓ =                   · 1′ (I − B)−1 ℓ
                                                     ·                                             (36)
                                     1 − (σ̂ + λ̂) N

                                                               1
The key step is then to show that 1′ (I −B)−1 =                      ′
                                                              1−σ̂ ·1 .   This can be shown as follows.
Let σ denote an N × 1 vector where each element is σ̂. Then, since B is an entire
matrix of σ̂, it follows that
                                               1′ B = σ ′ .

Then
                                        1′ − 1′ B = 1′ − σ ′

and therefore
                                      1′ (I − B) = (1 − σ̂)1′ .

Post-multiplying by (I − B)−1 and rearranging gives the result we wanted: 1′ (I −
           1
B)−1 =    1−σ̂   · 1′ . Once this is substituted into equation (36), one gets the expected
result that
                                          1        1 X
                            µ′ ℓ =                  ·  log(1 − τi ).
                                     1 − (σ̂ + λ̂) N i
                     MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                             43


      Following the same arguments used in proving Proposition 3, one gets

                                                           1         1 X
log C = log(1 − (σ̂ + λ̂)(1 − τ̄ )) − log(1 − τ̄ ) +              ·      log(1 − τi ) + Constant.
                                                       1 − (σ̂ + λ̂) N i

The rest of the proposition follows naturally from the log normal assumptions on
1 − τi .


References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, “Reversal of Fortune: Geogra-
  phy and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1231–1294.

  ,     , and   , “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” in Philippe
  Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1 of Handbook of
  Economic Growth, Elsevier, April 2005, chapter 6, pp. 385–472.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
  Econometrica, March 1992, 60 (2), 323–351.

Alfaro, Laura, Andrew Charlton, and Fabio Kanczuk, “Firm-Size Distribution and Cross-
  Country Income Differences,” NBER Working Paper 14060, June 2008.

Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo, “Growth Theory through the Lens of Development
  Economics,” in Philippe Aghion and Steven A. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic
  Growth, New York: North Holland, 2005, pp. 473–552.

Bartelsman, E.J., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta, “Cross-Country Differences in Productiv-
  ity: The Role of Allocation and Selection,” NBER Working Paper 15490, 2009.

Basu, Susanto, “Intermediate Goods and Business Cycles: Implications for Productivity and
  Welfare,” American Economic Review, June 1995, 85 (3), 512–531.

  , John Fernald, Jonas Fisher, and Miles Kimball, “Sector-Specific Technical Change,” April
  2010. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco manuscript.

Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2006, 121 (2), 541–585.
44                                   CHARLES I. JONES



Buera, Francisco J. and Yongseok Shin, “Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History:
  A Quantitative Exploration,” Manuscript, Washington University in St. Louis, 2008.

Caselli, Francesco and Nicola Gennaioli, “Dynastic Management,” December 2005. London
  School of Economics working paper.

Chari, V.V., Pat Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan, “The Poverty of Nations: A Quantitative Inves-
  tigation,” 1997. Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

  ,   , and   , “Business Cycle Accounting,” Econometrica, May 2007, 75 (3), 781–836.

Ciccone, Antonio, “Input Chains and Industrialization,” Review of Economic Studies, July
  2002, 69 (3), 565–587.

Cogley, Timothy and James M Nason, “Output Dynamics in Real-Business-Cycle Models,”
  American Economic Review, June 1995, 85 (3), 492–511.

Conley, Timothy G. and Bill Dupor, “A Spatial Analysis of Sectoral Complementarity,” Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, April 2003, 111 (2), 311–352.

Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees, “Optimal Taxation and Public Production I: Pro-
  duction Efficiency,” American Economic Review, March 1971, 61 (1), 8–27.

Dupor, Bill, “Aggregation and irrelevance in multi-sector models,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, April 1999, 43 (2), 391–409.

Erosa, Andres, Tatyana Koreshkova, and Diego Restuccia, “How Important Is Human Capi-
  tal? A Quantitative Theory Assessment of World Income Inequality,” Review of Economic
  Studies, October 2010, 77 (4), 1421–1449.

Gabaix, Xavier, “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” 2005. MIT working paper.

Gallup, J.L., J.D. Sachs, and A.D. Mellinger, “Geography and Economic Development,” In-
  ternational Regional Science Review, 1999, 22 (2), 179.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

Guner, Nezih, Gustavo Ventura, and Yi Xu, “Macroeconomic implications of size-dependent
  policies,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2008, 11 (4), 721–744.
                       MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                         45


Hauk, William R. and Romain Wacziarg, “A Monte Carlo Study of Growth Regressions,” Jan-
  uary 2004. NBER Technical Working Paper No. 296.

Hirschman, Albert O., The Strategy of Economic Development, New Haven, CT: Yale Univer-
  sity Press, 1958.

Horvath, Michael T.K., “Cyclicality and Sectoral Linkages: Aggregate Fluctuations from In-
  dependent Sectoral Shocks,” Review of Economic Dynamics, October 1998, 1 (4), 781–808.

Howitt, Peter, “Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Differences,” American
  Economic Review, September 2000, 90 (4), 829–846.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
  India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403–1448.

Hulten, Charles R., “Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 1978, 45 (3), 511–518.

Jones, Charles I., “Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic Develop-
  ment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2011, 3 (2), xxx–xxx.

Klenow, Peter J. and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, “Extenalities and Growth,” in Philippe Aghion
  and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2005.

Kremer, Michael, “Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1993, 108 (4), 681–716.

Lagos, Ricardo, “A Model of TFP,” Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (4), 983–1007.

Lazear, Edward P., “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic Review, 2000,
  90 (5), 1346–1361.

Leontief, Wassily, “Quantitative Input and Output Relations in the Economic System of the
  United States,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1936, 18 (3), 105–125.

Long, John B. and Charles I. Plosser, “Real Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
  February 1983, 91 (1), 39–69.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil, “A Contribution to the Empirics of Eco-
  nomic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1992, 107 (2), 407–438.
46                                   CHARLES I. JONES



Manuelli, Rodolfo and Ananth Seshadri, “Human Capital and the Wealth of Nations,” March
  2005. University of Wisconsin working paper.

Midrigan, Virgiliu and Daniel Y. Xu, “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level
  Data,” NBER Working Paper 15647, January 2010.

Moll, Benjamin, “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-financing Undo
  Capital Misallocation?,” 2010. Princeton University manuscript.

Olson, Mancur, “Big Bills Left on the Sidewalk: Why Some Nations are Rich, and Others
  Poor,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1996, 10 (2), 3–24.

Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott, “Monopoly Rights: A Barrier to Riches,” Ameri-
  can Economic Review, December 1999, 89 (5), 1216–1233.

Porta, Rafael La and Andrei Shleifer, “The Unofficial Economy and Economic Develop-
  ment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008, 2, 275–363.

Quah, Danny T., “Empirics for economic growth and convergence,” European Economic
  Review, 1996, 40 (6), 1353–1375.

Rebelo, Sergio, “Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, June 1991, 99, 500–521.

Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with
  Heterogeneous Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, October 2008, 11, 707–720.

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, Octo-
  ber 1990, 98 (5), S71–S102.

  , “New Goods, Old Theory, and the Welfare Costs of Trade Restrictions,” Journal of Devel-
  opment Economics, 1994, 43, 5–38.

Schmitz, James A., “What Determines Productivity? Lessons from the Dramatic Recovery
  of the US and Canadian Iron Ore Industries following their Early 1980s Crisis,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 2005, 113 (3), 582–625.

Syverson, Chad, “What Determines Productivity?,” NBER Working Paper 15712, January
  2010.

Vollrath, Dietrich, “How Important are Dual Economy Effects for Aggregate Productivity?,”
  Journal of Development Economics, March 2009, 88 (2), 325–334.
                    MISALLOCATION AND INPUT-OUTPUT ECONOMICS                         47


Yi, Kei-Mu, “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?,” Journal of
  Political Economy, February 2003, 111 (1), 52–102.
