                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DYNAMIC R&D COMPETITION



                         Gene M. Grossman

                           Carl Shapiro



                      Working Paper No. 1674




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 1985




We thank Avinash Dixit and Michael Katz for comments and
suggestions on an earlier draft. We are grateful to the National
Science Foundation for support under Grant No. SES—8408622.
Grossman also received support from the Sloan Foundation as an
Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellow. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Productivity and project in
Productivity and Industrial Change in the World Economy. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #1674
                                                August 1985




                       Dynamic R&D Competition


                               ABSTRACT




     We study a simple, two-stage, stochastic patent race involving two firms.
We examine the behavior of the participants as they gain the lead or fall
behind in the race. We find that the leader engages in R&D more intensively
than does the follower, and that both firms intensify their efforts if the
follower does catch up with the leader. We also analyze (1) the attractive-
ness of licensing, whereby the leader shares his results with the follower,
(2) a policy of issuing patents for intermediate research results, and (3)
the effects of research joint ventures, whereby the firms coordinate their
initial research efforts and share their results.




Gene M. Grossman                                     Carl Shapiro
Woodrow Wilson School                                Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University                                 Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                  Princeton, NJ 08544
(609) 452—4823                                       (609) 452—4847
I. Introduction



     Technological competition often has several of the characteristics of a race.

In a race, the largest (and perhaps only) prize is awarded to the first

participant to cross a well-defined finish line. Similarly, the first firm to

make an industrial breakthrough often captures the largest share of industry

profits. If the discovery is patentable, and "inventing around the patent" is not

possible, then second-place finishers may earn nothing at all. In races other

than sprints, strategy plays a critical role. The participants adjust their

tactics as the race develops, especially in response to changes in their relative

positions. Similarly, in technological competition, it is likely that firms will

vary their efforts depending upon whether they are ahead or behind in the

competition.

     The patent-race literature has focused primarily on the first of these

analogies behind technological competition and track events. Lee and Wilde (1980)

and Reinganum (1981), among others, have investigated thoroughly the determinants

of R&D expenditures in situations where the first to succeed captures the largest

(or only) prize. Their analyses embody no notion of progress or leadership,

however; they study stationary races in which all firms are equally placed until

the competition is (suddenly) over.

     In this paper we explore the dynamic aspects of R&D rivalry. In particular,

we focus our attention on how effort may vary over the course of a competition, as

one firm initially gains an advantage over its rival, and then (perhaps) the other

draws even again.

     Several investigators before us have studied some aspects of non-stationary

R&D races. Fudenberg, et. al., (1983) analyze a model of a multi-stage patent

race, but they severely restrict the firm's abilities to vary their research
                                        -2-




intensities. Harris and Vickers (1985) allow for a continuous choice of research

effort by firms, but theirs is a deterministic race in which equilibrium is

characterized by all firms but one exiting the competition right at the outset.

Neither of these specifications is suitable for investigating the dynamics of R&D

rivalry. The paper that is closest in spirit to ours is Judd (1985), which allows

for progress in the context of a stochastic competition. The applicability of

that analysis is limited, however, by the assumption that the winner's prize is of

arbitrarily small value.

     Our approach is to extend, in a very straightforward way, the familiar patent

race formulation of Lee and Wilde (1980). We adopt their stochastic structure,

but allow for progress (and the possibility that one firm may be ahead of another)

by introducing a single intermediate step in the research program facing each

firm. Thus, to win the race, a firm in our model must complete two phases of R&D

of equal difficulty. The two stages may be thought of as research and

development, respectively. Each firm is fully informed about the state of

progress of its rival and thus knows immediately if it has taken a lead or fallen

behind. Even with this very simple structure, we find a rich set of

possibilities, depending on the various parameters of the model, for the dynamics

of the race. The theoretical ambiguities that we uncover and discuss are bound to

be present in more complex specifications of multi-stage races.

     After describing our model of a two-stage race in the next section, we

proceed in Section III to characterize the dynamics of duopolistic R&D

competition. Then, in Section IV, we turn to a different set of issues that arise

in the context of multi-phase R&D rivalries. These concern the incentives that

exist for various forms of cooperation or competition at different stages of a

technological race. We explore three alternative institutions that alter the

dynamics of R&D rivalry. First, the leader may share its intermediate results
                                         -3-




 with its competitor under a licensing agreement. Second, the government might

 grant a patent to the first firm to achieve an intermediate result, thereby

 precluding the continued participation in the race of the loser in the initial

 phase. Finally, the firms may establish a common facility for early-stage

 research (i.e., form a research joint venture), and then compete noncooperatively

 in the development phase to turn basic research results into marketable products.

 We investigate the effects of each of these alternative institutional arrangements

 on the joint profits of the firms. Our analysis provides guidence in understanding

 the circumstances under which these forms of cooperation are most likely to arise.

     The paper concludes with a brief summary of the findings.



II. A Model of a Two-Stage Race



     Two risk-neutral firms compete for a prize of (current) value W. Each

discounts future expenses and earnings at rate r. The prize accrues to the first

firm to complete a research program involving two stages. At each point in time a

finn can choose to remain active by bearing a fixed cost of f > 0 per unit time1

and can achieve a flow probability (hazard rate) of success at its current stage

of p per unit time by spending a total amount, including the fixed cost, of c(p)

per unit time.2 We assume that c(O)    f, and c'(p) > 0 and c"(p) > 0 for all p >

0. The last of these assumptions reflects diminishing returns to R&D effort, due,




1.   Sunk costs incurred at the start of the race would not alter the analysis
so long as both firms chose to incur them. If only one firm sinks these
up-front R&D resources, the problem reduces to one of monopoly, which we have
analyzed in an earlier paper, Grossman and Shapiro (1985).

2.   Note that we are assuming that the two stages of research are equally
difficult, i.e., the same c(p) function applies at both stages.
                                         -4-




 for example, to the existence of some fixed factors in the research process such

 as a limited supply of promising ideas or talented researchers.

      Successful completion of the first stage of the program yields an

 "intermediate result". This result has no intrinsic value, but its attainment is

a prerequisite for beginning work on the ultimate phase of research. We assume

that each firm can observe the state of progress of its rival, i.e., whether the

rival has successfully completed the first stage of research or not.3 Clearly,

when one firm has completed the first phase and the other has not, we have a

situation where the former is ahead of the latter in the technological race.

     At every point in time, the game we have described can be fully characterized

by the state of progress of each firm. Three types of situations are possible:

(i) when neither firm has achieved the intermediate step; (ii) when one firm (the

leader) has completed the initial phase of R&D, but the other (the follower) has

not; and (iii) when both firms have advanced to the final stage of research. Each

firm chooses whether to remain active, and if so, its instantaneous rate of

expenditure on R&D, as a function of its own position in the race and that of its

rival. We shall refer to p, a firm's flow probability of achieving a breakthrough

in its current phase of research at any instant, as its "speed" or "intensity of

effort".

     We employ for this two-stage race the solution concept of sub-game perfect

Nash equilibrium. We must, therefore, determine for each possible configuration

the effort devoted to R&D by each of the firms. We denote by
                                                               p   the per-unit-




3.   It would be interesting to explore the (realistic) game of imperfect
information that arises when there are lags in observing the progress of one's
rival. Such an analysis, which is more complex than the one carried out here
due to the continual updating of beliefs and thus behavior by each firm, is
beyond the scope of the present paper.
time probability of success of a firm that has completed I stages of the research

program facing a competitor that has completed j stages, for i and j equal to zero

or one. The firms choose their R&D intensities to maximize expected discounted

net profits. The pair of speeds determines the expected payoffs to the rivals,

given the current state of the game. We write these as V.., using the same

subscripting convention as for the hazard rates.

     The analysis begins with the most advanced state and works backward. If each

firm already has achieved the intermediate result, the situation is that described

by Lee and Wilde (1980), with their arbitrary market structure replaced by that of

duopoly. If, in such circumstances, firm A chooses an R&D             intensity      and its

rival, B, chooses B then its expected payoff VA is given implicitly by



          rVA =   .c(pA)    +   A(w   -
                                          VA) +    B(VA)                      (1)




This equation states that the rate of return on the asset VA is equal to the flow

                                                                         -
of "dividends't, -c(p'4), plus any expected capital gains,                   VA), and losses,
 B      A               ,A.
p (0 - v ). Solving for v yields




          VA— pAW          c(pA)                                              2
                  r+p +p

Taking    as given, firm A chooses                to maximize VA. Observe that firm A will

remain active provided that there exists a value of A that makes VA positive.

Such a    will exist if and only if W >             c(p*)/p*   a, where p* is the speed that

minimizes the cost per unit probability of success, c(p)/p, and a is the minimal

average cost. Assuming that this condition is met, differentiation of (2) gives

the first-order condition for firm A's speed:
                                          -6-




            c(pA) =   W -                                           (3)


This   condition indicates that a firm's effort is directly related to the size of

the capital gain it will earn if a breakthrough is achieved.

       Equation (3) also tells us that the rivals have upward-sloping reaction

curves in (AB) space. The greater is firm B's expenditure rate on R&D, the

more firm A will find it optimal to spend on its own research program. The reason

is that an increase in firm B's expenditure rate reduces       and hence increases

the capital gain that firm A would enjoy were it to achieve a laboratory success.

This property of upward-sloping reaction schedules indeed will apply at all stages

of the patent race.4 It implies that R&D expenditures under competitive

conditions exceed the collusive rates that maximizes joint profits.5

       The symmetric equilibrium to the sub-game that results if both firms have
                                                             A      B
advanced to the final phase is found by substituting p11 for p and p and V11

for      in equations (2) and (3)6 This substitution leaves the following pair of

simultaneous equations:




4.   Straightforward calculations show that for all states of the game a firm's
reaction curve is upward sloping if and only if its expected payoff falls when
its rival completes a phase of the research program. This condition always
applies in the model.

5.   If the private payoff to the winning firm coincides with the social
benefit of the discovery, then the fact of upward—sloping reaction curves
implies that resources will be spent on R&D at a socially excessive rate. This
property of stochastic patent races was noted by several earlier authors.

6.   Any equilibrium for the sub-game in this state is symmetric, as can be
verified from (3). Firm A selects a higher speed than firm B if any only if
and only if firm A has a smaller expected payoff. But the payoff for firm B
must be smaller than that for firm A if its research effort is less intense.
                                                      —7-.




                   p11W -    c(p11)
                      r +                                                        (4)
                            2p11



           c'(p11) =   W —
                             V11                                                 (5)




     Next we calculate the equilibrium speeds and expected payoffs when one firm

has completed the initial phase of research but the other has not. Consider the

leader first. If this firm chooses a speed                   p10 and the follower selects p01,

then the equation analogous to (1) is



          rV10 =              +            -          +             -
                   -c(p10)         p10(W       V10)       p01(V11       V10).


The last term here represents the capital loss (V11 -
                                                      V10) that results if the
follower attains the intermediate result, thereby "catching up."                 Solving this

equation for V10 gives




          V10 = p10W    + p01V11- c(p10)
                                                                                (6a)
                        r+p10+p01

The leader will find it optimal to choose                 p10 > 0 if and only if W >   a,   in which

case its optimal intensity obeys



          c'(p10) =   W -                                                       (7a)
                             V10.


    Turning to the follower, it is possible that this firm will find it optimal

to drop out of the competition. This is the case if and only if the value
                                                                                             V11
                                                         -8-




found from equations (4) and (5) is less than a.7 Then p01 =              =   0,   and p10 and
                                                                    V01
V10 are found by substitution p01 = 0 into equations (6a) and (7a). If V11 >              a,
then the expected payoff to the follower is



                  p V - c(p           )

            01
                   r+p10+p01

where p01 satisfies the first-order condition



                     =          —                                         (7b)
                         V11        V01.


If the follOwer remains in the race, then the simultaneous solution of equations

(6a), (6b), (7a) and (7b) determines the speeds and values in the leader-follower

state.

      Finally, we consider the initial phase of the race, that which occurs before

either firm has achieved any progress. Applying reasoning similar to that above,

we note that any equilibrium at this stage is symmetric. The two firms will

embark on the research program if and only if V10 > a.         In this event, we have



                               ÷ p00V01 -
                 — p00V10                       c(p00)
                                          p00


and




7.   Since V11 < W/2 by equation (4), it is entirely possible that V11 < a < W,
in which case a firm will begin the race but drop out if it falls be.ind.
                                            —9—




           c'(p00) = V10 - V00                                       (9)




which jointly determine
                           p00 and V.
      Solving the entire two-stage race now is merely a matter of recursive

 solution of the various sets of equations for each possible state of the game. In

general, it is not possible to obtain explicit formulas for the optimal speeds.

Nonetheless, we are able to characterize the strategies that are chosen by firms

involved in a two-stage duopolistic patent race. This we do in the next section.



III. The Pattern of R&D Expenditures



     In this section we examine how a firm engaged in a race alters its behavior

over time, when it pulls ahead of or falls behind its rival, and when it or the

rival draws even again. Our main conclusions are that the leader always devotes

more resources to R&D than does the follower, but if the latter happens to catch

up, both firms intensify their efforts. Regarding the transition of the race from

its initial state to one where one of the firms pulls ahead, we find that it is

theoretically possible for either or both firms to speed up or slow down in the

event of an intermediate breakthrough by one of them. Numerical simulations

conducted over a wide range of parameter values for our model (with a particular

functional form for the cost function) suggest that perhaps the most typical

outcome is one where the firm that takes the lead intensifies its effort as a

consequence, while its rival reduces its rate of spending.

     We establish first that the (former) leader augments its R&D efforts when its

rival succeeds in attaining the intermediate result, i.e., p11 >            From
                                                                 p10.
equations (5) and (7a) and the fact that c" > 0 it is immediate that p11 >               if
                                                                                   p10
and only if V11 <          Arguing by contradiction, suppose that V11 >          and hence
                    V10.                                                   V10
                                                     -lo-




p10 > p11.     In this event, it is easy to show (by differentiating V10 in (6a) with

respect to p01) that the leader's reaction curve must be downward sloping. But

then p10 must be smaller than the leader's optimal response to p01 = 0, say p.

But p, which maximizes [pW -          c(p)]/(r   +   p),    also is the optimal speed for a firm

facing a rival who has also completed the initial stage, if the latter happens to

choose to devote no resources to R&D. Since the reaction curves in the state when

both firms are working on the second stage of research must be upward sloping, we

have p11 >    p.   It follows, therefore, that p11 >
                                                     p10, a contradiction that
establishes our claim.

     Next we show that when one firm is ahead and the other behind, the leader's

speed exceeds that of the follower, i.e., p10 >                           In combination with the
                                                p01.
previous results, this also will serve as proof of our claim that the (former)

follower increases its effort if it manages to draw even, i.e.,
                                                                                       p11 > p01.
     From equations (7a) and (7b) and the fact that c" > 0,                         p10 > p01 if and
only if W -          > V11 -           Substituting for V10 from (6a) and for V01 from
               V10             V01.
(6b) and rearranging terms, this inequality can be written as



     p01(W - 2V11) + r(W -      +      -         ÷ [c(p10) -                                   > 0         (10)
                           V11)   (p01   p10)V11                                    c(p01)]


Again arguing by contradiction, suppose that p01 > p10. Using the convexity of

the c(p) function, this would imply that c(p01) -                               < (p01 -
                                                                   c(p10)                   p10)c'(p01).
This in turn would imply that



          -             + c(p10) -               > (p01 -                   -
              p10)V11                  c(p01)                   p10)[V11         c'(p01)]
                                                 =          -
                                                     1o1        p10)V01                                    (11)
                                                    —11—



where the equality follows from equation (7b).

     We now can show that if the inequality in (11) is satisfied, that in (10)

must be so as well. Inequality (11) implies that the sum of the last two terms in

(10) is positive. But W >             (see equation (4)), so the first two terms of (10)
                               2V11
are also positive. Thus, under the working hypothesis that p01 >
                                                                                             p10, which gave
us inequality (11), inequality (10) is satisfied, implying p10 >                                    This
                                                                                            p01.
contradiction establishes that in fact p10 >
                                                            p01, i.e., the leader's speed exceeds
that of the follower.

     Our result that both the leader and the follower redouble their efforts if

the race becomes tied reflects the fact that the former has more to lose and the

latter more to win when the competition is even than when one firm is ahead. The

tendency to speed up is exacerbated by the positive competitive response of each

to the change in behavior of the other.

     Comparing the two states of the game that have the two firms on equal

footing, we find that the intensity of competition is greater after the

intermediate result has been attained by each. To see this, note from equations

(5) and (9) that p11 >
                         p00
                               if and only if W -
                                                             V11
                                                                   >
                                                                       V10
                                                                             -
                                                                                 V00.
                                                                                            But    the fact that

p10 > p01 implies that W -     V      >
                                          V11
                                                -
                                                    V01,
                                                           or W -
                                                                       V11
                                                                             >
                                                                                 V10
                                                                                        -
                                                                                            V01.
                                                                                                     It is

straightforward (and intuitive) but tedious to show that V00 >
                                                                                        V01, i.e., that
falling behind at the initial stage of the race entails a capital loss. It

follows therefrom that W -            >         -          and that p11 >
                               V11        V10       V00                           p00.
     Finally, we compare the starting speeds with those that are chosen after one

firm has captured a lead in the patent race. We have established by means of

constructed examples that any relationship between
                                                                   p10, p01 and p00 with p10 >

p01 is a possible outcome. After explaining why this is the case, we report
numerical simulation results which explore the comparative statics of our model in
order to gain an understanding of when the various possible dynamic paths are most

likely to occur.

     First consider the behavior of a firm that pulls ahead in the race. On the

one hand, its rival may react to having fallen behind by reducing its speed or

even by dropping out of the race entirely. Given the fact of upward-sloping

reaction curves, this diminished rivalry effect tends to cause the leader to

moderate its efforts. On the other hand, the leader has advanced towards the

finish line by making the intermediate discovery. This pure progress effect tends

to cause the leader to increase its expenditures on R&D, so long as the discount

rate is positive. In fact, we have shown in Grossman and Shapiro (1985) that a

single firm pursuing a multi-stage research program of the form analyzed here

will, absent rivalry, always increase effort with each increment of progress,

provided that r >   0.
     The follower also is subject to conflicting forces. The fact that its rival

already has achieved the intermediate result means that its reward from completing

the initial task is smaller, i.e., V11 <                  This diminution of the potential
                                                   V10.
reward to a breakthrough might cause it to reduce the intensity of research or to

abort the program altogether, independent of the leader's pace. If, however, the

follower chooses to continue racing, and if the leader speeds up upon making the

intermediate discovery, then the follower actually may increase its efforts in a

positive (upward-sloping reaction) to the leader's increased outlays.

     We simulated the model under the assumption of a constant elasticity of

variable   costs, c(p) =   f   + pe ,   for                   .   .
                                              a range of elasticities, e, greater than one.
                                                 -13-


We also varied extensively the other parameters of the model, W, r and f.8 We

 found that, if the follower drops out of the contest (p01 =          0),   then the leader

 increases its speed (p10 >
                                     p00) if the interest rate is large. A high interest
 rate implies a dominant pure progress effect. The leader also is more likely to

speed up when the rival exits the race if the elasticity of the cost-of-progress

function is large. In such circumstances, because it is costly to increase the

probability of discovery, competition at the start of the race does not push the

speeds to very high levels. Then, when one firm drops out upon falling behind,

the removal of the competitive interaction does not have a quantitatively large

impact on the behavior of the remaining firm.

       For most of the combinations of parameter values that we investigated, if the

follower remains active, then the leader works more intensively after the

completion of the initial phase of research than before. We did find examples

with p00 >         >         >   0, however; these occurred for small values of e.
             p10       p01
       Turning to the behavior of the follower, this firm is most likely to cease

its research operations upon falling behind if fixed costs are large, the prize is

small, the elasticity of the cost function is large or the discount factor is

large.9 If this firm does remain active, it is likely to reduce the size of its

R&D   expenditures.      Indeed, in all of our simulations we did not find a single

instance where the competitive response to the actions of the leader was

sufficiently large for the firm that fell behind to intensify its efforts.




8.   The ranges over which parameters were varied are as follows: W from 20
through 500, f from 10 through 200, r from 0 through 100, and e from 1.5 to
8.0. For the most part, these ranges were determined by the computer's
numerical limitations.

9.   For the constant elasticity(co,function the stopping rule for the
follower is V11 < a =        e[f/(e-1)]'
                                    '
                                      .  •Large values of r and small values of
W yield small values for V11.
                                           -14-




However, a simple analytical example suffices to demonstrate that such an outcome

cannot be ruled out on theoretical grounds. Suppose that the discount rate is

zero and only two levels of effort are possible, these yielding flow probabilities

of discovery per unit time of q1 and q2 with q1 <          The cost of research is nil
                                                    q2.
if q1 is chosen, while c(q2) =   c.   Then, if



          q1 +   3q    W(q2 - q1)
                                      <4

a unique equilibrium exists in the race and has p00 =          and p01 =         =         =
                                                          q1               p10       p11       q2.
In this example, each firm would prefer to proceed at the slower pace throughout

the race provided that its rival did so as well, but each speeds up after the

initial phase in response to the other's having done so.

    Pulling our findings together, we depict in Figure 1 a typical pattern for a

two-stage R&D race. At time t1, firm A attains the intermediate result and begins

work on the final stage of the research project. Sensing victory, this firm

intensifies its efforts, while a discouraged firm B reduces the scope of its

operations. At time t2, firm B achieves a breakthrough in its phase-one research,

and draws even in the race. Thereafter the firms compete intensively, until the

final stage is completed by one of them at t3, and the patent is awarded.



IV. Licensing Arrangements, Intermediate Patents and Research Joint Ventures



    We turn now to a variety of questions regarding the incentives that firms

have to cooperate (partially) during the course of a multi-stage patent race. Our

analysis focuses on three institutional arrangements that are observed in some,

but not all, instances of technological competition. These are:            (i) licensing
                                        -15-




 contracts, whereby the leading firm in an industry shares its superior knowledge

with one or more of its rivals in exchange for the payment of a royalty fee; (ii)

 the granting of "intermediate patents't, whereby the leading firm in a

technological race is declared by the policy authority to be the winner before it

has completed all the stages of development of an innovation that are necessary to

yield a marketable product; and (iii) research joint ventures, whereby the firms

agree to join forces in conducting certain phases of a larger research agenda.

Our analysis sheds light on what factors influence the attractiveness to the firms

of these various arrangements.



A. Licensing

     Once one firm in a multi-stage patent race has concluded an initial phase of

research that its rivals have not, the leader may have an incentive to make its

findings available to some of the other firms for a fee. Of course, certain

informational and bargaining obstacles will need to be overcome before an

agreement can be reached. These are beyond the scope of the present paper, as we

address only the issue of whether or not there are potential gains from trade in

information (i.e., the intermediate result) in our model.

     The question of the existence of potential gains from trade involves a

comparison of total industry "profits" with and without a licensing arrangement.

If licensing occurs, both firms will be engaged in the final stage of research

with a joint value of 2V11. In the absence of licensing, the firms together enjoy
                                        -16-




 expected profits of V10 ÷ V01. So, in our model, licensing can increase joint

profits if 2V1 >         +
                   V10       V01.10
      Licensing is jointly attractive to the firms because it allows the follower

 to advance towards the finish line without expending further resources on the

 intermediate result.'1 Clearly, in any realization of the race in which the

follower eventually draws even, the firms ex post would wish they had concluded a

licensing agreement. In addition, a licensing arrangement causes the follower to

remain in the competition in situations where dropping out is otherwise optimal

for this firm. While this may involve a waste of resources (if the leader is the

first to make the final discovery in any event), it can enhance industry R&D

efficiency. So long as the fixed costs, f, are not too large, the increasing

marginal costs in any particular laboratory imply that a given probability of

success can be achieved more efficiently by operating two labs rather than one.

This increased efficiency effect is most pronounced when the firms are in a rush

to reach the finish line, i.e., when the future is heavily discounted.

     Licensing also has a drawback from the perspective of the two firms in a

dupolistic patent race. A licensing agreement is bound to intensify competition

between the firms, since p11 exceeds both p10 and p01. Absent licensing, the




10. Of course, the feasibility of licensing will alter firmst incentives at
the start of the race. This ex ante effect may stimulate or retard the
discovery of the intermediate result by one of them, depending upon how the
gains from trade will be split between the licensee and the licensor. See Katz
and Shapiro (1984a and 1984b) and Shapiro (1985). Due to the existence of this
ex ante effect, the firms may seek ways of pre'-committing not to license to
their rivals even in instances where ex post gains from trade will be
available. Such means of pre-commitment may be difficult to find.

11. A second lab could also be put to work on the final research stage if the
leader could acquire the follower's laboratory. If feasible, this would clearly
dominate licensing, as the two labs' research intensities could be set
cooperatively. We assume that it is not possible to trade the specific assets
that constitute a lab.
                                            —17—




 period of intense competition might be avoided altogether, if the leader completes

 the research program before the follower makes any progress. Indeed, this outcome

 will surely arise in situations where the follower drops out of the race. The

 increased rivalry that licensing engenders may or may not dominate the

 "resource-free progress" that the follower can achieve by means of this

 arrangement.

       In our simulation exercise we found   potential   gains to licensing in a variety

of circumstances. In situations where the follower would drop out absent a

licensing agreement, licensing raises industry expected profits when the discount

rate is high or, for a given positive discount rate, when the elasticity of the

R&D   cost   function is sufficiently large. A high discount rate makes it optimal

for the firms to proceed quickly, and in such cases a second lab with its own

supply   of ideas and skilled personnel can be especially valuable. Similarly, for

a given value of r >    0,   the larger is the value of e the greater is the efficiency

gain from running two labs rather than one. When      r = 0,   however, it is efficient

from the industry point of view to operate a single lab at the scale that achieves

the minimum average cost of progress, c.

      In cases where the follower remains active, licensing is most likely to be

jointly profitable when the rivalry to which it gives rise in the final phase of

the race is not so intense. Thus, a high value of e is conducive to licensing;

when the marginal cost of increasing the probability of success is high, the firms

will not be tempted to do so to as great an extent. The same reasoning suggests

that licensing will be viewed more favorably when the prize is small. Finally, a

high discount rate is conducive to licensing, even if the follower stays in the

race, because it reduces the expected time to discovery. These intuitive

propositions were borne out consistently in our simulations, although we were

unable to prove general results using analytical methods.
                                        -18-



 B. Intermediate Patents

      We now inquire as to whether the firms would support ex ante a policy that

 awarded a patent at the intermediate stage of the innovation process.12 While

 current U.S. policy stipulates that patents are to be granted only for "useful"

 innovations, there may be considerable scope for discretion on the part of the

patent-granting authority concerning what satisfies this criterion. A patent may

well be awarded at a stage where substantial additional development expenses will

be necessary before the product can be made available to consumers.

      If an intermediate patent is issued, the firm that fails to make the initial

discovery first would be legally required to drop out of the race. From an ex

p point of view (i.e., once the intermediate result has been attained by one of

the firms), this would raise industry expected profits if the expected payoff to a

firm proceeding to the second stage of research without competition, say Vm

exceeds the sum of the two firms' payoffs, V10 +         in the event of continued
                                                   V1,
rivalry. The ex post benefit of an intermediate patent to the firms (which, of

course, accrues more than fully to the leader at that stage) is that it removes

the extra cost of competition in the later stages of development. The cost of

such a patent is that it reduces by one the number of active laboratories, thereby




12.  If the private prize W happens to coincide with the social benefit, as,
for example, when the winning firm can practice perfect price discrimination or
when all of the resulting product is to be sold in export markets, then the
question of whether the two firms would prefer the granting of intermediate
patents coincides with the normative question of what should be appropriate
patent policy from a social welfare perspective. Of course, in general the
private prize and the social benefits will differ. Surplus that accrues to
domestic consumers as a result of the discovery causes the social benefit to
exceed the private prize, while reductions in profits of firms not active in
the race under consideration work in the opposite direction. We do not pursue
the social welfare analysis more fully, as the line of reasoning is rather
clear. For example, if the consumer benefits are significant, then any
policies or institutional arrangements that cause the firms to conduct research
more intensively will be relatively more attractive than otherwise.
                                                    —19—




 decreasing the efficiency of research for a given industry-wide probability of

 success.

          In simulations using the constant elasticity of variable costs function, we

 found V >            +
                V10       V01 except when r is large or e is large. A high discount rate
 make it desirable to complete the research project quickly. Then it is most

 inefficient to have one of the labs inoperative, especially if diseconomies of

 scale are substantial.

          The fact that V > V         + V
                            m    10         01 is neither necessary nor sufficient for the
 firms to favor the granting of intermediate patents, however. The patent regime

 also effects the intensity of competition, and thus the expected resource

expenditure in the initial phase of research prior to the intermediate discovery.

If an intermediate patent increases expected industry profits measured from the

time that the initial stage has been completed, but it causes competition to be

more intense at the outset, then it may lower ex ante industry profits.

Similarly, an alleviation of competition at the start of the race can compensate

for a shortfall of V in comparison to V10 +
                                            V01 and cause the firms to support a
policy of intermediate patent awards.

          In our simulations we found that for parameters values consistent with V =
                                                                                 ifi
      +
V10       V01, competition at the start of the race is more intense under a regime
with intermediate patents than under one without.              Thus, for a range of parameter

values, intermediate patents appear beneficial to the firms (taken together) ex

post, but not ex ante. Nonetheless, for combinations of values of r and e

somewhat smaller than the ones that yield higher ex st expected industry profits

under an intermediate patent regime, the granting of such patents also yields

expected benefits to the firms before the race starts.
                                          -20-




C. Research Joint Ventures

      The final form of potential cooperation that we consider is a research joint

venture (RJV). We assume that such a venture enables the firms to coordinate

their research activities during the first stage of the R&D program. When the

intermediate result is achieved, both firms then have access to it. We do not,

however, allow for synergies in research to be enjoyed on account of a joint

venture. In other words, we assume that the research technology is unaffected by

the formation of an RJV. We also assume that joint research is not feasible
                                          13
during the second stage of the project.        This assumption corresponds to an

interpretation of the two-stage innovation process where the first stage is

"research,t' a public good, and the second stage is firm-specific "development".

      Under the R&D technology we have specified, the firms engaged in a research

joint venture may prefer to operate either one laboratory or two. By running only

one lab, the firms can conserve on fixed costs of equipment and administration.

However, the coordination of efforts and activities which imparts administrative

savings may also entail a reduction in the variety of approaches that can be

pursued. Given the assumption of decreasing returns to devoting more resources to

a fixed supply of ideas and techniques, it may be more efficient for the firms to

forego the (fixed) cost savings associated with a unified operation, and to use




13.  If feasible, the firms would always choose to coordinate their research
activities in our model once the intermediate result has been attained by both
of them. Doing so allows the rivals to avoid excess competition in the last
phase of the race. However, in many applications, it would not be reasonable
to maintain the assumption that the size of the prize would be unaffected by an
RJV that allowed both firms to have access to the ultimate innovation. In such
circumstances, competition might arise in the product market thereby eroding
the monopoly profits attached to the patent. For an analysis of the
desirability of RJV's with a single stage of research and subsequent product
market competition, see Katz (1984).
                                           -21-



 the joint venture only as a means to collusively set the research outlays at each

 of two separate facilities.14

      In general, an RJV tends to increase the joint expected profits of the

 patent-race participants for two reasons. First, it eliminates profit-dissipating

 rivalry at the initial stage of the research program. Second, by ensuring that

 both firms have access to the intermediate result as soon as a breakthrough is

 achieved in any lab; it (like licensing) allows the firms to avoid the wasteful

 duplication of effort associated with the follower attempting to gain a state of

knowledge that has already been achieved by the leader. On the negative side, an

RJV guarantees that the firms will need to endure the most intensively competitive

of the various states of the patent race, that when both firms simultaneously are
                            15
seeking the final result.        Absent an RJV, this potentially costly state can be

avoided if the leader happens to complete both phases of the research program

before the follower is able to progress to the intermediate point.

      In our simulations, we indeed found constellations of parameters such that

expected industry profits are smaller with an RJV than with unmitigated rivalry at

the initial stage. These arose for large fixed costs or small prizes, in




14. It is not clear, however, that a research joint venture involving no
common research facility, but only an agreement to coordinate research budgets,
would win approval from antitrust authorities.

15.  In this regard, the RJV is similar to the licensing arrangement, which, as
we noted, also is subject to this potential drawback. In fact, in situations
where licensing would take place, an RJV is a strictly superior arrangement
from the point of view of the two firms. Both regimes ensure transition to a
stage where each firm has access to the intermediate result as soon as one of
the labs achieves success, but the RJV involves coordination of expenditures at
the initial stage as well.
                                       -22-




situations where the follower would choose to drop out of the race entirely,
                 16
absent an RJV.

     We have identified a new reason why research joint ventures may fail to

appeal to rival researchers. The traditional reason is that joint ventures

generally involve increased coordination and administrative costs. Another problem

is that a joint venture might reduce the diversity of research paths that are

pursued. Even absent these factors, we have shown that an RJV may reduce members'

profits by increasing their direct rivalry after the venture's results are made

available to its members.



V. Conclusions




     In this paper we explored the dynamics of R&D competition that result when

two firms engage in a patent race. We adopted a simple structure in which a

research program requires the sequential completion of two phases of equal

difficulty. Following the literature on single-stage patent races, we assumed

that success at each stage is subject to uncertainty, and that the flow

probability per unit time of a breakthrough increases when more resources are

devoted to the project. This structure was sufficiently rich to allow us to

analyze how a firm will alter its behavior if it captures a lead, falls behind in

the race, or if it sees a former lead or deficit eliminated.




16. Note that it is neither necessary nor sufficient for an RJV to be
undesirable that the follower would drop out of the race. It is possible to
construct a two-speed, no-discounting example, such as the one described in
Section III, in which for certain parameter values the follower remains active
(albeit at the slow speed) under competition, and yet this regime is preferable
to an RJV. And when the follower does cease operations, an RJV nonetheless
might be profit-enhancing due to its moderating effect on expenditures at the
start of the race.
                                        -23-




     We found that competition is most intense when both firms are even and each

has completed the initial phase of the research project. When a lagging firm

draws even with a rival that was formerly ahead in the race, both competitors

 respond by increasing their research efforts.

     We also found that when the two firms are at different stages in the

innovation process, the one that is ahead has a greater incentive to invest in R&D

than the one that is behind. This result is reminiscent of another proposition in

the R&D literature, namely that the firm with lower initial costs in a Cournot

duopoly has a greater incentive than its rival to engage in cost-reducing R&D.

     The response of either firm to one of them becoming the first to achieve the

intermediate result is theoretically ambiguous. Numerical simulations for a wide

range of parameter values suggest that a typical pattern has the leading firm

increasing its R&D expenditures when it advances to the final phase, while the

follower reduces the extent of its research activity.

     Finally, we used the two-stage patent race model to study the incentives that

rival firms have to engage in various forms of cooperation during the course of a

technological competition. The desirability of licensing agreements after one of

the firms has achieved some progress, of a public policy that grants patents at an

intermediate stage in the innovation process, and of research joint ventures that

allow the firms to coordinate their activities in the early stages of an R&D

program all hinge on the various parameters of the model. In general, these

alternative forms of cooperation are most likely to increase joint expected

profits when the competition that would arise absent any such arrangement would be

quite intense. Competitive pressures are most severe when the prize being sought

is large, the discount factor is high and the marginal cost of augmenting the flow

probability of success at each stage of research rises slowly.
                                       -24-


                                    REFERENCES




Fudenberg, D., Gilbert, R., Stiglitz, J., and Tirole, J. (1983) "Preemption,
     Leapfrogging and Competition in Patent Races," European Economic Review, 22,
     pp. 3-31.

Grossman, G. and Shapiro, C. (1985) "Optimal Dynamic R&D Programs," Discussion
     Paper in Economics No. 94, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University.

Harris, C. and Vickers, J. (1985) "Perfect Equilibrium in a Model of a Race,"
     Review of Economic Studies, 52, pp. 193-209.

Judd, K. (1985) "Closed-Loop Equilibrium in a Multi-Stage Innovation Race,"
     Discussion Paper No. 647, Management Economics and Decision Science, Kellogg
     Graduate School of Management, Northwestern University.

Katz, H. (1984) "An Analysis of Cooperative Research and Development," Discussion
     Paper in Economics No. 76, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University.

Katz, H. and Shapiro, C. (1984a) "On the Licensing of Innovations," Discussion
     Paper in Economics No. 82, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University.

Katz, N. and Shapiro, C. (1984b), "Perfect Equilibrium in a Development Game with
     Licensing or Imitation," Discussion Paper in Economics No. 85, Woodrow Wilson
     School, Princeton University.

Lee, T. and Wilde, L. (1980) "Market Structure and Innovation: A Reformulation,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94, pp. 429-436.

Reinganum, J. (1981) "Dynamic Games of Innovation," Journal of Economic Theory,
     25, pp. 21-41.

Shapiro, C.. (1985) "Patent Licensing and R&D Rivalry," American Economic Review,
     75, pp. 25-30.
                               Figure 1

            Typical Pattern for a Two—Stage Patent Race



intensity
of effort
   4
                                   FirmA



                                    /
                           I                       I
                           I
                           I
                                                   I
                                                   I
                           ,                       I




                                   Firm   B




                         ti                       t2
                                                               .   time
                                                          t3
