NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING THE RETURNS TO URBAN BOARDING SCHOOLS:
EVIDENCE FROM SEED
Vilsa E. Curto
Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
Working Paper 16746
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16746

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

We are grateful to Eric Adler, Anjali Bhatt, Pyper Davis and Rajiv Vinnakota for their cooperation
in collecting data necessary for this project. Will Dobbie and Meghan Howard provided exceptional
research assistance. Support from the Education Innovation Laboratory at Harvard University (EdLabs)
is gratefully acknowledged. Correspondence can be addressed to either of the authors by email. The
usual caveat applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Vilsa E. Curto and Roland G. Fryer, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Estimating the Returns to Urban Boarding Schools: Evidence from SEED
Vilsa E. Curto and Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 16746
January 2011
JEL No. I20,J01,J15
ABSTRACT
The SEED schools, which combine a "No Excuses'' charter model with a five-day-a-week boarding
program, are America's only urban public boarding schools for the poor. We provide the first causal
estimate of the impact of attending SEED schools on academic achievement, with the goal of understanding
whether changing a student's environment through boarding is a cost-effective strategy to increase
achievement among the poor. Using admission lotteries, we show that attending a SEED school increases
achievement by 0.198 standard deviations in reading and 0.230 standard deviations in math, per year
of attendance. Despite these relatively large impacts, the return on investment in SEED is less than
five percent due to the substantial costs of boarding. Similar "No Excuses'' charter schools – without
a boarding option – have a return on investment of over eighteen percent.
Vilsa E. Curto
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
vilsa.curto@post.harvard.edu
Roland G. Fryer, Jr.
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

The racial achievement gap is an empirical fact that manifests itself in every American school
district, at every level of schooling, and on nearly every academic assessment. The National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), which measures students’ levels of proficiency in reading
and math, highlights this fact.1 Among fourth graders, 43.2 percent of white students and 12 percent of black students are proficient in reading. In math, 50.9 percent of white students and 14
percent of black students are proficient. Similarly, among eighth graders, 40.4 percent of white students and 10.6 percent of black students score proficient in reading. Math scores exhibit a similar
pattern. There is not one urban school district in NAEP in which more than twenty-one percent
of black students are proficient in reading or math (Fryer, forthcoming).
There have been many attempts to close the achievement gap, including early childhood interventions; smaller schools and classrooms; mandatory summer school; merit pay for principals,
teachers, and students; ending social promotion; using “smart” technology; and policies to lower
the barrier to teaching via alternative paths to accreditation (Currie and Thomas, 1995; Krueger
and Whitmore, 2001; Puma et al., 2010; Bloom et al., 2010; Krueger, 1999; Jacob and Lefgren,
2004; Podgursky and Springer, 2007; Fryer, 2010a,b; Jacob and Lefgren, 2009; Decker et al., 2004;
Kane et al., 2008). Yet, these policies have not substantially reduced the gap in even the most
reform-minded districts. There is recent enthusiasm for charter schools — publicly funded schools
that operate outside the direct control of local school districts — but the bulk of the evidence suggests that they perform roughly the same as traditional public schools (Zimmer et al., 2009; Gleason
et al., 2010).2
The lack of progress in closing the racial achievement gap has caused many to question whether
schools alone can increase achievement among the poor or whether the challenges children bring
1

NAEP is a nationally representative set of assessments administered every two years to fourth, eighth, and twelfth
graders that cover various subject areas, including mathematics and reading. Individual schools are first selected for
participation in NAEP in order to ensure that the assessments are nationally representative, and then students are
randomly selected from within those schools. Both schools and students have the option to not participate in the
assessments. Tests are given in multiple subject areas in a given school in one sitting, with diﬀerent students taking
diﬀerent assessments. Assessments are conducted between the last week of January and the first week of March every
year. The same assessment is given to all students within a subject and a grade during a given administration.
2
There are, however, several charter schools and charter management organizations that have demonstrated
marked success (e.g., Knowledge is Power Program, Harlem Children’s Zone, and Harlem Success Academies) (Hoxby
and Murarka, 2009; Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2009; Angrist et al., 2010; Dobbie and Fryer, forthcoming; Gleason et al.,
2010). Raymond (2009) estimates that 17 percent of charter schools outperform traditional public schools.

2

to school as a result of being reared in dysfunctional families and failing communities are too
much for all but the best educators to overcome. Consider the case of Washington, D.C.: 24.4
percent of blacks live in poverty, only 23 percent of black children are reared in a two-parent
household, 7.4 percent of black women will give birth while they are still teenagers, and nearly
50 percent of black men between the ages of 18 and 35 are under Criminal Justice supervision
(Lotke, 1998).3 School safety is also a major concern: in 2007, 11.3 percent of high school students
reported being threatened or injured with a weapon on school property during the previous twelve
months.4 Brooks-Gunn et al. (1999) argue that children who grow up in low-income families
tend to score lower than children from more aﬄuent families on assessments of health, cognitive
development, school achievement, and emotional well-being. In this scenario, combating poverty,
having more constructive out-of-school time, or minimizing negative social interactions with a
student’s environment will lead to better and more-focused instruction in school and increased
student achievement.
One potential solution, which has yet to be tested, is coupling achievement-minded schools with
a boarding program that ensures students have a positive and nurturing environment outside of
school.5 Theoretically, taking students away from their home environment and placing them in
a boarding program could have one of three eﬀects. If the environment that the typical student
encounters in a boarding school is, on net, more positive than her home environment and the
3

Figures on poverty and family structure were obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2006-2008 American
Community Survey 3-Year Estimates. In Washington, D.C., 80 percent of white children are reared in a two-parent
household. The percent of black women who will give birth as teenagers was estimated using data from the National
Vital Statistics System. There were 908 births to black women aged 15-19 in Washington, D.C., in 2008. Based on
data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2006-2008 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates, there are about 12,332
black women aged 15-19 in Washington, D.C. The corresponding birth rate among black women in Washington, D.C.,
aged 15-19 is about 7.4 percent. Being under Criminal Justice supervision is defined as being in prison or jail, being
on probation or parole, being out on bond, or being sought on an arrest warrant.
4
Figure obtained from the National Center for Education Statistics’ 2008 report on Indicators of School Crime
and Safety.
5
At least one residential program targeted to disadvantaged youths - Job Corps - has had considerable success,
leading to a 15 percent increase in annual earnings, reduced dependence on welfare and public assistance by about 2
weeks per year, and a fivefold increase in the probability of obtaining a high school diploma. Job Corps is a program
providing economically disadvantaged youths between ages 16 and 21 with basic education, vocational training, and
other services in a residential setting. Its primary purpose is to improve the long-term productivity and lifetime
earnings prospects of high school dropouts (Mallar, 1982). However, JOBSTART - a program intended to provide
training and support similar to that of Job Corps, but in a less expensive, non-residential setting - has had statistically
insignificant results. Cave et al. (1993) found that eﬀects on earnings four years after the program were not statistically
significant, there was little impact on youths’ receipt of public assistance, and that JOBSTART participants increased
their educational attainment, but this was mostly through receipt of the GED (General Educational Development)
rather than completion of high school. This evidence suggests that residential programs could be more eﬀective at
delivering education and support to disadvantaged youths in urban areas than non-residential programs.

3

diﬀerences between them are correlated with academic achievement, then boarding schools will
yield positive gains in test scores. If the boarding school environment is not more conducive
to achievement, or if the new environment causes psychological or emotional distress or other
behavioral responses that hinder a student’s academic performance, then boarding schools may
have a negative eﬀect on achievement. Finally, if the positive and negative aspects of placing a
student in a boarding program roughly balance out, or the diﬀerences in the home environment and
the boarding school are not correlated with achievement (e.g., less television in boarding school),
then the eﬀects of boarding school will be negligible.
The SEED schools, located in Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Maryland, are America’s only
urban public boarding schools for the poor. These schools combine a “No Excuses” charter school
model with a five-day-a-week boarding program, which provides a rare laboratory to estimate the
returns (both average and marginal) to attending an urban boarding school. The SEED schools
serve students in grades six through twelve. Like other “No Excuses” charter schools (e.g., Knowledge is Power Program or Harlem Children’s Zone), SEED schools have an extended school day,
extensive after-school tutoring for students who need support, rely heavily on data to drive instruction, and have a paternalistic culture with high expectations. The middle school curriculum
focuses on developing basic skills in reading and math, and the high school uses an intensive collegepreparatory curriculum that requires all students to take the SAT or ACT college admissions test
and apply to at least five colleges or universities in order to graduate.
To account for the fact that students who attend SEED schools may not be a random sample,
we exploit the fact that SEED is required to select students by random lottery when demand for
the school exceeds the supply of admission slots available. The treatment group is composed of
students who won the lottery and the control group is comprised of students who entered the lottery
but did not win. This allows us to provide a set of causal estimates of the eﬀect of being oﬀered
admission into SEED on student achievement.6
The results we obtain are interesting and, in some cases, quite surprising. Our lottery estimates reveal that SEED schools are eﬀective at increasing the achievement of the poorest minority
6
Our analysis focuses on the results from the SEED School of Washington, D.C., which has been in operation
since 1998. The SEED School of Maryland has only been open since 2008. The first year of operation is usually the
most diﬃcult one for any school, and results tend to improve over time, so estimates of eﬀect sizes from the first or
second year of operation may not be representative of the eﬀect sizes that one would expect from such a school once
it was more established (Zimmer et al., 2009).

4

children. Students who enroll gain 0.198 standard deviations in reading and 0.230 standard deviations in math, per year. Taken at face value, these eﬀects are enough to close the black-white
achievement gap in both subjects in four years. Girls who attend SEED score significantly higher
than boys in both subjects, but due to large standard errors, we are only able to reject the null
hypothesis of equality in reading. Free lunch students also outperform non-free lunch students in
reading. Treatment eﬀects for special education and non-special education students are statistically
the same, though we are underpowered to detect small to modest diﬀerences.
The impact of SEED on student achievement is significantly larger than that of the average
charter school. Compared to other “No Excuses” charter schools, SEED students’ gains in math are
similar but gains in reading are larger (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2009; Angrist et al., 2010; Dobbie and
Fryer, forthcoming). The costs, however, are also substantially larger. SEED spends approximately
$39,000 per student, per year. Following the approach in Krueger (2003), we estimate that the
return on investment in SEED is 4.59 percent. For comparison, the return on investment in a
typical “No Excuses” charter school — without a boarding option — is 18.50 percent. In other
words, based on evidence from the SEED school, the marginal benefit of boarding students five
days a week to provide them a nurturing environment away from potentially negative interactions
is outweighed by the costs.7 A very important caveat is that, by necessity, our returns are based
solely on achievement test scores and do not encompass other outcomes such as mental health, teen
pregnancy, happiness and well-being, or educational attainment, which may be positively aﬀected
by a boarding program. A more complete cost-benefit analysis of SEED will be possible with the
passage of time.
The next section of the paper presents a theoretical framework for analyzing the eﬀect of urban
boarding schools for the poor on student achievement. Section 3 discusses our data and research
design. Section 4 presents the results of our analysis, and the last section concludes. There are
three online appendices: Appendix A details programs and services provided by SEED schools
in both their academic and residential boarding programs; Appendix B is a data appendix that
details our sample and variable construction; and Appendix C provides details of our cost-benefit
calculations.

7

This is consistent with evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment, which demonstrates that moving
families to lower-poverty neighborhoods has virtually no impact on academic achievement. See Kling et al. (2007).

5

2

Boarding Schools and Student Achievement

Below, we discuss the major hypothesis about how boarding schools may aﬀect student achievement
for low-income minority groups.8
The Costs of Urban Boarding Schools
A large literature in sociology and psychology describes the potential costs of boarding schools,
though much of the evidence is qualitative and should be interpreted with care. In this section, we
highlight four potential channels: homesickness, stress, lack of positive parental support or input,
family detachment, and loss of identity (or what sociologists refer to as “double marginalization”)
(Fisher et al., 1984, 1985, 1986; Dick et al., 1993; Arieli et al., 2001; LaFromboise et al., 1998; Fordham and Ogbu, 1986; Fryer and Torelli, 2010; Datnow and Cooper, 1997).9 If young students living
away from home are homesick and as a result have diﬃculty concentrating or coping with academic
work, as Fisher et al. (1985) reported was the case in a sample of first-year university students,
then this could have adverse eﬀects on student achievement. In a study of Scottish boarding school
students, Fisher et al. (1986) found that approximately 70 percent reported being homesick at some
point during their first year. Relatedly, Dick et al. (1993) suggest that adolescents are exposed to
particularly high levels of stress as a result of social, physical, cognitive, and academic growth, and
these stress levels can be exacerbated by sending a youth to boarding school, particularly if the
youth lacks familial support.
Lack of parental support and input is a third potential cost of boarding schools. If parental
8

Boarding schools have a long and controversial history as educational and socializing institutions in a variety of
socioeconomic contexts around the world (Kahane, 1988). For instance, elite English and American boarding schools
have been described by sociologists as conservative institutions aimed at preserving an existing social order (Kahane,
1988; Levine, 1980; Cookson and Persell, 1985; Zweigenhaft, 1992). In stark contrast, boarding schools also have a
history as tools for assimilation for groups such as Native Americans (Adams, 1995; Ellis, 1996). In the late 1800s
and early 1900s, Congress aggressively pushed to assimilate Native Americans through education, establishing 147
reservation day schools, 81 reservation boarding schools, and 25 oﬀ-reservation boarding schools with the explicit
goal of inculcating Native American children with Protestant values (Adams, 1988).
9
Other potential channels through which boarding schools may impose costs on students include: lack of parental
supervision leading to engagement in adult behaviors, failure to develop independent decision-making ability as a
result of overdependence on boarding school structure, or increased likelihood of substance abuse. Although there is
evidence that a lack of parental supervision may make students more likely to engage in substance abuse and sexual
activity (Barnes and Farrell, 1992; Chilcoat and Anthony, 1996; Dishion and McMahon, 1998), the eﬀect of attending
boarding school on this channel is unknown. There is also a lack of evidence of the eﬀects of boarding schools on
developing independence, or what eﬀect this would have on achievement. While there is a literature on boarding
schools as a trigger for increased substance abuse (Koss et al., 2003; Kleinfeld and Bloom, 1977), this is generally
focused on Native American boarding schools, which students often attended unwillingly; its applicability to urban
public boarding schools is doubtful.

6

interactions such as discussing school-related activities at home each evening or getting help with
homework contribute to academic success, then boarding schools may undercut academic achievement. If the boarding program results in parental detachment and less parental input, then the
SEED schools may be less accountable to parents and school quality may be less than one would
expect given other observable school inputs.
A fourth potential cost of urban boarding schools is one that may be particularly acute in urban
areas: loss of identity. Arieli et al. (2001) note that the risk of so-called “mainstreaming settings” —
residential settings intended to introduce children from weaker socioeconomic classes to the social
and cultural mainstream of a society — is that they can confuse a child’s sense of identity, a problem
that sociologists have termed “double marginalization.” In these circumstances, black students can
develop an oppositional identity, view academic achievement as the prerogative of white people,
and discourage their peers from striving for academic success, accusing them of “acting white” if
they strive for success (Fordham and Ogbu, 1986).
Taking all the potential channels together, it is plausible that attending a boarding school could
have significant costs.
The Benefits of Urban Boarding Schools
A complementary literature in sociology and psychology emphasizes the potential benefits of
urban boarding schools including: placing students in safer and less volatile environments, minimizing negative parental and community interactions, and ensuring that students have positive adult
role models, are provided with nutritious foods, spend less time being idle, and so on (Gonzales
et al., 1996; Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn, 2000; Ainsworth, 2002; Datcher, 1982; Kemper, 1968;
Wacquant and Wilson, 1989). As stated in the Introduction, minority children are significantly
more likely to be reared in a single female-headed household; 69 percent of black family households with children under the age of 18 in Washington, D.C., are single-mother households; for
whites, this figure is 14 percent.10 Many believe that until children’s basic needs — security, stability, and frequent and positive parental interactions — are met, student achievement will not
increase (Gonzales et al., 1996; Ainsworth, 2002; Rothstein, 2004; Duncan and Magnuson, 2005;
Brooks-Gunn and Markman, 2005). In this scenario, putting students in more stable environments,
changing the nature of their interactions with their home environment, providing nutritious foods,
10

Data obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2006-2008 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimates.

7

decreasing idleness through after-school and evening programs, and providing positive and caring
adults or role models may provide important structure that will lead to greater focus in schools
and increased academic achievement.
Perhaps equally important, boarding schools can be leveraged as agents for delivering scholastic
and social capital to their students. Many “No Excuses” charter schools desire to instill mainstream
middle-class values into their students, as reformers posit that this type of education is essential
for improving academic achievement among low-income students (Rosen, 1956; Mickelson, 1990;
Whitman, 2008). Indeed, the slogan for the nation’s largest network of charter schools is an
explicit endorsement of the Protestant work ethic (“Work hard. Be nice.”). In his analysis of
six high-performing inner-city schools, Whitman (2008) argues that the success of schools such as
KIPP Academy and Amistad Academy (and SEED, one of the six schools profiled in the book)
can be attributed to the fact that these schools are paternalistic, attempt to “micro-manage” their
students’ lives, and teach students to act according to middle-class values. If this process of middleclass acculturation is a key ingredient to academic success, then a school equipped with a boarding
program could be more eﬀective at inculcating these values in its students.

2.1

A Model

We now demonstrate the costs and benefits of urban boarding schools in a stylized framework
designed to formalize the discussion above; the empirical results to come do not depend on the
specific assumptions of the model.
Let there be a continuum of agents with unit mass. Student achievement, denoted  is generated
by a smooth, continuous, and twice diﬀerentiable production function, (   1    ), where 
represents student eﬀort,  denotes parental and community interactions,  is school quality, and
1    are all other inputs to the education production function including stress, homesickness,
peer pressure, nutritious foods, positive role models, and so on. We assume that an agent’s utility
exhibits decreasing marginal returns in achievement () and leisure (), and that achievement has
decreasing marginal returns on eﬀort. Assuming a student has one unit of time to allocate between
eﬀort and leisure, her optimization problem can be written as:
max ( (   1    ) ())

∈[01]

8

subject to her budget constraint + ≤ 1 The first order condition with respect to  can be written
 

as
·
=
 which implies that, when optimizing, the marginal benefit of eﬀort equals the
 

marginal cost of that eﬀort.
Total diﬀerentiation of the first order condition with respect to  and collection of terms, gives:
¶
  2 
 2   
·
+
·
−
·

 2    

= 2 µ ¶2

 

  2 
 2
·
+
+ 2
·
 2

 2

µ

(1)

2
 0 and
 2
 2
2
 0 Similarly, achievement has decreasing marginal returns on eﬀort, so that
 0 We
2

2
µ ¶2


 0
assume that
 0 and that achievement has a positive eﬀect on utility, so that


Putting all of this together, we can conclude that the denominator of (1) is less than zero.
 2
The sign of the numerator, however, could be either positive or negative. We know that
0
 2


 0 but we cannot sign
, which could be either positive or negative. If parents are
and



is positive. If, on
supportive and that support helps a student increase his achievement, then

the other hand, the parent is a negative influence and the parent’s involvement hinders a student’s


 2
achievement, then
will be negative. Similarly, while
 0 the sign of
can also vary



depending on the particular type of interaction that takes place between a student and his parent.
Note: Since utility has decreasing marginal returns on achievement and leisure,

An analogous computation, with respect to  gives
¶
  2 
 2   
·
·
+
·
−

 2    

= 2 µ ¶2

 

  2 
2
·
·
+
+ 2
 2

 2

µ

(2)


2
Again, the sign of this eﬀect depends on the signs and magnitudes of
and
 We assume that



 0 and higher school quality and higher
higher school quality leads to higher achievement,

2
eﬀort interact to produce higher achievement,
 0 Yet, we still cannot definitively conclude

 2   
  2 
whether the numerator is positive or negative, because
·
·

0
but
·
 0
 2  
 
9

A final computation, with respect to the vector of other inputs {1   } gives:
µ


 2   
+
·
−
·
·

=1
X 
 2   
=
µ ¶2

2

  2 
=1
·
+
+
·
 2

 2
P

¶
2
 

2
 2

In the context of this model, SEED provides an opportunity to measure the eﬀect of an exogenous shift in the parameters (   ), simultaneously, that change as a result of sending a child to a
“No Excuses” charter school coupled with a boarding program. We do not have enough variation
to isolate the eﬀect of any particular parameter. Rather, the eﬀect that we obtain from the SEED
lottery results is approximately the first-order eﬀect
 =

µ


 
+
·

 

¶

 +

µ


 
+
·

 

¶

 +

 µ
X

=1

 
+
·

 

¶

 

(3)



which could be positive, negative, or neutral. We know that
 0 and
 0 but we cannot


    

 or even   In words, if homesickness, peer pressure, and loss of identity
,
,

sign
    
is negligible ( ) eﬀort increases in school quality, and minimizing parental interactions induces
more eﬀort in school, then the eﬀect of attending the SEED schools will be positive. Conversely,
if taking students out of their homes and social environments creates stress, loss of identity and
homesickness, and these eﬀects outweigh other potentially positive aspects of boarding, then the
results can be negative.
To complement Table 2, Appendix Figure 1 shows the geographic distribution of treatment and
control students across Washington, D.C., as well as census tract poverty rates. This map confirms
that SEED treatment and control students are similarly distributed across space and are more
likely to be in higher-poverty areas of the city.

3

Data and Research Design

We merge data from two sources: information from files at the SEED school and administrative data
on student demographics and outcomes from the District of Columbia Public Schools (DCPS).11
11

A small number of students in the SEED lottery have test scores from the Maryland Schools Assessment (MSA),
so we make use of these data as well.

10

The data from SEED consist of lottery files from the 2007 and 2008 lotteries. To insure that all
students in our lottery sample have an equal chance of being admitted to SEED, we drop students
with a sibling already enrolled in SEED (because they are guaranteed admission). Since siblings
who apply together are more likely to get in (if one sibling wins the lottery then all siblings are
allowed to enroll), we also include a dummy to indicate the presence of a sibling in the lottery,
as well as the interaction of this dummy with year of application. Excluding the applicants with
siblings in the same lottery yields results that are almost identical.12
A typical student’s data from SEED’s administrative files contains the applicant’s cohort, first
and last names, date of birth, whether and how the applicant was oﬀered admission (immediately,
oﬀ the waitlist, or not at all), whether the applicant already had a sibling attending SEED (and
was therefore guaranteed admission), whether the applicant applied late to SEED (and was therefore simply added to the end of the waitlist and not included in the lottery), and, if applicable,
date of withdrawal from SEED. The files also include demographic data such as sex, race, free
lunch eligibility, special education status, English Language Learner status, and family background
variables such as the student’s living situation, parents’ marital status, and parents’ highest level
of education (though the data fields for the latter two variables are sparse).
The SEED data were matched to administrative data from the District of Columbia Public
Schools (DCPS) collected from 2005-06 through 2008-09 using the maximum information available.
Match keys were used in the following order: (1) last name, first name, date of birth with various
versions of the names (abbreviations, alternative spellings, hyphenated versus non-hyphenated);
(2) last name, first name, and various versions of the date of birth (most often the month and day
reversed); (3) last name, first name, prior school, and prior grade with various likely adjustments
to prior grade; (4) name, date of birth, and prior grade. Once these match keys had been run,
the remaining data were matched by hand considering all available variables. In our final sample,
the proportion of students for whom at least one achievement test score was matched is 95 percent
for SEED lottery winners (N=129) and 92 percent for SEED lottery losers (N=92). Details of the
match rates and attrition for each lottery cohort are reported in Table 1. Our match rates and
attrition are similar to those from previous work using charter lottery data (Abdulkadiroglu et al.,
2009; Dobbie and Fryer, forthcoming; Hoxby and Murarka, 2009; Angrist et al., 2010).
12

No student entered both the 2007 and 2008 lotteries.

11

The DCPS data contain student-level administrative data on approximately 45,000 students
in each year. The data include information on student race, gender, free and reduced-price lunch
eligibility, attendance, and math and reading achievement scores in grades three through eight
and ten. The math and reading tests, extracted from the District of Columbia Comprehensive
Assessment System (DC CAS), are administered each April to students in grades three through
eight and ten. The DC CAS exams measure knowledge and skills in reading and math. Students
in grades four, seven, and ten also take a composition test; students in grades five and eight take a
science test; and students in grades nine through twelve who are enrolled in biology, take a biology
test.
In Washington, D.C., all public school students, including those attending charters, are required
to take the reading and math tests unless they are medically excused or have a severe disability.
Students with moderate disabilities or who are English Language Learners must take both tests,
but may be granted special accommodations (additional time, translation services, and so on) at
the discretion of school or state administrators.
Summary statistics for the variables that we use in our core specifications, as well as student
living situation, are displayed in Table 2. Column 1 includes all students who attended seventh grade
in DCPS in 2007-08 and 2008-09, Column 2 restricts the sample to lottery applicants, Columns 3
and 4 are for lottery winners and losers, respectively, and Column 5 further restricts the sample
to students who actually enroll in SEED for at least a day. Every student in the SEED lottery
sample is black. Males are more likely to be lottery winners than females, but this is due to the fact
that the SEED school holds separate lotteries for males and females and receives more applications
from females. As Column 6 shows, SEED applicants have higher baseline test scores than DCPS
students, on average, but these diﬀerences are not significant. SEED applicants are significantly
more likely to be eligible for free lunch and significantly less likely to be special education students.
Column 7 of Table 2 reports covariate diﬀerences, and their associated standard errors, between
lottery winners and losers controlling for lottery fixed eﬀects, sex indicator variables (since separate
lotteries are held for males and females), and a contemporaneous sibling dummy as well as the
interaction of this dummy with year of application. Lottery winners tend to have slightly higher
baseline reading and math scores, but the diﬀerences are not statistically significant. Free lunch
status and special education status are also balanced among lottery winners and losers. There are

12

two marginally significant diﬀerences between lottery winners and losers: (1) lottery winners are
8.9% (s.e. 4.6) less likely to be English Language Learners; and (2) lottery winners are less likely
to live with other legal guardians.

3.1

Research Design

Our research design exploits the fact that oversubscribed charter schools in Washington, D.C., are
required to admit students via random lottery. This allows us to provide a set of causal estimates
of the eﬀect of attending the SEED school. Let the eﬀect of attending the SEED school on student
achievement be a linear function of the number of years spent at the school ( )  We estimate
this eﬀect using the equation
 =  +   +  0  +  + 

(4)

where  denotes the test score of student  tested in grade  in year ,  and   are
year-of-test and grade-of-test eﬀects, and  is a vector of demographic controls, which include an
indicator variable for sex, since separate lotteries were conducted for males and females, as well as
baseline test scores in reading and math, free lunch eligibility, special education status, and English
Language Learner status.13  is an error term that captures random variation in test scores.
The causal eﬀect of attending SEED is . If the number of years a student spends at SEED
were randomly assigned, ordinary least squares estimates of equation (4) would capture the average
causal eﬀect of each year spent at SEED. Because students and parents selectively choose whether
to enroll in SEED, however, these estimates are likely to be biased by correlation between school
choice and unobserved characteristics related to student ability, motivation, or family background.
We identify  by comparing the average outcomes of students who “won” the lottery to the
average outcomes of students who “lost” the lottery. The lottery losers therefore form the control
group corresponding to the counterfactual state that would have occurred for students in the
treatment group if they had not been oﬀered a spot in the charter school. We define lottery winners
as students who receive a winning lottery number or are oﬀered admission oﬀ of the waitlist. Given
the size of the estimated treatment eﬀect, our results are robust to other definitions of “lottery
13

All students in the lottery sample are black, so race is not included as a covariate.

13

winner.”
Under several assumptions (that the treatment group assignment is random and that winning
the lottery only aﬀects outcomes through SEED enrollment), we can estimate the average eﬀect of
treatment for students induced into enrollment by the lottery oﬀer. The parameter is estimated
through a two-stage least squares (2SLS) regression of student outcomes on years of enrollment
( ) with the lottery oﬀer as an instrumental variable for enrollment.
The first stage equations for IV estimation take the form:

 =   +  +

X

  +  +  + 

(5)



where the lottery indicators  control for which lottery the student entered and  captures
the eﬀect of the lottery oﬀer ( ) on the number of years a student spends at SEED.

4

The Impact of Attending SEED Schools on Student Achievement

Table 3 reports lottery results for the pooled sample consisting of the 2007 and 2008 cohorts at
the SEED School in Washington, D.C. We report first stage (Column 1), reduced-form (Column
2), and 2SLS estimates (Column 3). There are two panels: the top panel displays the results for
reading scores and the bottom panel presents analogous results for math scores. Within each panel,
we estimate three specifications of equation (4). The first contains no controls, the second controls
for previous year’s achievement test scores in both reading and math, and the third specification
includes controls for free lunch eligibility, special education status, and English Language Learner
status. The outcome variable is seventh grade test scores from both cohorts and eighth grade test
scores for the 2007 cohort.
Lottery winners score 0.236 (0.100) standard deviations (hereafter, ) higher in reading and
0.384 (0.116) higher in math in the raw data. Controlling for previous scores and demographic
variables reduces these eﬀect sizes to 0.188 (0.087) and 0.218 (0.081) in reading and math,
respectively. The first stage coeﬃcients are all less than one, which is consistent with other work
on “No Excuses” charter schools (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2009). The 2SLS estimate, which captures

14

the causal eﬀect of attending the SEED school for one year for students induced into enrolling by
the lottery oﬀer, is 0.198 (0.093) in reading and 0.230 (0.084) in math controlling for previous
scores and demographics.
The magnitudes of our estimates in math are similar to those from other “No Excuses” charter
schools, which range from 0.26 to 0.54 (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2009; Angrist et al., 2010; Dobbie
and Fryer, forthcoming). The magnitudes of the results in reading, however, are surprising. The
literature has typically found treatment eﬀects on reading for middle school-aged or older children,
under a host of interventions, to be significantly smaller than in math (Decker et al., 2004; Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2009; Angrist et al., 2010; Dobbie and Fryer, forthcoming; Hoxby and Murarka,
2009). One of the leading theories for this result is that reading scores are influenced by the language spoken during the time when students are outside of the classroom (Charity et al., 2004;
Rickford, 1999). Charity et al. (2004) argue that if students speak non-standard English at home
and in their communities, increases in reading scores are diﬃcult to eﬀect — especially for older
students. The surprising eﬀect of SEED on reading scores is broadly consistent with this point of
view.
Tables 4 and 5 explore the heterogeneity of our estimated treatment eﬀects in a variety of
subsamples of the data and report p-values for the diﬀerences in the treatment eﬀects. Each table
reports 2SLS estimates that include baseline scores and demographic controls. Table 4 partitions
the data by sex, whether or not a student is eligible for free lunch, and special education status.
Perhaps the most striking result is that the positive treatment eﬀects in reading and math from
attending SEED are driven almost entirely by the female lottery applicants. (An important caveat is
that we are under-powered to detect whether there are modest positive eﬀects for males.) The 2SLS
estimates for females (including controls for baseline scores and demographic characteristics) are
0.382 in reading (-0.138 for males) and 0.265 in math (0.037 for males). The diﬀerence between
males and females is significant for reading, but we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the eﬀects
are the same for math.14 Students eligible for free lunch experienced larger eﬀects than students
who are not eligible for free lunch, and this diﬀerence is nearly marginally significant for reading.
Estimated eﬀects are also slightly larger for students who are not in special education compared to
students who are in special education, but large standard errors prevent sharp conclusions.
14

These results are similar to the gender diﬀerences found in the Moving to Opportunity experiment (Kling et al.,
2007), which suggests that removing students from their home environment may be particularly bad for boys.

15

Table 5 examines whether the eﬀects of SEED on achievement diﬀer as a function of a student’s
pre-treatment test score, both by examining the eﬀects of SEED for students above and below the
median of the previous year test score, and by estimating a model that adds the interaction between
baseline score and an indicator for winning the SEED lottery as an additional instrument. The
results suggest that lower-ability students benefit more from SEED. Students with below-median
baseline scores gained 0.314 (0.140) in reading, which is significantly diﬀerent from the eﬀects for
students who are above the median when they enter SEED (-0.048 (0.081)). Similarly, students
with below-median baseline scores showed gains of 0.354 (0.129) in math, compared to 0.163
(0.118) for students with above-median baseline scores — but due to low power we are unable to
distinguish between these two point estimates.
The estimates from the baseline score interaction model also suggest that SEED may have
larger eﬀects for lower-ability students, but, again, coeﬃcients are too imprecisely estimated to
make definitive conclusions. The interaction terms for reading and math are -0.112 and -0.084,
respectively, which suggest that a student who is 0.5 below the mean in terms of ability (as
measured by baseline test score) would gain an additional 0.056 in reading and 0.042 in math
per year. These interaction term coeﬃcients are very similar to those reported by Angrist et al.
(2010) for the eﬀects of attending a “No Excuses” charter school in Lynn, Massachusetts, on
students of lower baseline ability. Still, our estimates should be interpreted with caution given the
lack of power.
Our lottery estimates use the sample of students for which we have post-lottery scores. If
lottery winners and losers have diﬀerent rates of selection into this sample, our results may be
biased. Table 6 compares the rates of attrition of lottery winners and lottery losers. In the pooled
sample, 86.1 percent of winners and 87.9 percent of losers have reading scores. A simple test for
selection bias is to investigate the impact of the lottery oﬀer on the probability of entering our
lottery sample. The results of this test are reported in Columns 3 through 5 of Table 6 — the
diﬀerence is statistically zero. Similarly, 86.1 percent of winners and 86.4 percent of losers have
math scores, and this diﬀerence is also statistically zero. This suggests that diﬀerential attrition is
not likely to be a concern in interpreting the results.

16

5

Discussion

Our lottery estimates reveal that SEED is eﬀective at increasing achievement among poor minority
students. Students who enroll in SEED increase their achievement by 0.198 standard deviations in
reading and 0.230 standard deviations in math, per year. Thus, SEED schools have the power to
eliminate the racial achievement gap in four years.
Let us put the magnitude of our estimates in perspective. The eﬀect of lowering class size
from 24 to 16 students per teacher is approximately 0.22 (0.05) on combined math and reading
scores (Krueger, 1999). While a one-standard deviation increase in teacher quality raises math
achievement by 0.15 to 0.24 per year and reading achievement by 0.15 to 0.20 per year
(Rockoﬀ, 2004; Hanushek and Rivkin, 2005; Aaronson et al., 2007; Kane et al., 2008), value added
measures are not strongly correlated with observable characteristics of teachers, making it diﬃcult
to identify the best teachers ex ante. The eﬀect of Teach for America, one attempt to bring more
skilled teachers into poorly performing schools, is 0.15 in math and 0.03 in reading (Decker et al.,
2004). The eﬀect of Head Start is 0.147 (0.103) in applied problems and 0.319 (0.147) in letter
identification on the Woodcock-Johnson exam, but the eﬀects on test scores fade in elementary
school (Currie and Thomas, 1995; Ludwig and Phillips, 2007).
These eﬀect sizes are a small fraction of the impact of attending SEED. An emerging literature
on “No Excuses” charter schools finds eﬀect sizes closest to our own.15 Abdulkadiroglu et al.
(2009) and Angrist et al. (2010) find eﬀect sizes similar to ours, with students enrolled in a set of
Boston area “No Excuses” charter middle schools gaining about 0.4 per year in math and 0.1 per
year in reading. Dobbie and Fryer (forthcoming) report that the impact of attending the Harlem
Children’s Zone’s middle schools is 0.26 in math and 0.05 in reading. The key diﬀerence is that
SEED schools increase reading scores more than the typical “No Excuses” charter.
As the Obama administration and other governments around the U.S. decide whether and how
to use urban boarding schools as a model to increase achievement among the poor, cost is an
important consideration. At the SEED School in Washington, D.C., about $39,275 is spent per
pupil per year, compared to $20,523 per student in District of Columbia Public Schools (DCPS).16
15
The fact that “No Excuses” charter schools coupled with a boarding option increases achievement similar to
“No Excuses” charter schools without boarding is consistent with the evidence on neighborhood eﬀects described in
Kling et al. (2007).
16
See Appendix C for details of per pupil expenditure figures.

17

Therefore, a natural question arises for policymakers: is the extra $18,752 per student per year a
good investment? To answer this, we conclude with a simple cost-benefit analysis, comparing the
total net present value of costs and net present value of benefits of attending SEED.
Let  denote the additional cost of SEED per pupil in year , above normal DCPS costs, and
let  be the real discount rate. If  = 1 corresponds to the student’s sixth grade year, the present
value of the costs of SEED can therefore be written as
      =

3
X
=1



(1 + )

(6)

For the 2007 and 2008 cohorts, admitted students were enrolled, on average, for about 77.5 percent
of the time they could have potentially been enrolled in SEED. This means that one would expect
them to spend about 2.33 years actually enrolled in SEED. From this, we can infer that 1 = 2 =
$18 752 and 3 = 33 · $18 752 = $6 188
Calculating the gain in lifetime earnings associated with increased achievement requires a few
additional assumptions. Adopting the framework used in Krueger (2003), we let  represent an
individual’s average real earnings each year after entering the labor market at age 18. We let
 represent the increase in earnings associated with a one-standard deviation increase in either
reading or math achievement scores. As is discussed in Krueger (2003), the literature suggests that
 is approximately 8 to 12 percent.17
Let   and   be the increase in test scores in reading and math, respectively (in standard
deviation units), as a result of attending SEED. Furthermore, assume that each individual works
until age 65. The present value of the benefits from these increased earnings would be

       =

54
X
=7

 ·

(  +   )

(1 + )

(7)

Thus, SEED’s internal rate of return can be calculated as the discount rate, ∗  that solves:
3
X
=1

54

X

(  +   )
=
 ·



(1 + )
(1
+
)
=7

We use values of average annual earnings by age group from the 2009 Current Population Survey
17

See Appendix C for more details.

18

for  . However, students who entered SEED in 2007 will enter the labor market in 2013, and real
earnings will likely grow substantially between 2009 and 2013. If  is the rate of productivity growth,
then we can account for this growth by multiplying  by (1 + )−4 in our above equations. As in
Krueger (2003), we note that real earnings and productivity have grown by about 1 to 2 percent
per year, so that these are plausible values for 
The top panel of Table 7 presents discounted present values of benefits and costs for SEED
under various assumptions for the values of  and  If we assume no annual productivity growth,
the return on investment in SEED is 4.38 percent. If annual productivity growth is 1 percent or 2
percent, the return on investment is 4.59 percent or 4.80 percent, respectively. Here, for the sake of
comparison, we think of SEED as a middle-school intervention serving grades six through eight.18
If we assume instead that SEED is a six-year intervention (from grades seven through twelve),
that SEED students therefore would attend for approximately 4.7 years, and that SEED students
experience constant gains each year, then the estimated internal rates of return are slightly higher;
they are 4.80 percent, 4.99 percent, and 5.18 percent, assuming annual productivity growth rates
of 0 percent, 1 percent, and 2 percent, respectively.
For comparison, the bottom panel of Table 7 presents similar estimates for costs and benefits
for “No Excuses” charter schools. To do this, we make use of lottery estimates from an analysis of
Boston area charter schools in Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2009).19 Under the assumptions that  is 8
percent and  is 1 percent, we find that the return on investment of a “No Excuses” charter schools
is 18.50 percent — approximately four times the return of SEED schools.
There are two important caveats to our cost-benefit analysis. First, and most important, we
restrict our attention to expected future income that may increase as a result of an increase in test
scores and do not consider other important social outcomes. We do this because we have plausible
estimates of the eﬀect of increasing achievement on lifetime earnings from a variety of sources.
There is evidence from several literatures that suggests higher achievement is correlated with other
outcomes such as lower crime rates (Levitt and Lochner, 2001), lower incarceration rates (Neal
and Johnson, 1996), better health outcomes and lower mortality (Lleras-Muney, 2005), and so on.
We do not attempt to compute monetary benefits accrued from these eﬀects for two reasons: (1)
18
Even though the SEED School of Washington, D.C., admitted students in seventh grade in 2007 and 2008, as
opposed to sixth grade, thinking of SEED as an intervention in grades six through eight makes the comparison with
“No Excuses” charters cleaner, and qualitative results are not sensitive to this assumption.
19
See Appendix C for a discussion of how the costs per pupil were derived.

19

the private value of income is clear, but we did not want to make assumptions about the benefits
of improving other social outcomes such as incarceration, teen pregnancy, and so on; and (2) we
are more confident that more education causes higher income than we are that more education
causes these other social outcomes. Note: Even if we made an educated guess about the benefits
that would accrue through these channels, our main qualitative conclusion — the marginal benefit
of boarding, beyond a “No Excuses” school, is outweighed by the cost — would be unchanged as
those benefits are also present for “No Excuses” schools that do not have a boarding option. For
the conclusions of our cost-benefit analysis to change, there must be important benefits unique to
urban boarding schools that are not captured in test scores (e.g. reduced teen pregnancy rates,
lowering of discount rates, or increased grit and determination). Whether or not this is true is
beyond the scope of this paper, but knowable in the fullness of time.
Second, Chetty et al. (2010) suggest that long-term benefits of a high-quality education may
operate through non-test score outcomes not easily observed. If urban boarding schools influence
this set of outcomes — discount rates, for instance — then we may be underestimating the long-term
benefits. Given that we have no evidence in favor or against this hypothesis, it is an open question.

20

NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Online Appendix A: SEED Program Details
The SEED (School for Educational Evolution and Development) Foundation was founded in 1997
and opened its first school in Washington, D.C., in the fall of 1998. The school enrolled 40 seventh
graders in its inaugural year and diﬀers from other charter schools in a significant way: the SEED
School is an urban public boarding school. From Sunday night through Friday afternoon, students
live on campus, returning home for 48 hours every weekend.
The impetus for the creation of SEED was the idea that the educational opportunities of
many urban students are hindered both by failing public schools and by neighborhood risks and
distractions that divert attention from educational pursuits. The founders of SEED believed that
an urban boarding school could remove the dangerous distractions of the urban neighborhoods from
which its students hailed, and provide its students with added support and activities during the
after-school hours when traditional public schools send students home.
The school was originally housed in the attic of the Capital Children’s Museum before moving
in 2001 to its current location in Washington, D.C.’s impoverished Ward 7. The campus, which is
on the site of a former public school, consists of an academic building, two dormitories (one male
and one female), and a student center. The size of the student body has expanded from the original
40 seventh graders to now serve 320 students from sixth through twelfth grades.
The SEED Foundation opened its second school in the fall of 2008, located in Baltimore but
open to students throughout Maryland. The Maryland school currently serves 160 students in sixth
and seventh grades and will expand to serve 400 students in grades six through twelve. The school
has a campus layout similar to that of the Washington, D.C., campus, with dormitory buildings,
academic buildings, and recreational facilities. The major diﬀerence between the two campuses is
size: the Washington, D.C., campus is four acres, while the Maryland campus is fifty-two acres and
shares land with a natural preservation area.
Both schools admit students by a lottery if more students apply than there are spots available.
To enter the lottery, students and their parents must complete a thorough application and prove
eligibility for the lottery, including proof of residency and age eligibility. In order to promote

21

geographic diversity, the SEED School of Maryland reserves a spot for one student from each
county from which an eligible student applies.
Because of the boarding aspect of the program, the schools are much more expensive to operate
than traditional public schools, or even more highly funded charter schools (such as the Harlem
Children’s Zone). In 2008, the District of Columbia Public Schools spent approximately $20,523
per pupil; SEED’s expenditures were around $39,275 per pupil.

Academic Program
The academic component of the SEED model is broken into two basic pieces, the middle school
program and the high school program. The middle school curriculum is focused on basic skills with
the goal of allowing all students to enter the high school program performing at or above grade
level. The benchmark standards that middle school students must master before promotion to high
school are referred to as the “Gate.” In order to help students meet the goals of the Gate, students
are provided with tutoring outside of the classroom and extra periods of instruction. Students
who need more time to master grade level skills can take a “growth year” during middle school.
The middle school curriculum utilizes a readers and writers workshop model for language arts
instruction and is designed such that all students will take algebra by eighth grade.
The high school curriculum is a college-preparatory program of studies for all students. To
graduate, students must complete four years of English, four years of mathematics (through at
least Algebra II), three years of social studies, three years of science, three years of a foreign
language, one and a half years of physical education and health, one year of arts, one half year each
of U.S. government and politics, Washington, D.C., history, and technology, as well as five and a
half years’ worth of elective courses. In addition to course requirements, students must also take
the SAT or ACT college admissions test, apply to at least five colleges or universities, and complete
sixty hours of community service in order to graduate. The school oﬀers Advanced Placement
courses in English Literature, English Language, U.S. History, Government, and Biology.
Both the Washington, D.C., and Maryland schools at the middle and high school levels have
an extended school day, from 8 a.m. until 4 p.m., and provide students with extensive after-school
tutoring as needed. Instruction within the schools relies heavily on data. The SEED schools use
internal interim assessments and have data days every quarter for the staﬀ (both academic and

22

boarding) to review student data. There is a strong emphasis on preparation for college from the
time the students enter the school that begins more informally in middle school and is a formal part
of the curriculum in high school. While the SEED schools are only open for a traditional school
year, SEED staﬀ try to place students in educational programs during the summer months.

Residential Program
From Sunday evening through Friday afternoon, students live on campus, in double bedrooms in
same-sex dorms. Students are organized into “houses” of 12-14 students within the dormitories.
The houses are all named for a college or university and have study hall and meal times together,
as well as other activities such as book clubs, field trips, and community service. The school oﬀers
athletic and other extracurricular activities to students after school hours, as well as a program
known as HALLS (Habits for Achieving Life-Long Success) that teaches students study skills,
time management, and interpersonal communication. Students can complete homework in their
dorm rooms or in one of the common study spaces available throughout the dormitory. There
is a computer in each dorm room as well as in the common areas and the residential staﬀ are
available during homework times to answer questions. The residential staﬀ is separate from the
school faculty, although the two groups interact often to discuss student progress.
Despite the fact that students are living away from their families for the majority of the week,
SEED oﬀers some opportunities for parental involvement. SEED holds community dinners and
gives parents the opportunity to serve as tutors during study hall, assist during extracurricular
activities, and participate in book clubs.

23

NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Online Appendix B: Data Description
SEED
The data obtained from the SEED School in Washington, D.C., include lists of lottery applicants in
2007 and 2008 and whether or not they were admitted immediately, as well as call logs documenting
the calls made to candidates on the waitlist. Data also include SEED enrollment lists from each
year, as well as a number of other administrative files.
A typical student’s data from SEED’s administrative files contains the applicant’s cohort, first
and last names, date of birth, whether and how the applicant was oﬀered admission (immediately,
oﬀ the waitlist, or not at all), whether the applicant already had a sibling attending SEED (and
was therefore guaranteed admission), whether the applicant applied late to SEED (and was therefore simply added to the end of the waitlist and not included in the lottery), and, if applicable,
date of withdrawal from SEED. The files also include demographic data such as sex, race, free
lunch eligibility, special education status, English Language Learner status, and family background
variables such as the student’s living situation, parents’ marital status, and parents’ highest level
of education (though the data fields for the latter two variables are sparse). The files were used
to compile a list of lottery applicants with their lottery outcomes and enrollment statuses. This
list was examined by SEED oﬃcials, who used applicant records (such as copies of original SEED
applications) to resolve discrepancies.
In addition, other administrative files that were provided by SEED contained lottery registration data, such as students’ addresses, parents’ names, previous school attended, and reasons for
applying to SEED. The address data were used in conjunction with last names to determine siblings
who registered for the same lottery.

District of Columbia Public Schools
District of Columbia Public Schools (DCPS) administrative data were collected for school years from
2005-06 through 2008-09. These files contain scores from the District of Columbia Comprehensive
Assessment System (DC CAS) and enrollment files containing information on the school and grade

24

level of each student in DCPS as well as demographic information such as race, sex, free lunch
eligibility, special education status, and English Language Learner status. In addition, enrollment
files contain last name, first name, and date of birth, which were used to match students to SEED
data. Furthermore, all students in DCPS data are assigned a unique identifier called the “pupil
number.” This identifier was available for many students in the SEED data, as well.
In Washington, D.C., all public school students, including those attending charters, are required
to take the reading and math tests unless they are medically excused or have a severe disability.
Students with moderate disabilities or who are English Language Learners must take both tests,
but may be granted special accommodations (additional time, translation services, and so on) at
the discretion of school or state administrators. The DC CAS is administered each April to students
in grades 3 through 8 and 10. It measures knowledge and skills in reading and math. Students in
grades 4, 7, and 10 also take a composition test; students in grades 5 and 8 also take a science test;
and students in grades 9 through 12 who take biology also take a biology test.

25

NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Online Appendix C: Cost-Benefit Analysis
Calculating Costs
According to an audited DCPS enrollment file, there were 329 students enrolled in the SEED School
of Washington, D.C., as of October 6, 2008. According to the SEED School of Washington, D.C.’s
financial report for the 2008-09 fiscal year, SEED’s total expenses were $12,921,449. This amounts
to $39,275 per student.
According to the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), total expenditures per pupil
in the District of Columbia Public Schools were $20,596 in 2007-08 dollars for the 2006-07 school
year. This figure is obtained from Table 186 of the NCES’s List of 2009 Digest Tables, which
can be found at the following web site: http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2009menu_tables.asp.
Assuming similar expenditures for 2008-09, this amounts to $20,523 per student in 2009 dollars.

Calculating Benefits
Using evidence from the British National Child Development Study, Currie and Thomas (2001)
find that students who score in the upper quartile of the reading exam earn 20 percent more than
students who score in the lower quartile, while students who score in the upper quartile of the
math exam earn 19 percent more than students who score in the lower quartile. Following Krueger
(2003) and assuming a normal distribution of test scores, we can assume that the average score
for the top quartile is about 2.5 standard deviations higher than the average score for the bottom
quartile, so that a one-standard deviation increase in reading scores is associated with 8.0 percent
higher earnings at age 33. A similar calculation reveals that a one-standard deviation increase in
math scores is associated with 7.6 percent higher earnings at age 33.
Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Neal and Johnson (1996) find that a onestandard deviation increase in scores on the Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) taken at
age 15-18 (and adjusted for age at time of test) is associated with 20 percent higher earnings for
both men and women. As Krueger (2003) points out, the diﬀerences in these two sets of estimates
can be reconciled by the fact that Neal and Johnson (1996) estimate the eﬀect of one achievement
26

score, whereas Currie and Thomas (2001) include both reading and math achievement scores in
their wage equation.20 Because the estimates obtained by Currie and Thomas (2001) are therefore
consistent with those of Neal and Johnson (1996), and because estimates from SEED as well as
other charter schools are generally presented in terms of achievement gains in reading and math,
we rely on the estimates from Currie and Thomas (2001) for our calculations of earnings gains,
and assume that the increase in wages associated with a one-standard deviation increase in either
reading or math is approximately 8 percent.

Cost-Benefit Analysis of “No Excuses” charter schools
The middle school lottery sample studied by Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2009) consists of lottery applicants from five Boston middle school charters: Academy of the Pacific Rim, Boston Collegiate,
Boston Preparatory, Edward Brooke, and Roxbury Preparatory.
According to the 2008-09 Annual Report of the Academy of the Pacific Rim Charter Public
School, its enrollment was 474 students as of October 1, 2008. Its total expenses were $6,209,015.
This amounts to $13,099 per student. According to the 2008-09 Annual Report of the Boston
Collegiate Charter School, its enrollment was 464 students as of October 1, 2008. Its total expenses
were $6,362,511. This amounts to $13,712 per student. According to the 2008-09 Annual Report of
the Boston Preparatory Charter Public School, it served 285 students in 2008-09. Its total expenses
were $4,330,023. This amounts to $15,193 per student. According to the 2008-09 Annual Report of
Edward W. Brooke Charter School, its enrollment was 398 students as of October 1, 2008 and its
total expenses were $5,440,177. This amounts to $13,669 per student. The 2008-09 Annual Report
of the Roxbury Preparatory Charter School was unavailable at the time this was written, so we
used figures from the 2007-08 Annual Report instead, and converted these figures to 2009 dollars to
make them comparable to the figures from other schools. According to the 2007-08 report, 2007-08
enrollment was 198 students, and total expenses were $3,095,996. This amounts to $15,636 per
student. Converting to 2009 dollars, this is $15,580. An average of the expenses per student across
these five schools yields expenditures of approximately $14,251 per student.
According to a Boston Public Schools fact sheet from 2009-10, the school district per pupil
20

Some of the diﬀerence can also be attributed to the fact that students studied by Neal and Johnson (1996) are
older at the time of their exam, and that British and American labor markets are diﬀerent.

27

expenditures for Regular Education for the 2009 Fiscal Year were approximately $11,755. With
the inclusion of special education instruction costs, the per pupil expenditures are closer to $14,000
per student. However, since many critics charge that charter schools do not have to spend as
much money to accommodate special education students, we use the $11,755 figure to give a more
conservative estimate of the returns for the Boston charters.

References
Aaronson, D., L. Barrow, and W. Sander (2007): “Teachers and Student Achievement in
the Chicago Public High Schools,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25, 95—135.
Abdulkadiroglu, A., J. D. Angrist, S. M. Dynarski, T. J. Kane, and P. A. Pathak
(2009): “Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters and
Pilots,” NBER Working Paper, 15549.
Adams, D. W. (1988): “Fundamental Considerations: The Deep Meaning of Native American
Schooling, 1880-1900,” Harvard Educational Review, 58 (1), 1—28.
––– (1995): Education for Extinction: American Indians and the Boarding School Experience,
Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.
Ainsworth, J. (2002): “Why Does It Take a Village? The Mediation of Neighborhood Eﬀects on
Educational Achievement,” Social Forces, 81, 117—152.
Angrist, J. D., S. M. Dynarski, T. J. Kane, P. A. Pathak, and C. R. Walters (2010):
“Who Benefits from KIPP?” NBER Working Paper, 15740.
Arieli, M., J. Beker, and Y. Kashti (2001): “Residential Group Care as a Socializing Environment: Toward a Broader Perspective,” in Child and Youth Care Forum, vol. 30, 403—414.
Barnes, G. and M. Farrell (1992): “Parental Support and Control as Predictors of Adolescent
Drinking, Delinquency, and Related Problem Behaviors,” Journal of Marriage and the Family,
54, 763—776.

28

Bloom, H. S., S. L. Thompson, R. Unterman, C. Herlihy, and C. F. Payne (2010): “Transforming the High School Experience: How New York City’s New Small Schools Are Boosting
Student Achievement and Graduation Rates,” MDRC.
Brooks-Gunn, J., G. Duncan, and N. Maritato (1999): “Poor Families, Poor Outcomes:
The Well-Being of Children and Youth,” in Consequences of Growing Up Poor, Russell Sage
Foundation, 1—17.
Brooks-Gunn, J. and L. Markman (2005): “The Contribution of Parenting to Ethnic and
Racial Gaps in School Readiness,” The Future of Children, 15, 139—168.
Cave, G., H. Bos, F. Doolittle, and C. Toussaint (1993): “JOBSTART: Final Report on
a Program for School Dropouts,” Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.
Charity, A., H. Scarborough, and D. Griffin (2004): “Familiarity with School English in
African American Children and Its Relation to Early Reading Achievement,” Child Development,
75, 1340—1356.
Chetty, R., J. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, D. W. Schanzenbach, and D. Yagan
(2010): “How Does your Kindergarten Classroom Aﬀect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project
STAR,” NBER Working Paper, 16381.
Chilcoat, H. and J. Anthony (1996): “Impact of Parent Monitoring on Initiation of Drug Use
through Late Childhood,” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
35, 91—100.
Cookson, P. and C. Persell (1985): “English and American Residential Secondary Schools:
A Comparative Study of the Reproduction of Social Elites,” Comparative Education Review, 29,
283—298.
Currie, J. and D. Thomas (1995): “Does Head Start Make a Diﬀerence?” American Economic
Review, 85, 341—364.
––– (2001): “Early Test Scores, Socioeconomic Status, School Quality and Future Outcomes,” in
Research in Labor Economics, ed. by S. Polachek and K. Tatsiramos, Emerald Group Publishing
Limited, 103—132.
29

Datcher, L. (1982): “Eﬀects of Community and Family Background on Achievement,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 64, 32—41.
Datnow, A. and R. Cooper (1997): “Peer Networks of African American Students in Independent Schools: Aﬃrming Academic Success and Racial Identity,” Journal of Negro Education, 66,
56—72.
Decker, P., D. Mayer, and S. Glaserman (2004): “The Eﬀects of Teach for America on
Students: Findings from a National Evaluation,” Mathematica Policy Research Report, 8792750.
Dick, R., S. Manson, and J. Beals (1993): “Alcohol Use among Male and Female Native
American Adolescents: Patterns and Correlates of Student Drinking in a Boarding School,”
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 54, 172—177.
Dishion, T. and R. McMahon (1998): “Parental Monitoring and the Prevention of Child and
Adolescent Problem Behavior: A Conceptual and Empirical Formulation,” Clinical Child and
Family Psychology Review, 1, 61—75.
Dobbie, W. and R. Fryer (forthcoming): “Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase
Achievement among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Duncan, G. and K. Magnuson (2005): “Can Family Socioeconomic Resources Account for
Racial and Ethnic Test Score Gaps?” The Future of Children, 15, 35—54.
Ellis, C. (1996): To Change Them Forever: Indian Education at the Rainy Mountain Boarding
School, 1893-1920, University of Oklahoma Press.
Fisher, S., N. Frazer, and K. Murray (1984): “The Transition from Home to Boarding
School: A Diary-Style Analysis of the Problems and Worries of Boarding School Pupils,” Journal
of Environmental Psychology, 4, 211—221.
––– (1986): “Homesickness and Health in Boarding School Children,” Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 6, 35—47.

30

Fisher, S., K. Murray, and N. Frazer (1985): “Homesickness, Health and Eﬃciency in First
Year Students,” Journal of Environmental Psychology, 5, 181—195.
Fordham, S. and J. Ogbu (1986): “Black Students’ School Success: Coping with the Burden of
‘Acting White’,” The Urban Review, 18, 176—206.
Fryer, R. (2010a): “Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from Randomized
Trials,” NBER Working Paper, 15898.
––– (2010b): “School-Based Merit Pay: An Experiment in 200 New York City Public Schools,”
Working Paper, Harvard University.
––– (forthcoming): “Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination,” Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 4.
Fryer, R. and P. Torelli (2010): “An Empirical Analysis of ‘Acting White’,” Journal of Public
Economics, 94, 380—396.
Gleason, P., M. Clark, C. Tuttle, E. Dwoyer, and M. Silverberg (2010): “The Evaluation of Charter School Impacts,” National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Gonzales, N., A. Cauce, R. Friedman, and C. Mason (1996): “Family, Peer, and Neighborhood Influences on Academic Achievement among African-American Adolescents: One-Year
Prospective Eﬀects,” American Journal of Community Psychology, 24, 365—387.
Hanushek, E. and S. Rivkin (2005): “Teachers, Schools and Academic Achievement,” Econometrica, 73(2), 417—458.
Hoxby, C. M. and S. Murarka (2009): “Charter Schools in New York City: Who Enrolls and
How They Aﬀect Their Students’ Achievement,” NBER Working Paper, 14852.
Jacob, B. and L. Lefgren (2004): “Remedial Education and Student Achievement: A
Regression-Discontinuity Analysis,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 226—244.
––– (2009): “The Eﬀect of Grade Retention on High School Completion,” Center for Local,
State, and Urban Policy Working Paper, 12.
31

Kahane, R. (1988): “Multicode Organizations: A Conceptual Framework for the Analysis of
Boarding Schools,” Sociology of Education, 61, 211—226.
Kane, T. J., J. Rockoff, and D. Staiger (2008): “What Does Certification Tell Us about
Teacher Eﬀectiveness? Evidence from New York City,” Economics of Education Review, 27(6),
615—631.
Kemper, T. (1968): “Reference Groups, Socialization and Achievement,” American Sociological
Review, 33, 31—45.
Kleinfeld, J. and J. Bloom (1977): “Boarding Schools: Eﬀects on the Mental Health of Eskimo
Adolescents,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 134, 411—417.
Kling, J., J. Liebman, and L. Katz (2007): “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Eﬀects,”
Econometrica, 75, 83—119.
Koss, M., N. Yuan, D. Dightman, R. Prince, M. Polacca, B. Sanderson, and D. Goldman (2003): “Adverse Childhood Exposures and Alcohol Dependence among Seven Native American Tribes,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 25, 238—244.
Krueger, A. B. (1999): “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 497—532.
––– (2003): “Economic Considerations and Class Size,” The Economic Journal, 113, F34—F63.
Krueger, A. B. and D. M. Whitmore (2001): “The Eﬀect of Attending a Small Class in the
Early Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from Project
STAR,” The Economic Journal, 111, 1—28.
LaFromboise, T., H. Coleman, and J. Gerton (1998): “Psychological Impact of Biculturalism,” Readings in Ethnic Psychology, 123—155.
Leventhal, T. and J. Brooks-Gunn (2000): “The Neighborhoods They Live In: The Eﬀects
of Neighborhood Residence on Child and Adolescent Outcomes,” Psychological Bulletin, 126,
309—337.

32

Levine, S. (1980): “The Rise of American Boarding Schools and the Development of a National
Upper Class,” Social Problems, 28, 63—94.
Levitt, S. and L. Lochner (2001): “The Determinants of Juvenile Crime,” in Risky Behavior
Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, ed. by J. Gruber, University of Chicago Press, 327—373.
Lleras-Muney, A. (2005): “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the
United States,” Review of Economic Studies, 72, 189—221.
Lotke, E. (1998): “Hobbling a Generation: Young African American Men in Washington, DC’s
Criminal Justice System - Five Years Later,” Crime & Delinquency, 44, 355.
Ludwig, J. and D. Phillips (2007): “The Benefits and Costs of Head Start,” NBER Working
Paper, 12973.
Mallar, C. (1982): “Evaluation of the Economic Impact of the Job Corps Program. Third
Follow-up Report,” Employment and Training Administration (DOL), Washington, D.C. Office of Policy, Evaluation and Research.
Mickelson, R. (1990): “The Attitude-Achievement Paradox among Black Adolescents,” Sociology
of Education, 63, 44—61.
Neal, D. and W. Johnson (1996): “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
Diﬀerentials,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 869—895.
Podgursky, M. J. and M. G. Springer (2007): “Teacher Performance Pay: A Review,”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 26(4), 909—950.
Puma, M., S. Bell, R. Cook, and C. Heid (2010): “Head Start Impact Study: Final Report,”
Administration for Children and Families.
Raymond, M. (2009): “Multiple Choice: Charter School Performance in 16 States,” Center for
Research on Education Outcomes (CREDO) Report.
Rickford, J. (1999): African American Vernacular English: Features, Evolution, Educational
Implications, Wiley-Blackwell.

33

Rockoff, J. E. (2004): “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence
from Panel Data,” American Economic Review, 94(2), 247—252.
Rosen, B. (1956): “The Achievement Syndrome: A Psychocultural Dimension of Social Stratification,” American Sociological Review, 21, 203—211.
Rothstein, R. (2004): Class and Schools: Using Social, Economic, and Educational Reform to
Close the Achievement Gap, Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute.
Wacquant, L. and W. Wilson (1989): “The Cost of Racial and Class Exclusion in the Inner
City,” The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 501, 8—25.
Whitman, D. (2008): Sweating the Small Stuﬀ: Inner-City Schools and the New Paternalism,
Washington, D.C.: Thomas B. Fordham Foundation & Institute.
Zimmer, R., B. Gill, K. Booker, S. Lavertu, T. Sass, and J. Witte (2009): Charter
Schools in Eight States: Eﬀects on Achievement, Attainment, Integration, and Competition,
RAND Corporation.
Zweigenhaft, R. (1992): “The Application of Cultural and Social Capital: A Study of the 25th
Year Reunion Entries of Prep School and Public School Graduates of Yale College,” Higher
Education, 23, 311—320.

34

Table 1: Lottery and Match Summary
A. Lottery Records

Total number of records
Excluding siblings
Excluding late/non-randomized applicants
Excluding applicants from wrong grade

Lottery
Grade
7th
7th
7th

Lottery
Year
2007
2008
Pooled

Grades
Observed
7th - 8th
7th
7th - 8th

Number of
Applicants
132
89
221

B. Match Summary
Overall
Number of
Match Rate
Winners
0.95
80
0.93
49
0.94
129

Lottery Cohort
2007
2008
155
106
138
94
133
91
132
89

Winner
Match Rate
0.95
0.96
0.95

Number of
Losers
52
40
92

Loser
Match Rate
0.94
0.90
0.92

NOTES: This table summarizes the lottery cohorts and match rates from SEED lottery files to SEED administrative data, District of
Columbia Comprehensive Assessment System (DC CAS) data, and Maryland School Assessment (MSA) data. The sample consists of
students in the SEED School of Washington, D.C., lotteries in 2007 and 2008. Panel A shows the breakdown of different types of records
in the student lottery files. Panel B shows the breakdown of winners and losers in each lottery sample, as well as match rates. The match
rate shown is the proportion of students for whom at least one DC CAS or MSA score in either math or reading was matched.

Black

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics and Covariate Balance
Means
DCPS
Lottery
Lottery Lottery
SEED
Enrollees Applicants Winners Losers Enrollees
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
0.837
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

Balance
Applicants v. Winners v.
DCPS
Losers
(6)
(7)
0.163
–
(0.005)

Non-black

0.163

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

-0.163
(0.005)

–

Male

0.506

0.385

0.574

0.120

0.596

-0.123
(0.033)

–

Female

0.494

0.615

0.426

0.880

0.404

0.123
(0.033)

–

Baseline reading score

-0.017

0.041

0.068

0.003

0.075

0.061
(0.055)

0.131
(0.122)

Baseline math score

-0.031

0.033

0.057

-0.000

0.064

0.072
(0.058)

0.187
(0.126)

Free lunch

0.678

0.748

0.778

0.703

0.753

0.070
(0.035)

0.062
(0.078)

Special education

0.215

0.119

0.094

0.162

0.098

-0.096
(0.024)

-0.095
(0.059)

English Language Learner

0.066

0.083

0.070

0.107

0.058

0.020
(0.020)

-0.089
(0.046)

Lives with two parents

–

0.223

0.227

0.217

0.221

–

0.019
(0.063)

Lives with mother

–

0.623

0.664

0.565

0.644

–

0.098
(0.075)

Lives with grandparent(s)

–

0.077

0.070

0.087

0.087

–

-0.028
(0.042)

Lives with other legal guardian

–

0.077

0.039

0.130

0.048

–

-0.089
(0.047)

5045

221

129

92

104

5266

221

Number of students

NOTES: Columns (1)-(5) report means of the variable indicated in each row. Column (1) reports means for students who were enrolled in seventh
grade in District of Columbia Public Schools (DCPS) in 2007-08 and 2008-09. Column (2) reports means for all SEED lottery applicants. Column
(3) reports means for SEED lottery winners and Column (4) reports means for SEED lottery losers. Column (5) reports means for lottery applicants
who enrolled in SEED for at least one day. Column (6) reports coefficients from regressions of the variable indicated in each row on an indicator
variable equal to one if the student was a SEED lottery applicant and zero if the student is from the DCPS seventh grade sample from Column
(1). Column (7) reports coefficients from regressions of the variable indicated in each row on an indicator variable equal to one if the student won
the lottery. Because SEED holds separate lotteries for male and female applicants, these regressions include an indicator variable equal to one if
the student is male, and results for Column (7) are not reported for sex indicator variables. Because every applicant in the lottery sample is black,
results for Column (7) are not reported for race indicator variables. The pooled regression in Column (7) combines the 2007 and 2008 cohorts and
includes dummies for applicant year as well as a contemporaneous sibling dummy and the interaction of the contemporaneous sibling dummy with
applicant year. The number of students in each sample is reported in the final row. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.

Outcome
Reading

Math

Table 3: Lottery Results
First
Reduced
Stage
Form
Controls
(1)
(2)
Basic
0.934
0.236
(0.075)
(0.100)

2SLS
(3)
0.252
(0.106)

Baseline Scores

0.922
(0.076)

0.168
(0.081)

0.182
(0.088)

Baseline Scores
and Demographics

0.949
(0.078)

0.188
(0.087)
303

0.198
(0.093)

Basic

0.933
(0.075)

0.384
(0.116)

0.412
(0.122)

Baseline Scores

0.921
(0.076)

0.283
(0.083)

0.307
(0.090)

Baseline Scores
and Demographics

0.949
(0.078)

0.218
(0.081)
301

0.230
(0.084)

NOTES: This table reports estimates of the effect of attending SEED on
achievement. The sample is students who applied to the SEED School of
Washington, D.C., in 2007 and 2008. Columns (1)-(3) report the first stage,
reduced form, and 2SLS coefficients from instrumenting years in SEED using an indicator for having won the SEED lottery. This indicator is equal
to one if the applicant was offered admission either immediately or off the
waitlist. Applicants with sibling priority or who applied late and were
not included in the original lottery are excluded. All regressions include
an indicator variable for sex, since separate lotteries were conducted for
males and females. All regressions combine the 2007 and 2008 cohorts and
include dummies for grade of test and applicant year as well as a contemporaneous sibling dummy and the interaction of the contemporaneous sibling
dummy with applicant year. Estimates are also reported for regressions
including controls for baseline test scores in reading and math as well as
demographic controls for free lunch eligibility, special education status, and
English Language Learner status. Because every applicant in the lottery
sample is black, race controls are not included. Robust standard errors
(clustered at the student level) are reported in parentheses. Numbers of
observations are reported directly below each set of estimates.

Full
Sample

Male

Outcome
Reading

(1)
0.198
(0.093)
303

(2)
-0.138
(0.145)
94

Table 4: Lottery Results by Subsample
NonFree
Female p-value
p-value
Free
Lunch
Lunch
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.382
0.014
0.254
0.023
0.109
(0.155)
(0.123) (0.075)
126
184
58

Math

0.230
(0.084)
301

0.037
(0.156)
94

0.265
(0.142)
125

0.280

0.196
(0.104)
183

0.125
(0.108)
58

0.636

(8)
0.105
(0.235)
38

NonSpecial
Education
(9)
0.224
(0.100)
250

0.102
(0.302)
38

0.288
(0.090)
249

Special
Education

p-value
(10)
0.640

0.555

NOTES: This table reports estimates of the effect of attending SEED on achievement for subsets of the lottery sample. Columns (1)-(3),
(5)-(6), and (8)-(9) report 2SLS coefficients from instrumenting years in SEED using an indicator for having won the SEED lottery. This
indicator is equal to one if the applicant was offered admission either immediately or off the waitlist. Columns (4), (7), and (10) report
p-values for the F-test for the hypothesis that the coefficients in the preceding two columns are equal. Applicants with sibling priority
or who applied late and were not included in the original lottery are excluded. All regressions include an indicator variable for sex, since
separate lotteries were conducted for males and females. Because every single male student in the 2008 lottery was offered admission to
SEED, the regressions for males and females in Columns (2) and (3) only include the 2007 cohort and include grade of test dummies and
a contemporaneous sibling dummy. All other regressions combine the 2007 and 2008 cohorts and include dummies for grade of test and
applicant year as well as a contemporaneous sibling dummy and the interaction of the contemporaneous sibling dummy with applicant
year. All regressions include controls for baseline test scores in reading and math as well as demographic controls for race, free lunch
eligibility, special education status, and English Language Learner status. Because every applicant in the lottery sample is black, race
controls are not included. Robust standard errors (clustered at the student level) are reported in parentheses. Numbers of observations
are reported directly below standard errors.

Outcome
Reading

Table 5: Distribution Effects
Effects by Baseline Score Quantile
Non-Missing
Below
Above
Baseline
p-value
Median Median
Score
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.144
0.314
-0.048
0.025
(0.087)
(0.140) (0.081)
272
139
133

Mean Score by Quantile
Math

Mean Score by Quantile

0.247
(0.085)
270

-0.491

0.653

0.354
(0.129)
141

0.163
(0.118)
129

-0.532

0.663

0.274

Baseline Score Interaction
Main
Effect

Interaction
Term

(5)
0.156
(0.094)
272

(6)
-0.112
(0.135)
272

0.261
(0.089)
270

-0.084
(0.119)
270

NOTES: This table reports estimates of the effect of attending SEED on achievement for students from different parts of the baseline
test score distribution. Columns (1)-(3) report 2SLS coefficients from instrumenting years in SEED using an indicator for having won
the SEED lottery. This indicator is equal to one if the applicant was offered admission either immediately or off the waitlist. Column
(1) reports estimates for the sample of students with non-missing baseline scores in the same subject as the outcome. Columns (2)-(3)
report estimates for the groups that are below the median and above the median in terms of baseline score in the same subject as
the outcome. Column (4) reports the p-value for the F-test for the hypothesis that the coefficients for the Below Median and Above
Median groups are the same. Columns (5) and (6) report results from models interacting baseline test score with years in SEED.
Main effects are at the mean. The interaction models are estimated by including an indicator for having won the SEED lottery
interacted with baseline score as a second instrument. Applicants with sibling priority or who applied late and were not included
in the original lottery are excluded. All regressions include an indicator variable for sex, since separate lotteries were conducted for
males and females. All regressions combine the 2007 and 2008 cohorts and include dummies for grade of test and applicant year
as well as a contemporaneous sibling dummy and the interaction of the contemporaneous sibling dummy with applicant year. All
regressions include controls for baseline test scores in reading and math as well as demographic controls for free lunch eligibility,
special education status, and English Language Learner status. Because every applicant in the lottery sample is black, race controls
are not included. Robust standard errors (clustered at the student level) are reported in parentheses. Numbers of observations are
reported directly below standard errors. Mean baseline score by quantile is also reported below each set of estimates.

Outcome
Reading

Math

Number of observations

Share of
Lottery
Winners
with
Scores
(1)
0.861

Table 6: Attrition
Share of
Differential Follow-up (Winner - Loser)
Lottery
Baseline Scores
Losers
Basic
Baseline Scores
and Demographics
with
Scores
(3)
(4)
(5)
(2)
-0.011
-0.017
-0.031
0.879
(0.040)
(0.040)
(0.040)

0.861

0.864

0.001
(0.040)

-0.006
(0.040)

-0.024
(0.040)

209

140

349

349

349

NOTES: This table reports differential rates of attrition for SEED lottery winners and losers. Columns (1) and (2) report shares
of lottery winners and losers with non-missing values for the outcomes indicated in each row. Columns (3)-(5) report coefficients
from regressions of an indicator variable equal to one if the outcome indicated in the same row is non-missing on an indicator for
having won the SEED lottery. Samples and specifications are otherwise identical to those reported in Table 3. Robust standard
errors (clustered at the student level) are reported in parentheses. Numbers of observations are reported directly below estimates.

Table 7: Discounted Present Values of Costs and Benefits

A. SEED
Increase in Income
Assuming Annual
Productivity
Growth Rate of:
Discount
Rate
(1)
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06

Cost
(2009 $)
(2)
42,874
42,161
41,468
40,795
40,141
39,506

Internal Rate of Return:

Discount
Rate
(1)
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06

0%

1%

2%

(3)
105,867
77,926
58,470
44,678
34,729
27,426

(4)
111,268
81,901
61,452
46,957
36,500
28,825

(5)
116,886
86,037
64,555
49,328
38,343
30,281

4.38%

4.59%

4.80%

B. “No Excuses” Charter Schools
Increase in Income
Assuming Annual
Productivity
Growth Rate of:
Cost
0%
1%
2%
(2009 $)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
3,566
85,293
89,644
94,171
3,521
62,782
65,985
69,317
3,476
47,107
49,510
52,010
3,433
35,995
37,832
39,742
3,390
27,979
29,407
30,892
3,349
22,096
23,223
24,396

Internal Rate of Return:

18.07%

18.50%

18.93%

NOTES: Figures assume that a one standard deviation increase in either reading
or mathematics scores is associated with an 8 percent increase in earnings, and
that attending SEED in grades 6-8 raises reading scores by .198 standard deviations per year and raises math scores by .230 standard deviations per year. Real
wages are assumed to grow at the same rate as productivity. Costs and benefits
are based on the assumption that students who are admitted to SEED actually
attend SEED for, on average, approximately 2.3 out of the 3 middle school years
they could possibly attend. It is assumed that attending a “No Excuses” charter
school in grades 6-8 raises reading scores by .149 standard deviations per year
and raises math scores by .405 standard deviations per year. These estimates
are taken from a study of “No Excuses” charter schools by Abdulkadiroglu et
al. (2009). Costs and benefits are based on the assumption that students who
are admitted to a “No Excuses” charter school actually attend a “No Excuses”
charter for, on average, approximately 1.4 out of the 3 middle school years they
could possibly attend.

Appendix Figure 1. SEED Treatment and Control Households

T
TC T C
T
TC
C T CT
T
T
TC
C CTT
C
TT
CT T
C
T
TC
T
T C
T C
T T
T
C
TC
T
TT T
T
TT C
C
C C T C
T
T
T
T
C
CC
T CTC
CCC
T
T
C
T
C
T
C
T
C
C C TT
TCT
C
T
T
C
T
C
T
TCT T TT
C
C
C
T TC
C
T
C
C
T
T
T
T
TCT
C
T
T
T
TT TTC
CT C C
C
T
T
C
C
T
TTC
C
C
T TT C
C TC
TC
T TCC
TC
T TC
C
C
CTTC
T
C
T
TT
T
C
C
T
T
TCT
TC
C
CC
TTC
C
CT
C
T
TCTC
T

^

T

Legend
Poverty Rates
0.00 - 0.05
0.06 - 0.10
0.11 - 0.16

0.17 - 0.25

^
T
C

0.26 - 1.00
SEED Campus

SEED Lottery Winners
SEED Lottery Losers

2.5

Miles

p

