NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARITAL SORTING AND PARENTAL WEALTH
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Erik Hurst
Alexandra Killewald
Working Paper 16748
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16748

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

We would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Mark Aguiar, Steve Levitt, Bruce Meyer, and Emily Oster
along with seminar participants at the University of Chicago for helpful comments. We thank Liqian
Ren for help with the empirical work on early drafts of the paper. Charles would like to gratefully
acknowledge support from the Searle Freedom Trust. Hurst would like to acknowledge financial support
from Chicago Booth. Killewald would like to acknowledge financial support from the Gerald R. Ford
School of Public Policy, Rackham Graduate School, and the Quantitative Methodology Program in
the Survey Research Center, all at the University of Michigan. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Kerwin Kofi Charles, Erik Hurst, and Alexandra Killewald. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Marital Sorting and Parental Wealth
Kerwin Kofi Charles, Erik Hurst, and Alexandra Killewald
NBER Working Paper No. 16748
January 2011
JEL No. J12
ABSTRACT
Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), this paper studies the degree to which
spouses sort in the marriage market on the basis of parental wealth. We estimate a variety of models,
including transition matrices, OLS and TSLS models to deal with measurement error in wealth reports.
Our various results show that men and women in the U.S. marry spouses whose parents have wealth
similar to that of their own parents; and are very unlikely to marry persons from very different parental
wealth backgrounds. This effect is present in the population as a whole, within racial groups, and
especially in the tails of the distribution. Our preferred estimates indicate that the correlation in log
wealth between own and spouse’s parents wealth is around 0.4. We show that education accounts
for only one-quarter of this sorting, and also show that selection into and out marriage by parental
wealth does not appreciably bias our results.

Kerwin Kofi Charles
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kcharles@uchicago.edu
Erik Hurst
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Harper Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu

Alexandra Killewald
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan
akillewa@umich.edu

1

Introduction
Marital sorting – who marries whom – has long interested social scientists. This interest

is not surprising. Marriage is a key indicator of cross-group interactions so the tendency of
particular types of people to marry is instructive about how socially segregated society is along
various dimensions. Marital sorting also has important implications for inequality in socioeconomic outcomes. How people sort into marriage determines how the socio-economic gains
from marriage are distributed in the population at any point in time. 1 And, if there is sorting on
the basis of parental traits, socio-economic movement across generations might be affected. 2
There are theoretical reasons to expect some sorting by socio-economic background, as
measured by parental traits. People from similar backgrounds likely have similar tastes, which
would tend to make them mutually attractive as marriage partners.

Adults from similar

backgrounds are more likely to have earlier met and socially interacted. And, in a standard
queuing model (Becker 1973) men and women from similar backgrounds would tend to marry if
parental background were a desired trait in the marriage market.

Despite its potential

contribution to inequality, there has been very little work on sorting by parental traits. This paper
is the first to study marriage market sorting by parental wealth.
Perhaps the key challenge to studying marital sorting by a trait like parental wealth is the
paucity of data: very few data sources provide information on the parental traits of married
adults.

There is some work, dating from the 1940s, studying similarity in spouses’ parents’

occupational class (Burgess and Wallin 1943, Centers 1949, Rubin 1968, Kalmijn 1991 and

1

Some of the gains from marriage documented in the literature include better health (Lillard and Waite 1995;Waite
1995) and wage gains (Chun and Lee 2001; Gray 1997; Hersch and Stratton 2000; and Loh 1996). Consistent with
the idea of marital gains, marital disruption appears to cause declines in economic wellbeing for both men (Hoffman
and Duncan 1988; Smock 1993) and women (McManus and DiPrete 2001).
2
See Solon (1999) for a comprehensive review of the large empirical literature on inter-generational correlations in
socio-economic outcomes. See Kremer (1997) and Fernandez and Rogerson (2001) for theoretical analysis of the
connection between sorting and inequality.

1

Uunk et al. 1996). Because parental wealth summarizes command over financial resources, it
may better reflect adults’ socio-economic background than do measures of occupational
affiliation.
This paper uses data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). In 1988 the
survey elicited information about the wealth of the living parents of respondents and
respondents’ spouses. In principle, these reports permit a comparison of the parental wealth of a
random sample of married adults. Unfortunately, this simple exercise is complicated by various
features of the data. One problem is that a non-trivial fraction of the parental wealth reports are
in broad wealth categories like “negative”, “zero” and “positive”. Another, and more important,
problem is that when adult children report parental wealth, and especially when they give
explicit numerical values of parental wealth, the reports are likely fraught with error, both
classical and otherwise.
Making as full use of the available data as possible, we present a variety of estimates of
sorting by parental wealth. We first show that there is a very strong positive correlation between
spousal parental wealth in reported categories – both in terms of reported categories like
“negative”, “zero”, and “positive” wealth and when we sort the sample into wealth brackets
based on the ranges used by the PSID. We also show that spouses are disproportionately likely
to have parents who occupy similar quintiles in the continuous parental wealth distribution.
This sorting tendency is particularly pronounced in the tails: the sons and daughters of parents in
the highest and lowest quintiles of parental wealth are especially likely to marry people from
similar backgrounds.
To produce quantitative estimates of sorting we estimate the correlation in parental
wealth among the subset of our sample for which explicit positive wealth levels are reported. In

2

addition to simple OLS estimates, we present Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS) models meant to
deal with biases arising from measurement error. Given the PSID genealogical design, for a part
of the overall sample we know the respondent’s report about their parents’ wealth and the
parents’ own report of their wealth. This feature of the data allows us to estimate TSLS models
where we instrument for one type of parental wealth report using another. These TSLS estimates
are our preferred results. We estimate the correlation in parental wealth between U.S. husbands
and wives to be between 0.38 and 0.42, and show that only between a fifth and a quarter of this
correlation can be explained by sorting on the educational attainment of husbands and wives. All
our results are robust to modifications in specification and sample construction.
We also formally measure the degree to which the sample of married couples on which
our analysis is based is selected. Two types of selection are of concern: (a) if parental wealth
affects whether or when people become married; and (b) if parental wealth affects the likelihood
that a marriage dissolves and thus does not appear in our sample. 3 Various probit analyses of
marriage formation show no evidence of selective sorting into marriage on the basis of parental
wealth. We do find some evidence that higher parental wealth slightly increases the divorce
hazard, but this effect differs very slightly depending on the wealth of one’s in-laws. Overall,
these results suggest that any biases arising from selection into our sample are small.
Apart from new evidence of parental wealth sorting, our work extends the large literature
on marital sorting. Educational sorting has been a particular focus in this literature, with many
authors documenting strong positive assortative mating by education (Lam 1988, Mare 1991,

3

Another possible type of selection for which we are able to do little is the fact that our analysis is limited to adult
children with living parents.

3

Pencavel 1998, and Schwartz and Mare 2005). 4 Education is an acquired trait, and people may
acquire a given level of schooling with an eye to its marriage market payoff, so this work tells us
little about marital sorting on the basis of factors outside an agent’s control, like parental wealth.
And, although parental wealth is strongly correlated with schooling attainment, our analysis
documents the impact of parental background on marriage outcomes above and beyond anything
operating through education.
Our analysis also extends previous work on how financial resources affect martial
formation and durability.

Previous work on formation has examined traits like education and

employment (Oppenheimer, Kalmijn, and Lim 1997; Smock and Manning 1997; Xieet al. 2003,
and Sweeney 2002).

To our knowledge, none of this work examines parental resources.

Previous work on dissolution has focused on spouses’ employment and wages. 5 A challenge
faced in this work is the potential endogeneity between spouses’ spousal labor supply outcomes
and divorce. 6 Our focus on parental wealth permits a more comprehensive definition of the
financial resources that might affect divorce and, because its focus is on parental traits, is free of
some of endogeneity concerns likely to plague individual level measures like own labor supply.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes and summarizes
the data used in the analysis. Section 3 presents estimates of parental wealth sorting by wealth
categories and by wealth quintiles. Section 4 presents estimates of parental wealth correlations,
4

Whereas most literature on marital sorting has focused on education, some studies have examined sorting by
occupation (Hout 1982) and ethnicity (Pagnini and Morgan 1990). In the biological sciences, there is evidence that
men and women sort based on biological characteristics such as age and height (see Epstein and Guttman 1984).
5
For theoretical arguments about how spousal wages or labor supply might affect the probability of divorce, see
Oppenheimer 1988; Sayer and Bianchi 2000; Schoen et al. 2002; Heckert, Nowak, and Snyder 1998; Ono 1998; and
Rogers 2004. Empirical analyses generally find have generally found positive association between wives’
employment and earnings and divorce, while husbands’ labor supply and labor income are negatively associated
with divorce (Heckert et al. 1998; Jalovaara 2003; Ono 1998; Rogers 2004; Schoen et al. 2002; South 2001;
Teachman 2010).
6
For example, wives may increase labor supply in anticipation of divorce (Lyngstad and Jalovaara 2010; Ono 1998;
Rogers 1999), or may choose to work because of traits are correlated with divorce, such as their attitudes about
gender roles (Sayer and Bianchi 2000).

4

including various TSLS results. Section 5 gives robustness evidence about the effect of parental
wealth on marriage formation and dissolution. Section 6 concludes.

2.

Data on Parental Wealth and PSID Sample
We take advantage of a series of questions on parental background asked in a supplement

in 1988. In each wave of the PSID, a single household member responds to survey questions for
the entire household. Unmarried respondents answered these questions about their own parents;
married respondents answered about their own parents and their spouse’s parents. In addition to
parental wealth, the parental background information included whether parents were alive at the
time of the survey, the parents’ age if alive, parental education, parents’ marital status, and
whether the parents had remarried.
Questions about parental wealth concerned current (as of 1988) level of wealth. If the
parents of either spouse were not married to each other at the time of the survey, the questions
were asked for both fathers (and the father’s new family, if applicable) and mothers (and the
mother’s new family, if applicable). Two questions were asked about parental wealth. First:
“Suppose your parents were to sell all of their major possessions (including their home), turn all
their investments and other assets into cash, and pay off all their debts. Would they have
something left over, break even, or be in debt?” Households reporting that their parents had
positive wealth were subsequently asked, “How much would your parents have left over?” If the
respondent did not know how much wealth their parents would have left over, they were asked to
give an approximate range as to their parents’ wealth (where the ranges were fixed as part of the

5

survey). 7 An exactly analogous set of questions was asked about the respondents’ parents-inlaw.
Our analysis focuses on the 1988 PSID sample. Because parental wealth information was
asked only about parents alive as of the survey, we deleted couples for whom either spouse was
an orphan at the time of the survey. Next, because it is difficult to link parental wealth to the
child in cases where parents were alive, but had remarried, we exclude the 8% of all married
households meeting this condition. When both parents were divorced and not remarried, the
reported wealth of the two households is summed. 8 These restrictions result in a sample of 1820
cases. As we proceed through our analysis, we use different versions of this overall sample
because of various features of the data. For example, the TSLS analysis requires the use of
explicit positive wealth reports, so this part of the analysis drops not only the categorical
“negative” and “zero” parental wealth cases but also cases where parental wealth was
characterized as “positive” but no explicit numerical value was reported.
Panel A of Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the 1988 sample of 1820 married
couples for which we have any information on parental wealth.

All means in this table are

weighted using the PSID 1988 household-level weights and all dollar values are in 1988 dollars.
About 90% of the sample is white. Husbands are slightly better educated that their wives, with
about 54% of them having more than high school training compared to 47% for wives. At thirtyeight years old on average, husbands are about two years older than their wives.

This age

difference naturally manifests itself in the age of spouses’ parents: husbands’ fathers and

7

The approach taken by the PSID elicits responses via “unfolding brackets”. Specifically, respondents were asked if
their parents’ wealth was greater or less than $25,000. If they responded greater than $25,000, they were
subsequently asked if it was greater or less than $100,000. If they initially responded that it was less than $25,000,
they were subsequently asked whether it was greater than or less than $1,000.
8
An exception occurs when one divorced parent is reported to have negative wealth and one positive. Since the
level of indebtedness is not known, it is not possible to meaningfully combine reports in this case.

6

mothers, at ages 67 and 65, respectively, are two years older than wives’ parents. Although
reported parental education is substantially lower than adults’ own schooling, the schooling
difference between fathers and mothers is similar to the gap for adult children.
The final three rows in Panel A report the share of spouses’ parents for whom available
reports of wealth are the categorical values “negative”, “zero” or “positive with no explicit not
numerical value”. Nearly half of the full married sample falls into these groups. In particular,
for about 12% of couples the report about parental wealth is that is either “zero” or “negative”.
For 39% of spouses’ parents we do not have an actual numerical value of wealth but know only
that it “positive” and perhaps the unfolding bracket into which it falls. Panel B of Table 1
presents summary statistics for the subsample of 587 couples with explicit numerical positive
wealth reports for both the husband’s and wife’ parents. This part of the sample shows a slightly
higher incidence of whites than does the overall sample. Otherwise, the subsample is quite
similar to the sample as a whole. The mean level of parental wealth for people with numerical
wealth reports was about $170,000 in 1988 dollars, with a standard deviation of just over
$200,000. The median value of parental wealth in this sample is $100,000. 9
Reports about parental wealth are likely fraught with error and any such problems are
probably more pronounced with explicit numerical wealth reports than for reports of parental
wealth categories. If errors in reports about own and spouses’ parents’ wealth are random and
uncorrelated, estimates of sorting by parental wealth would be biased towards zero. But
measurement error might not be of this classical form. In particular, since respondents who
overstate (understate) the wealth of their own parents might make the same sort of error in
reporting the wealth of their parents-in-law, errors for the two wealth reports would probably be

9

The distribution of numerical parental wealth values was very “lumpy”, with many respondents giving numerical
values reporting “round” values like $50,000 or $150,000.

7

positively correlated, leading to an overestimate of the degree of marital sorting. Naïve estimates
of marital sorting by parental wealth which did not account for measurement error biased could
thus be biased in either direction. We use a variety of methods to deal with these various types
of measurement error in the analysis that follows.

3

Similarity in Parental Wealth Position among Spouses

3a.

Sorting by Wealth Categories

We begin with an analysis of marital sorting using three categories of reported wealth –
“negative”, “zero”, or “positive”. This analysis is conducted on the full sample of 1820 couples
from Panel A of Table 1. Table 2a presents the unconditional joint distribution of husbands’ and
wives’ parents’ wealth by the three categories for the full sample and suggests a positive
correlation in husbands’ and wife’s parental wealth. For example, among husbands whose
parents’ wealth is “negative”, 14% are married to wives whose parents’ wealth is also
“negative”. This incidence is seven times larger than would be expected if people married at
random and is much larger than the rates of marriage to these women by husbands from other
backgrounds. While not as dramatic everywhere, these coarse categories show evidence of
unconditional assortative matching throughout the distribution. 10
Although Table 2a uses the entire sample of married spouses, the results discard a lot of
information about those with reported “positive” parental wealth. For many of these persons we
have either an explicit parental wealth report or a PSID- defined range into which parental
wealth falls. Dropping from the sample in Table 2a those couples who report positive parental
wealth but give no other information, we can sort the 1207 remaining couples into four reported
10

Some assortative mating on the basis of parental wealth may reflect assortative mating on the basis of race,
coupled with racial differences in parental wealth distributions (see Oliver and Shapiro 1996; Conley 1999 and
Barsky et al 2002). We perform the analysis in Table 2A separately by race and find equally strong parental wealth
sorting patterns within racial groups (whites and non-whites).

8

parental wealth categories: less than $1,000, $1,000 to less than $25,000, $25,000 to less than
$100,000, and $100,000 or more. These ranges do not split the sample into equally sized groups.
However, families with “zero” and “negative” parental wealth can be placed in the lowest bin,
and those with “positive” parental wealth in Table 2a can be more finely disaggregated.
Table 2b presents the unconditional transition matrix of husbands and wives by the range
into which their reported parents’ wealth falls. The table shows much more dramatic evidence of
sorting than do the coarser categories in Table 2a. For example, 16% of all husbands have
parents in the lowest wealth range of less than $1,000. Among these men, 35% are married to
wives with parents in the same wealth range. This is more than double the incidence we would
expect relative to random sorting (16%). These husbands marry wives with parents from the top
range at a rate of 20%, or about half the rate that random matching would predict. At the other
end of the distribution, 60% of husbands with parents in the highest wealth range marry wives
from similar backgrounds, which is vastly higher than the 39% rate we would expect from
random matching. And, these husbands marry wives with parents in the lowest range of parental
wealth at less than one-half the rate random matching would predict (7% versus 16%).
In Table 3 we report the results of a series of probit models that ask how a wife’s parental
wealth belonging to a given range affects the probability that her husbands’ parents are in the
given range, after adjusting for various observables.

We present the estimated probit model

coefficient for the variable, the estimated standard error in regular parentheses, and the implied
marginal effect of the estimate in squared parentheses. These marginal effects are given by the
mean of
⎛

⎞

βˆ jφ ⎜ ∑ β j X ij ⎟
⎝

⎠

j

9

(1)

in the sample, where βˆ j is the estimated probit coefficient, X ij is the vector of observables, and
φ (.) is the pdf of the Normal distribution. The probit models in Table 3 control for the race and

age of each spouse, as well as the age of the parents of both spouses. 11
Nearly all of the probit estimates are strongly statistically significant, and the implied
marginal effects show dramatic sorting by wealth range, after accounting for observables.
People are hugely likely to marry spouses from similar parental backgrounds, and the further a
spouse’s parental background is from their own, the sharply lower the incidence of marriage.
For example, we estimate that wives with parents with reported wealth in the lowest range are 28
percentage points more likely to marry husbands from a similar background, compared to the
excluded group of wives with the highest parental wealth range.

Moreover, this implied

marginal effect is larger than that for wives from the next wealthiest background (13 percentage
points), which is in turn larger than the marginal effect for wives from the next highest wealth
range (6 percentage points).

Similar patterns exist through the table, although they seem

especially pronounced at the tails. It also bears noting that, for all the wealth ranges, the
marginal effects are very large, especially compared to the relevant mean outcome.

3b.

Sorting by Wealth Quintiles

An alternative measure of sorting is the use of wealth quintiles. For this analysis (and
henceforth) we focus on the part of the sample with explicit numerical reports about parental
wealth for both husbands and wives (panel B of Table 1). Using this sample, we first adjust
husbands’ and wives’ parental wealth for child age and race using a simple regression of log
wealth. We then sort the residuals from those regressions into quintiles and create transition
11

In all models that control for age, of either the individual or his parents, we include both linear and quadratic
terms.

10

matrices whose elements elements π ab indicate the probability that the wife’s parents belongs to
the ath quintile of the wife’s age-adjusted parental wealth distribution, given that the husband’s
parents belong to the bth quintile of the husband’s age-adjusted parental wealth distribution. The
more independent husband’s and wife’s parental wealth, the greater the likelihood that the
elements of the matrices should be close to one-fifth; large departures from 0.2 suggest strong
systematic relationships between husbands’ and wives’ parental wealth.
Panel A of Table 4 shows this transition matrix result. The results are striking. Among
husbands with parents in the lowest quintile of the adjusted parental wealth distribution, 39% are
married to women whose parents also fall into the lowest 20% of the distribution of wives’
adjusted parental wealth, while only 8% are married to women with parents in the top quintile of
the parental wealth distribution.

Sixty-three percent of men with parents in the lowest wealth

quintile marry women whose parents are in the lowest two parental wealth quintiles. Only 19%
of husbands with the poorest parents marry women whose parents are wealthy enough to place
them in the top 40% of the parental wealth distribution. The same sorting is evident at the top
end of the wealth distribution. Sixty-four percent of husbands with parents in the top quintile of
the adjusted parental wealth distribution are married to wives whose parents are in the upper
40% of the parental wealth distribution. Only 10% of husbands from the wealthiest parental
backgrounds are married to wives drawn from families in the lowest quintile of the adjusted
parental wealth distribution.
Although it is most pronounced in the tails, this tendency of people to marry spouses
whose parents are drawn from the same approximate place in the parental wealth distribution can
be seen throughout the distribution. The null hypothesis that husbands’ and wives’ reported
parental wealth quintiles are independent can be rejected at any conventional level of

11

significance (p-value < 0.001). Robustness exercises suggest that this finding is not an artifact of
the results in Table 4 being restricted to the portion of the sample for which we have explicit
positive numerical reports. 12
The preceding results strongly suggest that people marry spouses who come from very
similar wealth backgrounds. What explains this sorting? One possibility is that parental wealth
may determine people’s preferences, so that the traits one finds attractive among all the people
one meets in the marriage market tend to be most prevalent in people from similar backgrounds.
Alternatively, being from a particular wealth background may have no causal effect of
preferences at all, but may merely delimit the set of people with whom one interacts and gets to
know.
We do not attempt to identify the precise mechanism that generates parental wealth
sorting in this paper, but we examine throughout the role of the one obvious mechanism – the
couple’s own education. 13 Individuals’ schooling likely affects their preferences, and schooling
affects the set of people with whom individuals interact during the ages when marriage decisions
are made. Finally, it is well known that a person’s wealth background determines their level of
schooling (Conley 1999).
In Panel B of Table 4, we re-do the analysis Panel A, but now regression-adjust reported
parental wealth for educational attainment as well. A comparison of the two panels shows that
whereas adjusting for education slightly reduces estimated sorting in the transition matrices,
residual parental wealth levels remain highly associated ( χ 2 (16 ) = 74.1, p-value<0.001) .

12

For

In a robustness exercise, we expand the sample for the transition matrix analysis by including information from
the PSID unfolding bracket ranges. We allocate wealth values to people in a reported bracket equal to the mean
response for those with exact reports. The transition matrices computed using this alternative method yield results
very similar to results shown in Table 4.
13
There is a literature showing that couples sort based upon their own level of educational attainment. See Schwartz
and Mare (2005) and the cites within.

12

example, even after accounting for the spouses’ education levels, 36% of husbands from the
bottom quintile of the parental wealth residuals marry wives from the bottom quintile, which is
16 percentage points more than would be expected by random matching, while 33% of husbands
from the top quintile marry wives from the top quintile. Sorting on the basis of schooling
contributes to assortative mating by parental wealth, but the transition matrix estimates suggests
that that contribution is relatively small.
Like the earlier results, the transition matrix estimates show strong evidence of dynastic
marriage: the offspring of wealthy (poorer) families marry the offspring of other wealthy
(poorer) families. Nor does this sorting appear to be a function of sorting by race or education.
Nonetheless, a concern about all the results presented thus far is that they are based on children’s
reports of parental wealth, and as such might be seriously affected by measurement error
concerns. Also, none of the estimates thus far shown is a summary, quantitative measure of
sorting. That is, these estimates do not tell us how much larger, on average, a husband’s parents’
wealth is for each additional dollar of a wife’s parents’ wealth. We turn next to quantitative
estimates of marital sorting, in which we try to account formally for measurement error
problems.
4.

Estimated Correlation in the Level of Parental Wealth
For this analysis, following the specification used by authors like Solon (1992), Mulligan

(1997), and Charles and Hurst (2003) to assess the intergenerational correlations in economic
well being, we estimate:
ln (W fP ) = α + δ1 ln (WhP ) + β X + ε

13

(2)

where subscripts h (husband) and f (wife) denote the person whose parental wealth is reported.
The superscript P denotes parental measures and W denotes household wealth. Thus, Whp is the
reported wealth of the husband’s parents, reported by the husband or another member of his
household. The vector X contains various covariates, including both spouses’ ages, the ages of
their parents, and the race of the couple. This regression is estimated on the subsample with
explicit numerical reports for both husbands’ and wives’ reported parental wealth.
Assuming that ε is normally distributed, the age- and race-adjusted wealth correlation
between husbands’ and wives’ parents is the regression coefficient, δ1 , multiplied by the ratio of
the standard deviation of wives’ parental wealth to the standard deviation of husbands’ parental
wealth. Since Table 1 shows that these standard deviations are the same for spousal reports of
parental wealth and since we will always adjust for age difference between spousal parents, we
refer to the estimate of δ1 as the estimated spousal parental wealth correlation in all that follows.
Unfortunately, potential measurement error in spouses’ reports of their parents’ wealth
complicates interpretation of the OLS estimate of δ1. In the case where errors in the reported
parental wealth of husbands and wives are uncorrelated, classical measurement error in reports of
the parental wealth variable on the left hand side of (2) are irrelevant, as the error is simply
absorbed into the regression error term, ε . However, classical measurement error in reports of
parental wealth variable on the right hand side will lead to an attenuated estimate of the
correlation in spousal parental wealth, with the estimate of δ1 biased towards zero. In this bestcase scenario, the OLS estimate of δ1 produces a lower bound on the true relationship between
husbands and wives parental wealth.
If errors in the reports of husbands’ and wives’ parental wealth levels are correlated,
determining the likely sign of any bias in the OLS estimates is more complicated. For example,
14

if the errors are positively correlated (as seems likely) the estimate of δ1 will be biased upwards,
all else equal. 14 In general, since we do not know how errors are correlated between spouses
OLS estimates of δ1 may be biased in either direction, rendering these estimates of limited value
is assessing the true correlation between parental wealth of husbands and wives.
One way to deal with these measurement error problems is to employ an instrumental
variables strategy. Specifically, if instruments could be found that are correlated with the report
of one spouse’s parents’ wealth, but uncorrelated with any error in the parental wealth report of
the other spouse, this variation could be isolated using Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS) to
estimate the relationship of interest.
We use two instruments. Both measures are available because of the PSID’s genealogical
design. Children of core sample members themselves become part of the PSID core sample as
they leave their parents’ household and form their own households. As a result, the subsample of
married couples in our analysis has at least one spouse who is the child or grandchild of an
original sample member. Recall that the parental wealth question in 1988 was asked only of
persons whose parents were alive in that year, so the parents of the children are themselves PSID
core sample members, provided that they have not attrited from the sample prior to 1988. For the
TSLS estimates we focus on these couples and their parents, provided that the parents reported
positive wealth. 15
The PSID core survey asked all sample members to report their own wealth in 1989.
Thus, for children of original PSID sample members, we know both the child’s report of the
parent’s wealth and the parent’s own report of their own wealth. One natural instrument for the
14

Although it seems unlikely, it is theoretically possible that the spousal reports of parental wealth could be
negatively correlated. If this is the case, the estimate of δ1 via OLS will be further attenuated.
15
More than 97% of PSID parents report positive wealth. This suggests that children may be under-estimating their
parents’ wealth.

15

child’s report of parental wealth report is the parent’s report of their own wealth. The validity of
the parent’s own wealth report as an instrument requires that it be strongly correlated with the
child’s report.
To assess the strength of this relationship, we estimate
P
P
ln (WPSID
− child ) = ω0 + ω1 ln (WP ) + ν .

(3)

P
In (3), WPP denotes the parent’s report of their own wealth. The variable WPSID
− child denotes the

wealth of the parent, as reported by the person in the couple who is descended from the PSID
original sample or his/her spouse. It is important to stress that this “PSID-child” could be either a
husband or a wife in the sample of married couples.
To conserve space we do not present the regression results for these first-stage results in a
table, but regression estimates for (3) show that the parent’s report of their own wealth and the
child’s report of parental wealth are very strongly and significantly related: the estimated
coefficients for the parameters ω0 and ω1 are, respectively, 2.9 and 0.73 with t-statistics of 5.5 and
16.2, respectively. Indeed, if we could be certain that parents reported their own wealth with
perfect accuracy, it would be straightforward to adjust the estimate of δ1 from regression (2) by
the appropriately estimated signal-to-noise ratio. However, even if parents report their wealth
with some error, the parental report is still a valid instrument for the child’s report. Given the
strength of the first stage relationship the only thing that would invalidate the use of the parent’s
own report is if, for some reason, a parent’s estimate of their own wealth were associated with
the errors in the reported wealth of the child-in-law’s parents. This possibly cannot be logically
ruled out, but seems unlikely.
To implement the instrumental variables strategy, equation (2) must be modified in the
following way:
16

P
P
ln (WOther
− child ) = α + δ 2 ln (WPSID − child ) + β X + ε

(4)

In (4), unlike (2), we distinguish partners not by whether they are husband or wife, but by
whether they are the person descended from the PSID original sample (PSID-child) or not
(Other-child), since the PSID-child could be either male or female. For the TSLS exercise, we
instrument for the PSID-child’s report of their parent’s wealth using the parent’s report of their
own wealth, with the relevant first stage given by equation (3).
Table 5 presents the results of estimating the correlation in spousal parental wealth using
the specifications given by (4) and (2).

Row 1 of Panel A shows the OLS estimate of the

spousal parental wealth correlation for regression (2), estimated on the full sample of married
households with positive parental wealth reports. This strongly statistically significant point
estimate is 0.46.
In the analyses in Panels B and C, we restrict the analysis sample to couples with valid
data on the instrumental variables: the PSID parents’ self-reported wealth. In the second row of
Panel A, we again estimate (2), but restrict the sample to that used in Panels B and C. The
estimate of the spousal parental wealth correlation in this subsample is again 0.46. This finding
is immensely reassuring, as it shows that the subset of the positive report sub-sample for which
we also have the parents’ own report lines up remarkably well with the results for the positive
numerical report sample overall.
Row 1 of Panel B presents the OLS estimates of regression (4) on the sub-sample for
which we know both the child’s and parent’s own report of the parent’s wealth, but with the
spouses distinguished by whether they are they are the PSID_child, rather than whether they are
the husband or wife. Again the results are very reassuring. The results show that the estimated
correlation in spousal parental wealth of 0.45 is quite similar to the OLS estimate from (2) and is
17

just as strongly statistically significant.

The re-formulation from (2) to (4) and the use of a

subset of the original sample thus has no effect on the estimated correlation in spousal parental
wealth.
The second row of Panel B of Table 5 presents TSLS estimates of (4), in which we
instrument for the PSID child’s report of their parent’s wealth report using the parent’s own
report. The TSLS estimate of δ 2 of 0.38 is smaller than the corresponding OLS estimate. This
suggests that, as suspected, there is in fact a positive correlation between the errors in spousal
reports of parental wealth, which biases the OLS estimates in (2) and (4) upwards. Classical
measurement error would have tended to bias the simple OLS estimates downwards.
Panel C of Table 5 again separates spouses by whether they were the PSID-child or not.
The first regression in this panel relates the non-PSID child’s parental wealth directly on the
wealth of the parent of the PSID child as reported by the parent. To repeat, rather than using
the parent’s own wealth report (WPP ) as an instrument for the child’s report, we use the parent’s
own report directly as the regressor in (4). That is, we estimate
P
P
ln (WOther
− child ) = α + δ 3 ln (WP ) + β X + ε .

(5)

Since parents probably make random errors when giving numerical values of their own wealth,
the estimate of δ 3 should be downwards biased. However unlike the estimates of (2) and (4)
there is no reason to believe that the reporting errors of the dependent variable and the
independent variable in (5) are correlated.

The bias from estimating (5) should therefore be

standard attenuation bias. Row 1 of Panel C shows that the OLS estimate of δ 3 is 0.28.
To account for potential attenuation bias in the OLS estimate of (5), we use the parents’
report of their own education as an instrument for the parents’ report of their own wealth.

18

Education dummies strongly predict parents’ report of their own wealth. 16 Moreover, parental
education reports are likely uncorrelated with the non-PSID child’s error in reporting their
parents’ wealth. Row 2 of Panel C shows the estimated TSLS spousal parental correlation when
we instrument for the parent’s report using the parent’s reported schooling. The estimate is 0.42.
Two things are noteworthy about the TSLS estimate of δ 3 . First, the fact that the TSLS
estimate of δ 3 is larger than the OLS estimate is consistent with our belief that there is some
essentially random error in the parents’ report of their own wealth and that this error is not
positively correlated with errors in the child’s report of the wealth of non-PSID child’s parents’
wealth. Second, the IV estimate of (5) is very close to the IV estimate from (4): 0.38 versus
0.42.

We consider it immensely reassuring and persuasive that two different estimation

approaches to accounting for measurement error in reports of parental wealth yield such similar
point estimates, and therefore conclude relatively confidently that the correlation in spousal
parental wealth is around 0.4.
To assess the importance of education in explaining the level of marital sorting based on
parental wealth, we estimate TSLS version of (4) and (5) adding controls for the level of
schooling for both spouses.

When estimating (4) with husband and wife educational controls,

we instrument the PSID-child’s report of their parents’ wealth with their parents’ own report.
Similarly, when re-estimating (5), we instrument the parents’ report of their own wealth with the
father’s level of educational attainment (or the mother’s if the father’s is not available).
The results are shown in Table 6. The first row shows that re-estimating the TSLS
version of (4) with controls for the spouses’ own schooling lowers the estimate of δ 2 from 0.38
16

In a regression of PSID parents’ report of their own wealth on indicator variable denoting, respectively, that the
father had exactly 12 years of schooling or more than 12 years of schooling, the estimated coefficients on the two
dummy variables were 0.71 and 1.39 with t-statistics above 6 and an R2 of 0.16. Parent’s education is the father’s
education when it is available and mother’s education otherwise.

19

to 0.30. In the second column of Table 6, we re-estimate the TSLS version of (5) with controls
for spouses’ own schooling and find a reduction in the estimate of δ 3 from 0.42 to 0.32. These
results suggest that the preferences and social interactions that operate through schooling are
important mechanisms by which sorting by parental wealth sorting is generated. However, as the
earlier transition matrix results also show, this effect is not large; schooling appears to account
for only about one quarter of estimated parental wealth sorting. 17

5

Selection into the Sample of Spouses
A natural question is whether the various results we have documented are driven by

selection into the 1988 married sample. If people exhibit a differential propensity to form
marriages in the first place based on parental wealth, our estimates of parental wealth sorting
among married couples might be biased. Similarly, if there is a differential propensity of
marriages to dissolve based on parental wealth, our married sample will be very different from
what the sorting among people who ever married, but who do survive into our sample of married
couples.
We present some evidence about these two concerns. We begin with an analysis of how
entry into marriage is affected by parental wealth for a representative sample of unmarried
adults. The PSID asked households to report their wealth every five years between 1984 and
1999 and biannually thereafter. We match these responses to the survey data for the children
from these families using the PSID’s Family Identification and Mapping System (FIMS). Since

17

It would be interesting to explore in future work whether this result holds up once accounting for finer measures
of educational attainment than are available in the PSID such as the type of schools that the husband and wives
attend.

20

parents report their own wealth every five year, we linearly interpolate the wealth for the years
between reports.
We estimate simple discrete time hazard models of entry into marriage. The dependent
variable in these models is an indicator of whether the individual marries in the following
calendar year. Individuals enter the sample at age 15 and are censored once they marry, leave
the sample, or are over the age of 40. We include all person-year observations for which the
parent reports positive wealth – something done by more than 97% of the sample. The estimates
are from pooled probit models with standard errors clustered at the level of the individual. We
control for parental and child education, 18 whether the person is a student in the given year,
whether the person in a parent in the given year, age and race.
Table 7 presents our estimation results. As with the earlier results, we present the probit
estimates, standard errors in normal parentheses, and estimated marginal effects in squared
parentheses. The marriage hazard – the probability that a previously unmarried adult marries
within a year – is about 5 percent for men and 7 percent for women in each year. The baseline
models labeled I show that parental wealth does not affect the marriage entry hazard for either
men or women.
In the models labeled II, we add controls for labor force attachment and log wages among
workers. 19 For this expanded model, as in the baseline specification, we find that parental
wealth has no effect on the probability of entry into marriage for either men or women. These
results suggest no selection into the sample of married couples used in main analysis.

18

For children, we use the highest education level that is observed for the individual. For parents, we use the current
education of the father, if it is available. If necessary, we impute his education from the other years. If the
education of the father is never available, the mother’s education is used as the measure of parental education.
19
Wages are adjusted for inflation to 1988 dollars in all years. Values of both labor market hours and wages above
the 99th percentile are re-coded to the 99th percentile

21

To assess how parental wealth affect marital dissolution, we use the sample of married
couples who reported explicit positive values parents’ wealth in 1988 and follow these couples
forward in time. We construct couple-year observations beginning in 1988 and continuing
through 2005. For each observation, we use the PSID’s marital history file to construct a dummy
variable set equal to one if the couple divorces in the following calendar year. Couples are
censored from the sample when their marriage dissolves (through divorce or death), they reach
their tenth anniversary, either spouse reaches his or her 63rd birthday, or the couple is no longer
observed in the sample. We then use the pooled cross-sectional data to estimate probit models of
the hazard of divorce in each year, with standard errors clustered at the couple level.
Our models include several control variables that are expected to be associated with the
couple’s probability of divorce: whether the marriage began when the bride was a teenager,
whether the current marriage is a first marriage for both spouses, whether either spouse became a
parent prior to the beginning of the current marriage, whether the spouses became parents after
the beginning of the marriage, and a quadratic in the duration of the marriage to date. In a
second set of models, we further control for spouses’ labor supply and wage rates during the
current calendar year.
Couples in our sample have been married an average of 5.1 years, so many couples are
past the peak years of divorce which tends to occur in the first few years after marriage.
Furthermore, the set of couples giving explicit wealth reports about both sets of parents may be
more durable than the average couple. We study the probability of marital dissolution over the
first 10 years of marriage, when divorce is most likely (Kreider 2005).
Table 8 presents probit coefficients, clustered standard errors and estimated marginal
effect of the marital dissolution models with and without the controls for labor force outcomes.

22

Our estimates suggest that higher parental wealth on the part of both the husband and the wife
increase the likelihood of marital dissolution. The interaction term captures whether this destabilizing effect of own parents’ wealth varies by the wealth of in-laws. The results indicate
that the positive effect on marital dissolution of higher own parental wealth is smaller the
wealthier one’s in-laws. 20 These results suggest that types of couples likely to have sorted out
of the observed 1988 marriage sample are those with widely differing parental wealth; spouses
whose parental wealth is similar seem to have more durable marriages and are thus more likely
to be part of our sample. This pattern should bias us towards finding the positive parental wealth
sorting we have documented.

But is this effect economically (rather than merely statistically)

meaningful?
The divorce hazard for the sample in Table 8 is about 0.3% per year, and is 0.4% per year
for the full marriage sample in Panel 1 of Table 1. Both these numbers are about half as large as
the estimated hazard of divorce from sample from the PSID that exclude left-censored couples
(South 2001). The estimated marginal effects for the interaction terms in the table suggest that
huge increases in log parental wealth have very small differential effects on the marriage hazard
based on in-law wealth. So, while we find some evidence that own parents’ wealth does appear
to affect exit from marriage, there is much less evidence that this effect varies by the wealth of
one’s in-laws.

On the whole, we think the estimated effects too small to appreciably bias our

main conclusions about sorting by parental wealth.

20

For robustness, we estimated versions of these models on the fuller sample in which we measure parental wealth
by ranges or quintiles. To conserve space (given the number of interaction terms) we do not present these results,
which show the same basic pattern in Table 8.

23

6

Conclusion
In this paper we use a variety of estimation strategies to study the degree to which

spouses sort in the U.S. marriage market based on the wealth of their parents. We have been
unable to find previous work studying this question in the large social science literature studying
marriage and marital sorting. Our various estimates are striking and mutually supportive: men
and women in the U.S. marry partners whose parents have wealth similar to that of their own
parents; and are very unlikely to marry persons from very different parental wealth backgrounds.
Our preferred estimate is that the correlation between own and spouses’ parents log wealth is
around 0.4.

Many possible mechanisms might account for this sorting, but one channel we

believe we have convincingly ruled out is that having to do with education. Specifically, we
show that the fact that the sons and daughters of the wealthy (poor) tend to be very similarly
educated explains no more than one-quarter of the strong assortative marriage by parental wealth
we document.
Beyond its contribution to the marriage sorting literature, our work is relevant to the
literatures on social fluidity and the inter-generational transmission of economic outcomes.
Kalmijn captures the connection between marriage sorting and social fluidity well: “Questions
about how much someone can get ahead socially and economically in spite of a disadvantageous
social background are similar to questions about whether two individuals who are attracted to
each other will get married despite their coming from different social backgrounds” (1991, p.
497). Our findings suggest that the society, especially, in the tails departs very dramatically for
perfect fluidity.
Work in the large literature on inter-generational correlations studies how own outcomes,
like earnings, are related between parents and their children but there has also been interest in the
transmission across generations of less transitory and more complete measures of economic
24

resources such as asset ownership and wealth. Unlike income, a person’s command over these
other economic measures is determined at the level of the household. As a result, although this
point has not been particularly emphasized in previous empirical work, the observed association
between the wealth of a parent and the wealth of the child necessarily depends upon the access to
wealth of the people the parent and child marry – something to which our parental wealth sorting
results directly speak. An interesting area for future work would be to formally assess how much
the parental wealth marital sorting we have estimated affects measured intergenerational
associations like that for wealth and income.

25

References

Barsky, Robert, John Bound, Kerwin Kofi Charles and Joseph Lupton (2002)). “Accounting for
Black-White Wealth Gap: A Nonparametric.” Journal of American Statistical
Association, 97(September), 663-673.
Becker, Gary (1973). “A Theory of Marriage: Part I”, Journal of Political Economy, 81(4), 81346.
Burgess, Ernest W. and Paul Wallin (1943). “Homogamy in Social Characteristics”, American
Journal of Sociology, 49, 109-124.
Centers, Richard (1949). “Marital Selection and Occupational Strata”, American Journal of
Sociology, 54, 530-535.
Charles, Kerwin K. and Erik Hurst. 2003. “The Correlation of Wealth Across Generations.”
Journal of Political Economy, 111(6), 1155-82.
Chun, Hyunbae and Injae Lee (2001). “Why do Married Men Earn More: Productivity or
Marriage Selection?”, Economic Inquiry, 39, 307-319.
Conley, Dalton (1999). Being Black, Living in the Red: Race, Wealth, and Social Policy in
America. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Epstein, Elizabeth and Ruth Guttman (1984). “Mate Selection in Man: Evidence, Theory and
Outcome”, Social Biology, 31, 243-78.
Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson (2001). “Sorting and Long-Run Inequality”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1305-42.
Gray, Jeffrey S. (1997). “The Fall in Men’s Return to Marriage: Declining Productivity Effects
or Changing Selection?”, The Journal of Human Resources, 32, 481-504.
Heckert, D. Alex, Thomas C. Nowak, and Kay A. Snyder (1998). “The Impact of Husbands’ and
Wives’ Relative Earnings on Marital Disruption,” Journal of Marriage and Family, 60,
690-703.
Hersch, Joni and Leslie S. Stratton (2000). “Household Specialization and the Male Marriage
Wage Premium,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54, 78-94.
Hoffman, Saul D. and Greg J. Duncan (1988). “What Are the Economic Consequences of
Divorce?”, Demography, 25, 641-645.
Hout, Michael (1982). “The Associations Between Husbands’ and Wives’ Occupation in TwoEarner Families,” American Journal of Sociology, 88, 397-409.

Jalovaara, Marika (2003). “The Joint Effects of Marriage Partners’ Socioeconomic Positions on
the Risk of Divorce,” Demography, 40, 67-81.
Kalmijn, Matthijs (1991). “Status Homogamy in the United States”, American Journal of
Sociology, 97, 496-523.
Keister, Lisa A. And Stephanie Moller (2000). “Wealth Inequality in the United States,” Annual
Review of Sociology, 26, 63-81.
Koball, Heather (1998). “Have African American Men become Less Committed to Marriage?
Explaining the Twentieth Century Racial Cross-Over in Men’s Marriage Timing,”
Demography, 32, 251-258.
Kreider, Rose M. (2005). "Number, Timing, and Duration of Marriages and
Divorces: 2001." Current Population Reports, P70-97. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Census Bureau.
Kremer, Michael (1997). “How Much Does Sorting Increase Inequality”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112(1), 115-39.
Lam, David (1988). “Marriage Markets and Assorative Mating with Household Public Goods,”
Journal of Human Resources, 23(4), 426-87.
Lillard, Lee A. and Linda J. Waite (1995). “’Til Death Do Us Part: Marital Disruption and
Mortality,” American Journal of Sociology, 100, 1131-1156.
Loh, Eng S. (1996). “Productivity Differences and the Marriage Wage Premium for White
Males,” The Journal of Human Resources, 31, 566-589.
Lyngstad, Torkild Hovde and Marika Jalovaara (2010). “A Review of the Antecedents of Union
Dissolution.” Demographic Research, 23, 257-292.
Mare, Robert (1991). “Five Decades of Educational Assortative Mating”, American Sociological
Review, 56(1), 15-32.
McManus, Patricia and Thomas DiPrete (2001). “Losers and Winners: The Financial
Consequences of Separation and Divorce for Men.” American Sociological Review, 66,
246-268.
Mulligan, Casey B (1997). Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Oliver, Melvin L. and Thomas M. Shapiro (1995). Black Wealth/White Wealth: A New
Perspective on Racial Inequality. New York: Routledge.

Ono, Hiromi (1998). “Husbands’ and Wives’ Resources and Marital Dissolution,” Journal of
Marriage and Family, 60, 674-689.
Oppenheimer, Valerie Kincade (1988). “A Theory of Marriage Timing,” American Journal of
Sociology, 94, 563-591.
Oppenheimer,Valerie, Matthijs Kalmijn, and Nelson Lim (1997). “Men's Career Development
and Marriage Timing During a Period of Rising Inequality,” Demography, 34, 311-330.
Pagnini, Deanna and S. Philip Morgan (1990). “Intermarriage and Social Distance among U.S.
Immigrants at the Turn of the Century,” American Journal of Sociology, 96, 405-32.
Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1968-2007 Family, 1968-2007 Cross-Year Individual, public
use datasets. Produced and distributed by the University of Michigan with primary
funding from the National Science Foundation, the National Institute of Aging, and the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. Ann Arbor, MI, 2010.
Pencavel, John (1998). “Assortative Mating by Schooling and the Work Behavior of Wives and
Husbands”, American Economic Review, 88(2), 326-29.
Rogers, Stacy J. (2004). “Dollars, Dependency, and Divorce: Four Perspectives on the Role of
Wives’ Income,” Journal of Marriage and Family, 66, 59-74.
Rubin, Zick (1968). “Do American Women Marry Up?” American Sociological Review, 33, 750760.
Sayer, Liana C. and Suzanne M. Bianchi (2000). “Women’s Economic Independence and the
Probability of Divorce: A Review and Reexamination,” Journal of Family Issues, 21,
906-943.
Schoen, Robert, Nan Marie Astone, Kendra Rothert, Nicola J. Standish, Young J. Kim (2002).
“Women’s Employment, Marital Happiness, and Divorce.” Social Forces, 81, 643-662.
Schwartz, Christine and Robert Mare (2005). “Trends in Educational Assortative Marriage from
1940 – 2003,” Demography, 42, 621-46.
Smock, Pamela J. (1993). “The Economic Costs of Marital Disruption for Young Women over
the Past Two Decades,” Demography, 30, 353-371.
Smock, Pamela and Wendy Manning (1997). “Cohabiting Partners’ Economic Circumstances
and Marriage,” Demography, 34, 331-341.
Solon, Gary (1992). “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States.” American
Economic Review, 82, 393-408.

Solon, Gary (1999). “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market”, in Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 3, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card.
South, Scott J. 2001. “Time-Dependent Effects of Wives’ Employment on Marital Dissolution.”
American Sociological Review, 66, 226-245.
Sweeney, Megan (2002). “Two Decades of Family Change: The Shifting Economic
Foundations of Marriage,” American Sociological Review, 67, 132-147.
Teachman, Jay (2010). “Wives’ Economic Resources and Risk of Divorce,” Journal of Family
Issues, 20(10), 1-19.
Uunk, Wilfred J., Harry B. Ganzeboom, and Péter Róbert (1996). “Bivariate and multivariate
scaled association models. An application to homogamy of social origin and education in
Hungary between 1930 and 1979”, Quality & Quantity 30, 323-343.
Waite, Linda J. and Maggie Gallagher (2000). The Case for Marriage: Why Married People are
Happier, Healthier, and Better off Financially. New York: Broadway Books.
Xie, Yu, Jamies M. Raymo, Kimberly Goyette, and Arland Thornton (2003). “Economic
Potential and Entry into Marriage and Cohabitation,” Demography, 40, 351-367.

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Sample of Married Couples
Panel A: All Couples (N=1820)
Husbands

Wives

Age
Percent White

38.36
0.91

36.15
0.90

Education =12
Education > 12

0.32
0.54

0.41
0.47

65.06
67.15

63.26
65.60

Child’s Father’s Education = 12
Child’s Father’s Education > 12

0.32
0.21

0.35
0.23

Parents have Negative Wealth
Parents have Zero Wealth

0.03
0.09

0.02
0.10

Percent with Positive Wealth, no Explicit Value

0.39

0.38

Husbands

Wives

Age
Percent White

38.39
0.93

36.26
36.26
0.94

Education = 12
Education > 12

0.31
0.58

0.42
0.50

65.41
67.29

63.47
65.79

0.32
0.22

0.36
0.25

167,970
215,220
100,000

174,127
226,069
100,000

Age of Child’s Mother
Age of Child’s Father

Panel B: Couples with Explicit Positive Wealth (N=587)

Age of Child’s Mother
Age of Child’s Father
Child’s Father’s Education = 12
Child’s Father’s Education > 12
Parent’s Wealth (Mean)
Parent's Wealth (Standard Deviation)
Parent’s Wealth (Median)

Notes: Sample includes all married couples in the 1988 wave of the PSID where at least one parent of each spouse was
alive in 1988 and parental wealth was measurable. See text for full details of sample construction. All wealth variables
are measured in 1988 and are in 1988 dollars. The top 1% of wealth values for each set of parents were re-coded to the
99th percentile. All entries were weighted using 1988 core PSID sample weights. The sample standard deviations of
husbands' and wives' ages are 9.36 and 9.02, respectively. For the age of the child's mother, the corresponding numbers
are 10.63 and 10.49, and for the age of the child's father they are 10.85 and 10.58.

Table 2a: Unconditional Parental Wealth Transition Matrix, by Race
Panel A: All Respondents (N=1820)
Husband's Parents' Wealth
(Share)
Negative (0.03) Zero (0.09)
Positive (0.88)
Wife’s Parents’ Wealth
(Share)
Negative (0.02)

0.14

0.04

0.01

Zero

(0.10)

0.11

0.27

0.08

Positive (0.88)

0.75

0.69

0.91

Total

1.00

1.00

1.00

Notes: Sample includes all married couples in the 1988 wave of the PSID with at least one parent of each spouse
alive in 1988 and for which there is any information on parental wealth. All entries were weighted using 1988
core PSID sample weights. The unweighted likelihood ratio χ2 statistic that the categories of husbands’ and
wives’ parental wealth are independent is χ2(4) = 241.9 (p-value<0.001) for the full sample, χ2(4) = 57.2 (p -value
< 0.001) for whites and χ2(4) = 100.8 (p -value < 0.001) for non-whites.

Table 2b: Parental Wealth Transition Matrix, by PSID Wealth Bracket, Excluding Couples with Positive
Wealth but No Information about Level (N=1207)

<$1K
(0.16)

Husband's Parents' Wealth Range
(Share)
>=$1K,<$25K >=$25K,<$100K >=$100K
(0.32)
(0.39)
(0.13)

Wife’s Parents' Wealth Range
(Share)
<$1K

(0.16)

0.35

0.20

0.13

0.07

>=$1K, <$25K

(0.14)

0.20

0.27

0.11

0.07

>=$25K, <$100K (0.30)

0.25

0.31

0.44

0.26

(0.39)

0.20

0.22

0.31

0.60

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

>=$100K

Total

Notes: Sample includes married couples in the 1988 wave of the PSID with least one parent of each spouse alive in 1988, for which parental wealth
was either non-positive or positive and explicit or reported in bracket form. The ranges are PSID defined ranges from 1988 wealth survey. See text
for further details. All entries were weighted using 1988 core PSID sample weights. The unweighted likelihood ratio χ2 statistic that the categories of
husbands’ and wives’ parental wealth are independent is χ2 (9) = 327.1 (p-value<0.001).

Table 3: Probit Estimates of Husband’s Parental Wealth Range as a Function of Wife’s Parental Wealth Categories. (Robust
Std Err. In Parentheses, Marginal Effect in Squared Parentheses).

I.
Husband's Parents'
Wealth <$1K
(mean = 0.16)

Dependent Variable
II.
III.
Husband’s Parents'
Husband’s Parents'
Wealth $1K-$25K
Wealth $25K-$100K
(mean=0.13)
(mean=0.32)

IV.
Husband’s Parents'
Wealth >=$100K
(mean=0.39)

Wife’s Parents' Wealth
<$1K (mean=0.16)

0.97
(0.17)
[0.28]

0.52
(0.17)
[0.13]

0.01
(0.15)
[0.00]

-0.96
(0.15)
[-0.25]

Wife’s Parents' Wealth
$1K-$25K (mean=0.14)

0.52
(0.19)
[0.13]

0.80
(0.16)
[0.22]

0.19
(0.15)
[0.07]

-0.93
(0.15)
[-0.25]

Wife’s Parents' Wealth
$25K-$100K (mean=0.30)

0.28
(0.15)
[0.06]

0.24
(0.15)
[0.05]

0.50
(0.11)
[0.19]

-0.69
(0.11)
[-0.20]

Pseudo R2

0.14

0.08

0.03

0.15

N

1207

1207

1185

1207

Notes: Sample includes married couples in the 1988 PSID with at least one parent of each spouse alive in 1988 and parental wealth
was non-positive, or positive with range or explicit value given. See text for furtehr details. Regressions control for race, and spouses'
and parents' age. Regressions weighted using 1988 core PSID weights. Coefficients are probit coefficients. In Specification III, 22
observations with missing husband's parental wealth were dropped from the sample because none of the observations were from
couples with husband's parental wealth $25,000-$100,000

Table 4: Parental Wealth Transition Matrix Among Couples with Explicit Parental Wealth Reports
Panel A: Adjusted for Child Age and Race
(N=587)
Husband's Parents' Wealth Quintiles
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile

Fifth
Quintile

Panel B: Adjusted for Child Age, Race, and
Education (N=587)
Husband's Parents' Wealth Quintiles
First
Second
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile Quintile

Wife’s Parents'
Wealth Quintile
First Quintile

0.39

0.20

0.20

0.12

0.10

0.36

0.27

0.14

0.12

0.11

Second Quintile

0.24

0.32

0.19

0.13

0.11

0.24

0.23

0.20

0.26

0.08

Third Quintile

0.17

0.15

0.24

0.28

0.15

0.17

0.20

0.25

0.20

0.19

Fourth Quintile

0.11
11

0 19
0.19

0 25
0.25

0 22
0.22

0 24
0.24

0 11
0.11

0 19
0.19

0 25
0.25

0 15
0.15

0 30
0.30

Fifth Quintile

0.08

0.14

0.12

0.25

0.40

0.11

0.12

0.16

0.27

0.33

Total

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

Notes: Sample includes all married couples in the 1988 wave of the PSID where at least one parent of each spouse was alive in 1988 and explicit
positive parental wealth report for both spouses' parents. All entries weighted using 1988 core PSID sample weights. The unweighted likelihood
ratio c2 statistic that the quintiles of husbands’ and wives’ parental wealth are independent is c2(16) = 105.8 (p-value < 0.001) in Panel A and
χ2(16) = 76.6 (p-value < 0.001) in Panel B.

Table 5: OLS and TSLS Estimates of Marital Sorting Based Upon Parental Wealth
Panel A: Regression of Log of Husband's Parents' Wealth on log Report of Wife's Parent's
Wealth

Regression
1.

OLS Estimate (full sample)

2. OLS Estimate (sample from Panels B and C)

Parental Wealth
Coefficient

R2

N

0.46
(0.06)

0.28

587

0.46
(0.06)

0.29

413

Panel B: Regression of Log of Non-PSID Child's Report of Parental Wealth on the Log of
PSID Child's Report of Parental Wealth

Regression

Parental Wealth
Coefficient

R

2

N

1.

OLS Estimation

0.45
(0.06)

0.28

413

2.

IV Estimation (Instrument: Parent's
Parent s Own
Wealth Report)

0.38
(0.07)

0.27

413

Panel C: Regression of Log of Non-PSID Child's Report of Parental Wealth on the Log of
Parental Wealth of the PSID Child's (as Reported by the Parents)

Regression

Parental Wealth
Coefficient

R

2

N

1.

OLS Estimation

0.28
(0.06)

0.18

413

2.

IV Estimation (Instrument: Parental
Education Controls)

0.42
(0.13)

0.16

413

Notes: Sample includes all married couples in the 1988 wave of the PSID where at least one parent of each
spouse was alive in 1988 with explict positive reports of parental wealth. See text for full details of sample
construction. In Panels B and C, sample includes only husband-wife pairs where one spouse's parents gave
report of own wealth in 1989. All regressions control for race, and spouses' and parents' age . The top 1% of
parental wealth values were recoded to the value at the 99th percentile. All regressions were weighted using
1988 core PSID weights. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses.

Table 6: TSLS Estimates of Marital Sorting Based Upon Parental
Wealth: Controlling for Education Levels of Husbands and Wives

Log of Parental Wealth

I

II

0.30
(0.07)

0.32
(0.20)

Independent Parental
Wealth Variable

Log of Child's Report Log of Parent's Report
of Parental Wealth
of Their Own Wealth

Instrument

Log of Parental Report
of Parental Wealth

Parental Education

Regressions Include Child
Education Controls

Yes

Yes

R2

0.29

0.21

N

413

413

Notes: Sample includes married couples in the 1988 wave of the PSID where at least one parent of
each spouse was alive in 1988 and parental wealth was measurable and positive and one of the spouses
had parents who were PSID members reporting positive wealth in 1989 and for whom valid measures
of the PSID parents’ education could be constructed. The sample is identical to the one used for the
results reported in Panels B and C of Table 5. See text for full details of sample construction. The top
1% of parental wealth values were recoded to the value at the 99th percentile. Aside from the inclusion
of educational controls for both the husband and the wife, specifications I and II above are identical to
those discussed in Panel B and Panel C of Table 5, respectively. The dependent variable for both
specifications is the log of non-PSID child's report of parental wealth. Child education is controlled
for using three dummy variables for each spouse (exactly 12 years, more than 12 years, or missing;
fewer than 12 years is the omitted group). Robust standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 7: Hazard Model Estimates of Effect on Parnetal Wealth on Entry into
Marriage (Robust Std Err. In Parentheses, Marginal Effect in Squared Parentheses).

Men
I
Ln(Parents’ Wealth)

-0.00
(0.02)
[-0.00]

Women
II
-0.01
(0.02)
[-0.00]

I
0.00
(0.02)
[0.00]

II
0.00
(0.02)
[0.00]

Doesn't Work

-0.33
(0.26)
[-0.03]

-0.05
(0.17)
[-0.01]

Works Part Time

-0.05
(0.07)
[-0.01]

-0.03
(0.07)
[-0.00]

Ln(Hourly Wage)

0.07
(0.05)
[0.01]

0.03
(0.05)
[0.00]

Pseudo R2
N

0.08

0.10

0.06

18,118

18,118

16,226

0.06
16,226

Notes: Sample includes all observations from unmarried individuals ages 15-40 in the 1984-2005
waves of the PSID for whom parental wealth was measurable and positive. See text for full details of
sample construction. Results shown are probit coefficients. Regressions control for race, own and
parents' age, whether individual has a child, year, student status, and own and parents' schooling. The
top 1% of wealth values and wage rates were re-coded to the 99th percentile. All entries were
weighted using year-specific individual PSID sample weights, rescaled to average one in each year.

Table 8: Hazard Model Estimates of Probability of Divorce in Following
Year, for First 10 years of Marriage. (Robust Std Err. In Parentheses,
Marginal Effect in Squared Parentheses).
I

II

Ln(Husband’s Parents’ Wealth)

0.79
(0.39)
[0.005]

0.65
(0.44)
[0.004]

Ln(Wife’s Parents’ Wealth)

0.91
(0.37)
[0.006]

0.78
(0.42)
[0.004]

Ln(Husband’s Parents’ Wealth)*
Ln(Wife’s Parents’ Wealth)

-0.07
(0.03)
[-0.000]

-0.06
(0.04)
[-0.000]

No

Yes

0.21

0.33

5,400

5,400

Labor Supply Contols: Husband
Work Full Time? Wife Doesn't
Work?, Wife Works Part Time?
Husband's log wage, Wife's Log
Wage if work
Pseudo R
N

2

Notes: Sample includes observations from 1988 married couples with explicit parental wealth
reported for both spouses. Person-year observations begin in 1988 and end when the marriage
dissolves or reaches its 10th anniversary, when either spouse reaches age 63, or the couple is no
longer observed in the PSID. See text for further details. Results shown are probit coefficients.
All regressions control for race, spouses' and parents' age, quadratic in the duration of the
marriage, whether first marriage for both spouses, whether the marriage began while the wife
was a teenager, whether either spouse became a parent prior to the marriage, whether have
child, and spouses' and parents' education. Full-time work defined as 30 hours per week. The
top 1% of wealth values for each set of parents were re-coded to the 99th percentile. All entries
were weighted using the 1988 PSID household-level weights.

