                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       THE LONG SLUMP

                                           Robert E. Hall

                                       Working Paper 16741
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16741


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




This paper is a draft of my AEA presidential address that will appear in the April American Economic
Review. See my website for related materials, including the appendixes, animated slides, and data
files and programs. I am grateful to John Cochrane, Steven Davis, Gauti Eggertsson, Martin Eichenbaum,
Mark Gertler, Robert Gordon, Peter Klenow, Narayana Kocherlakota, Robert Lucas, N. Gregory Mankiw,
Sergio Rebelo, Richard Rogerson, David Romer, Robert Shimer, Robert Solow, John Taylor, Susan
Woodward, and seminar and conference participants at the University of Pennsylvania, the Society
for Economic Dynamics, the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank, Stanford, and the Minneapolis Federal
Reserve Bank for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Robert E. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Long Slump
Robert E. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 16741
January 2011
JEL No. E1,E2,E3,E4,E5

                                              ABSTRACT

In a market-clearing economy, declines in demand from one sector do not cause large declines in aggregatge
output because other sectors expand. The key price mediating the response is the interest rate. A decline
in the rate stimulates all categories of spending. But in a low-inflation economy, the room for a decline
in the rate is small, because of the notorious lower limit of zero on the nominal interest rate. In the
Great Depression, substantial deflation caused the real interest rate to reach high levels. In the Great
Slump that began at the end of 2007, low inflation resulted in an only slightly negative real rate when
full employment called for a much lower real rate because of declines in demand. Fortunately the inflation
rate hardly responded to conditions in product and labor markets, else deflation might have occurred,
with an even higher real interest rate. I concentrate on three closely related sources of declines in demand:
the buildup of excess stocks of housing and consumer durables, the corresponding expansion of consumer
debt that financed the buildup, and financial frictions that resulted from the decline in real-estate prices.


Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@gmail.com
              98

              97

              96

              95                                             Normal

              94

              93

              92

              91

              90

              89
                          Slump               Slump                     Slump           Slump
              88

              87
                1979   1982   1985   1988   1991   1994   1997   2000   2003    2006   2009


    Figure 1: U.S. Employment Rate for Workers Aged 25 through 54, 1980 through 2010

1     Introduction
Slumps—extended periods of low resource utilization—are an enduring part of life in modern
advanced economies. At the beginning of 2011, the U.S. and many other economies found
themselves in slumps. The worst slump in U.S. history was the Great Depression, in which
the economy contracted from 1929 to 1933 and failed to return to normal until the buildup
for World War II. Figure 1 shows the employed fraction of the labor force aged 25 through
54 since the beginning of 1979 (the remaining fraction of the labor force is unemployed).
Slumps are identified as periods when this measure of employment was less than its normal
level of 95.5 percent of the labor force.
    A slump begins with a contraction, often fairly brief, at least in comparison to the
extended period of slow growth that follows the contraction. Relative to the vocabulary of
peaks and troughs, a slump lasts from the time when employment falls below its normal
level during the contraction to the time when employment regains its normal level during
an expansion. Thus a slump spans the trough date. Usually most of the slump occurs after
the trough, during the period of low but positive growth. Everybody but business-cycle
specialists uses the term “recession” to describe a slump.
    The more serious slumps in U.S. economic history have followed financial crises. In the


                                                      2
case of the slump that began at the end of 2007 but became severe after the crisis of Septem-
ber 2008—the Great Slump—the origin in the financial events of the earlier years of the
decade seems obvious. Years of stable and rising house prices made levered positions in real-
estate-related assets seem quite safe. Regulators permitted increases in leverage, especially
for investment banks and other financial entities thought to be free from government guaran-
tees and the accompanying need for government supervision. The Securities and Exchange
Commission eliminated capital requirements for investment banks in 2004 and their leverage
rose. Risk analysis and loan underwriting used probability distributions that assigned zero
probability to significant declines in housing prices. Credit became available to households
who were denied access under earlier standards. The result was a bulge in homebuilding and
sales of cars and other consumer durables, together with a corresponding bulge in consumer
debt.
   The wholly unexpected decline in housing prices brought the financial crisis. Commercial
banks required help from the government that they had reason to expect. Events showed
that the precarious conditions of other large financial entities—investment banks, insurance
companies, and money-market funds—threatened the stability of the entire financial sys-
tem, so they too received government assistance. The government’s hands-off treatment of
Lehman Brothers appeared to demonstrate the vulnerability of the financial system to the
failure of an entity previously thought to be outside the class requiring protection and super-
vision. The crisis disabled the financial system in some dramatic and transitory ways, with
low valuations of many types of financial claims and high valuations of others, notably claims
on the U.S. government. These valuation effects soon stabilized, but financial intermediaries
were left thinly capitalized. They responded with tightened lending standards and higher
interest charges to borrowers relative to their own borrowing costs.
   My topic is the aftermath of the crisis. Three adverse forces gripped the economy in the
aftermath: (1) the overhang of housing and consumer durables resulting from the building
and buying frenzy of the decade of the 2000s, (2) high consumer commitments to debt service,
and (3) financial frictions from the crisis. These adverse forces were so destructive because
the economy was unable to lower its interest rate to stimulate other kinds of spending to
replace house construction and other affected components of spending. The result was the
long and deep slump. Unemployment is a leading symptom of the poor performance of the
economy. It lingered near 10 percent three years into the slump.



                                              3
                                              Normal demand function
                                                                                        Supply
                               12                                                       function


                                8
                                                                                         Normal employment and
                                                                                         normal interest rate
              Interestt rate
                                                             Crisis
                                4

                                        Crisis demand function
                                0

                                                        Normal employment and
                               ‐4
                                4                       l crisis
                                                        low i i interest
                                                                 i       rate


                               ‐8
                                8
                                    0         0.2      0.4       0.6        0.8     1         1.2   1.4    1.6

                                                                       Employment


                 Figure 2: A Negative Interest Rate Preserves Full Employment

   My discussion invokes a sequence of models to explain the central point about the failure
of the interest rate to preserve full employment. Figure 2 is the starting point of the most
stripped-down model. In this version, the real interest rate is completely flexible and can
clear the labor market. The supply of employment is inelastic, a vertical line, and the demand
for employment slopes downward. A high interest rate results in deferral of investment and
consumption, and employment is correspondingly low. The crisis, operating through the
factors I just listed, shifts the demand curve to the left. The new intersection of supply and
demand occurs at the same level, full employment, but a much lower interest rate. Here, the
interest rate has done its job to preserve full employment. For example, the collapse of house
construction is offset by higher business investment and higher consumption of nondurables.
Note that the story leaves the rest of the world out of the picture for simplicity.
   The real interest rate did not fall to -2.5 percent in the Great Slump or in earlier slumps.
Despite huge efforts in the Great Slump, the Fed could do no more than drive short term
rates to zero and try to get longer-term rates down through non-standard policies. I’ll deal
only with the short rate, again for simplicity.
   The lowest possible nominal interest rate is zero, so the lowest possible real interest rate
is minus the rate of inflation. In the worst case—the Great Depression—the price level fell
for several consecutive year and the real rate was pinned at a high positive level. Figure 3

                                                                        4
                                                                                            Supply
                                12                                                          function


                                 8
               Interestt rate              Crisis demand function

                                 4                                             Excess
                                                                               supply

                                         Interest rate pinned at zero
                                 0


                                ‐4
                                 4


                                ‐8
                                 8
                                     0          0.2      0.4        0.6        0.8      1         1.2   1.4   1.6

                                                                          Employment


Figure 3: Excess Supply of Labor Resulting from a Real Interest Rate Pinned above Equi-
librium

shows the simple implication of a real interest rate pinned at zero instead of falling to minus
2.5 percent. At the rate of zero, there is excess supply of labor. That excess supply translates
into unemployment. Much of the analysis here involves building models that describe that
translation.
   I will proceed by documenting the conditions in the U.S. economy after the crisis, at
the beginning of the Great Slump. Then I will discuss the effects in general equilibrium of
an excessive real interest rate, first in a two-period setting and then in an infinite-horizon
generalization. Finally, I will launch the infinite-horizon model from the initial conditions
immediately post-crisis to demonstrate the large and persistent shortfall of economic activity
that occurs in a model with a real interest rate pinned above its full-employment value when
it starts with those initial conditions. I compare that outcome to the equilibrium in a
counterfactual economy with a fully flexible real interest rate, where the effects are a low
initial value of the real interest rate and mild changes in the composition of output but no
decline of output below its full-employment value. I conclude with some observations on
policies to fight the long slump.




                                                                           5
             1.8

             1.6                     Housing and
                                     consumer durables
             1.4

             1.2

             1.0
                                    B i
                                    Business capital
                                                i l
             0.8

             0.6

             0.4

             0.2

             0.0
                   1990           1995                 2000          2005


                      Figure 4: Ratios of Capital and Durables to GDP

2     The Overhang of Housing and Consumer Durables
Figure 4 shows the ratios of housing and consumer durables, on the one hand, and business
capital (plant and equipment), on the other hand, over the past 20 years. Business capital
was virtually constant as a fraction of GDP, and so was housing and durables in the 1990s,
but a conspicuous bulge in household capital occurred in the 2000s. The economy reached
the crisis with about 14 percent more housing and durables in relation to GDP than normal.
Almost all economic models—and the historical performance of the U.S. economy—agree on
the principle that what goes above normal will tend to return to normal. Thus the overhang
of housing and consumer durables pointed toward lower future spending in these categories,
no matter what happened to the economy.
    I’ll not say anything more about the fascinating topic of the causes of the splurge on
houses and cars and the rise and fall in housing prices. I just take the abnormal level of
household capital goods as a fact about the economy as of the end of 2008. Others are working
on the topic of the house-price bubble. Macroeconomists have built asset-price crashes into
general-equilibrium models—Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2010) is a recent example
where beliefs about appreciation spread among homeowners like an epidemic disease. See
also Kocherlakota (2010) and Martin and Ventura (2010). No view about the origins of


                                               6
bubbles or crashes is yet firmly established.


3       Illiquid Households and Debt-service Commitments
A significant fraction of American consumers appear to be at corners in their intertemporal
equilibria—they borrow as much as they can and hold almost no liquid assets. I take a
family as liquidity-constrained if its holdings of net liquid assets are less than two months
of income. Net liquid assets are the difference between holdings in savings accounts and
the like and borrowing from credit cards and other unsecured forms. In the 2007 Survey of
Consumer Finances, households illiquid by this standard earned 58 percent of all income.
The fraction of households that were constrained—74 percent—is even higher because lower-
income households are more likely to be constrained. Nonetheless, many quite prosperous
families hold essentially no liquid financial assets. Their recourses in times of unexpected
income losses include borrowing against unencumbered houses and cars, selling these assets,
liquidating retirement accounts, and seeking help from friends and family. Blundell, Pistaferri
and Preston (2008) find a rather smaller response of consumption to transitory income than
is implied by the SCF data, suggesting that the other recourses may be important.
    I incorporate these facts into the model by dividing consumption into two parts. Con-
sumption of unconstrained households obeys the standard life-cycle model, while consump-
tion of constrained households is their earnings less their payments on outstanding credit.
The payments are forced saving. To determine the amount of the required payments, I use
the following logic: Let Dt be the outstanding debt of constrained households in quarter t.
Constrained households always borrow the maximum allowed, so their debt is controlled by
the borrowing limits imposed by lenders. The borrowing interest rate is rD . The sources of
funds for constrained households are income ȳt and increased borrowing, Dt − Dt−1 . Uses
of funds are consumption c̄t and payment of interest on earlier debt, rD,t−1 Dt−1 . Thus
consumption is
                               c̄t = ȳt + Dt − (1 + rD,t−1 )Dt−1 .                        (1)

I let
                                   st = rD,t−1 Dt−1 − ∆Dt ,                                (2)

the net burden on consumption relative to income associated with debt service. The level of
debt is high enough that interest payments usually exceed new borrowing, so Dt is usually


                                                7
              0.16

              0.14

              0.12

              0.10

              0.08

              0.06

              0.04

              0.02

              0.00

              ‐0.02
                      2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010


                  Figure 5: Burden of Debt Service, as a Fraction of GDP

positive. In a stationary setting, Dt = D̄, a constant, debt repayments are zero, and house-
hold purchases of consumption goods are less than income by the amount of interest they
pay, rD D̄.
   Figure 5 shows the burden st , as a fraction of GDP, calculated from Flow of Funds data
on consumer debt and NIPA data on household interest payments. Prior to 2007, the burden
was close to zero—new borrowing came close to covering interest payments. Tightening of
credit began even before the onset of recession at the end of 2007 and continued to the end
of 2010.
   In a full-employment economy containing unconstrained and constrained households, the
tightening of credit as shown in Figure 5 would not have contributed to a slump. Rather,
the interest rate would clear the output market, thanks to the absence of any lower bound
on the interest rate. When constrained households cut back consumption spending, includ-
ing purchases of new houses and consumer durables, low rates would induce unconstrained
households to consume more by borrowing, thus offsetting the saving of constrained house-
holds.
   Mian and Sufi (2010b) demonstrate large differences among states in the U.S. in durables
purchases negatively correlated with indebtedness.



                                                         8
4     Financial Frictions
A financial friction drives a wedge between the returns that savers receive and the rates that
borrowers pay. Agency problems in financial intermediaries are one source of those frictions.
Adverse selection of borrowers is another. The financial crisis resulted in large declines in the
equity values of financial intermediaries, which substantially worsened the agency problems.
Loss of equity among household borrowers worsened adverse selection.
    Hall (2010) describes a framework for studying financial frictions and Hall (2011) gives
many details and cites to recent work on this topic. The framework in those papers shares
many elements with the discussion here.
    A widely studied setup—see Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999)— generates frictions
from the agency relationship between investors and financial intermediaries. See Gertler
and Karadi (2009) for an application to the Great Slump. Investors lack the expertise to
invest directly in productive enterprises. They place their funds with intermediaries who will
abscond with some fraction of the funds unless their continuation values exceed the value of
absconding. In equilibrium, the intermediary charges entrepreneurs more for credit than the
amount paid to investors. The present value of the difference is the needed continuation value.
The present value arises from spread between the intermediary’s lending and borrowing rates
and from the intermediary’s equity. The setup has been influential in the theory of bank
regulation, which holds that the value of a bank’s franchise protects depositors and deposit
insurers against excessive risk-taking by banks.
    When assets held by intermediaries lose value—as from a decline in real-estate prices—
the continuation value threatens to drop below the value from absconding. To prevent
absconding, the investors accept a widening of the spread. Thus the behavior of credit
spreads is central to this theory of variations in financial frictions.
    Although the agency friction model has most often been applied to businesses, it is
even more apt for consumers. Larger businesses escape the agency friction by sidestepping
intermediaries and selling securities directly to providers of capital. Consumers borrow only
from intermediaries, with the small exception of borrowing from family and friends.
    Following the logic of the agency friction model, I consider a variable interpreted as a
wedge between returns earned by savers and the cost of capital to businesses and households.
The wedge is equivalent to a property tax on business capital and household durables,
including houses. Increases in the wedge are potent sources of lower output and higher


                                                9
unemployment.
   As a result of the real-estate crash, many financial intermediaries suffered severe depletion
of their equity in long positions in real-estate-related assets. Measuring the resulting increase
in frictions is a challenge. While it is easy to measure spreads for traded instruments, those
spreads are not infected by the wedge suggested by the agency theory. The spread between
BAA corporate bonds and Treasurys of the same maturity widened stunningly in late 2008
but the difference did not reflect profit accruing to any intermediary. Spreads of that type
came back to normal way too fast to account for any of the persistence of the slump. These
spreads may arise from transitory segmentation of asset markets—sudden loss of equity
among one class of investors results in price declines for the assets they sell. Quickly, other
classes of investors develop the expertise to recognize the undervaluation of the assets and
bid their prices back to the normal level relative to safe Treasurys.
   Intermediation spreads are potentially instructive about frictions. One important chal-
lenge is to distinguish the part of a spread that arises from the probability of default from
the part that is a true friction. The ideal measure of the spread for bank loans would be the
lending rate for new loans, less the best forecast of risk-adjusted default losses and less the
bank’s borrowing rate. The difficulty is determining the forward-looking expected loss from
default. Under the assumption that banks stabilize expected default losses for new loans, so
that the default component is a constant, it is informative to study the total spread between
lending and borrowing rates. Figure 6 shows the spread based on data from the Federal
Reserve Board for business loans of $1 million or more. The spread is the loan rate reported
by banks (not necessarily limited to new loans) less the federal funds rate as a measure of
the borrowing rate. The spread rose by almost two percentage points and remained persis-
tently high. I conclude that the evidence mildly supports the view that spreads of the type
associated with frictions rose and remained high during the slump. I note that the spread
remains persistently high at the same time that spreads for traded securities have returned
to normal.
   Figure 6 shows one measure of friction with respect to business investment, the spread
between the rates that businesses pay and the rate that banks pay to fund loans, the fed
funds rate. It widened dramatically after the crisis and was still widening even in 2010.
   Figure 7 shows the spreads between the rate reported by the Federal Reserve Board for
credit-card borrowing and the federal funds rate. There is just a hint of a decline at the end,



                                               10
                                           3.5


                                           3.0



               Spread, percentage points
                                           2.5


                                           2.0


                                           1.5


                                           1.0


                                           0.5


                                           0.0
                                                 2000   2002   2004    2006   2008   2010


Figure 6: Spread, in Percentage Points, between Business Loan Rates and Banks’ Borrowing
Rate

but the spread definitely remained high for most of the slump to date.
   The most important component of household credit is residential mortgages. Figure 8
shows the spread between the rate reported by the Federal Reserve Board for conventional
(30-year fixed rate) mortgages and the yield on 10-year Treasury notes, a reasonable match
to the actual duration of mortgage debt. The spread rose early in the slump until the Federal
Reserve intervened and restored the spread to roughly normal levels. Mortgage underwriting
practices have changed dramatically during the slump to try to limit losses on new mortgages.
   My discussion of intermediation spreads has focused on the agency model, where spreads
measure distortions but not actual losses of resources. Agency frictions have much the same
effect as taxes—they create wedges and resulting inefficiencies, but do not consume output.
   A different type of friction occurs when a borrower is unable to perform on a debt obliga-
tion. Another branch of the literature on financial frictions, starting from Townsend (1979),
observes that debt contracts have the property that the lender need not consume resources
monitoring the borrower unless the borrower fails to make good on the simple promise to
repay the loan, an act that is costless to verify. When the borrower is unable to repay, the
lender incurs substantial costs to recover value through a workout or bankruptcy. When
borrowers suffer losses in asset values, the probability of default rises and total spreads rise.


                                                                  11
                                             16

                                             14

             Spread, percentage points       12

                                             10

                                             8

                                             6

                                             4

                                             2

                                             0
                                                  2000    2002   2004        2006    2008    2010


Figure 7: Spread, in Percentage Points, between Credit-Card Rates and Banks’ Borrowing
Rate



                                             3.5


                                             3.0
                      d, percentage points




                                             2.5


                                             2.0


                                             1.5
                 Spread




                                             1.0


                                             0.5


                                             0.0
                                                   2000   2002   2004        2006   2008    2010


 Figure 8: Spread, in Percentage Points, between Mortgage Rates and 10-year Treasurys



                                                                        12
The friction is less than the spread, because one consequence of a default is a simple transfer
of value from the lender to the borrower. The friction is the amount of the loss accruing
to the borrower and lender jointly—it comprises bankruptcy costs, business interruption
costs, and the like. But the friction is likely to move in proportion to observed spreads, so
a widening of the total spread will usually indicate an increase in the financial friction.

4.1        Credit rationing and lending standards
Lenders always ration credit. They need to overcome substantial adverse selection problems.
They set standards for borrower eligibility and spend resources verifying that borrowers meet
the standards. One of the consequences of a slump, especially one with an initial financial
crisis, is a tightening of lending standards for both businesses and households. Adverse
selection becomes a more serious danger when more borrowers are close to the margin of
failure.
   Lending standards are increasingly based on credit scores and other metrics, but I am
not aware of any systematic compilation of quantitative standards into an overall index.
The Federal Reserve Board carries out a quarterly survey of senior loan officers of banks
with respect to lending standards for a variety of types of loans. An example of a ques-
tion in the survey is “Over the past three months, how have your bank’s credit standards
for approving applications for credit cards from individuals or households changed?” The
permissible answers are (1) Tightened considerably, (2) Tightened somewhat (3) Remained
basically unchanged (4) Eased somewhat, and (5) Eased considerably. Although the answers
are qualitative, it appears possible to create an index of standards from the answers.
   To this end, let xt be an index of lending standards, interpreted as the mean across
banks, where the change in the bank’s own index is normal with mean ∆xt + µ and unit
standard deviation. If a bank’s own index change is in the interval [−ν, ν], it reports that
its standards “remained basically unchanged.” The Federal Reserve reports the difference in
the fraction of banks that reported a tightening of standards and the fraction that reported
a loosening—this is called the net change. It is

                    Net change = Φ(∆xt + µ − ν) − Φ(−∆xt − µ − ν),                            (3)

where Φ is the standard cumulative normal distribution (see the Appendix for details). To
estimate the parameter ν, I observe that when ∆xt + µ = 0, that is, when standards are
not changing, the probability of the middle answer is the probability for [−ν, ν], which is

                                              13
2Φ(ν) − 1. For October 2010, a time of small net change, the Federal Reserve reports these
probabilities, which are around 0.85. The corresponding value of ν is around 1.4. I calculate
the time series for ∆xt + µ by solving equation (3) and estimate µ as the mean of the series,
in the cases of business loans and credit cards. The identifying assumption is that ∆xt has
mean zero. For mortgages, where data are available only for the crisis period, I use a mean of
0.15. My assumption that the cross-sectional standard deviation across banks is 1.0 amounts
to a normalization of the units of the index.
   Figure 9 shows the resulting indexes, the cumulations of the estimated changes. Because
the indexes are constructed to start and end at zero, nothing should be read into the lack
of trend, though it remains a reasonable assumption. Further, because each of the three
indexes starts arbitrarily at zero, but in different years, the relative values of the indexes
have no significance. Standards for business loans track the business cycle almost perfectly.
Each recession saw tightening up to a peak that occurs around or a little after the trough of
the cycle. Then standards began to ease, gradually during the 1990s and more rapidly in the
2000s. For credit cards, special factors not relevant for current purposes caused a tightening
during the expansion of the 1990s. Starting from the peak in standards in 2003, credit card
standards behaved similarly to business lending standards. The Federal Reserve added a
question about mortgage lending standards in 2007, around the time of the low point in the
other two indexes. The index of mortgage standards rose dramatically and has declined only
slightly below its peak value.
   Figure 10 provides further confirmation of a substantial and persistent increase in house-
hold rationing from the financial crisis. It shows an index from Google Insights of queries
for the term “withdrawal penalty.” The logic is that households suffering from income inter-
ruptions, who might normally have borrowing opportunities or other ways to deal with the
need to fund continuing normal consumption, turn to expensive alternatives such as 401K
withdrawals that are subject to a penalty tax. The index measures, in arbitrary units, the
share of all search queries on Google for this term. The index jumped up in late 2008 and
has remained high ever since.
   Rationing through the application of lending standards enters the model in the same way
as agency frictions. Borrowers behave as if credit were more costly than the interest rate
they pay for the amounts they are actually allowed to borrow. The data in Figure 6 through
Figure 10 suggest that agency frictions, default costs, and rationing all worsened during the



                                                14
              6
                                                                             Mortgages
              5

              4

              3

              2

              1
                                     Credit cards
              0

             ‐1          Business
                         loans
             ‐2

             ‐3

             ‐4
                  2003              2005               2007           2009


Figure 9: Indexes of Lending Standards Inferred from the FRB Senior Loan Officer Survey




             80




             70




             60




             50




             40




             30




             20




             10




              0


              2004       2005        2006       2007          2008   2009     2010


     Figure 10: Share of Google Search Queries for the Term “withdrawal penalty”



                                                    15
                                         6.0
                                                      Actual                             CBO forecast

                                         5.0



               Rate,, percent per year   4.0


                                         3.0


                                         2.0


                                         1.0


                                         0.0
                                               2008   2009     2010   2011        2012   2013     2014   2015


          Figure 11: A Long Period with the Nominal Short Rate Pinned at Zero

crisis and have remained at levels close to their peaks during the crisis. I combine all of these
factors into the wedge discussed earlier. Although the evidence seems strong that the wedge
increased and has remained high, I have not found a basis for quantifying its rate. Rather,
I will demonstrate that rates in a reasonable range have powerful negative effects on output
and employment.


5     Nominal Interest Rate Pinned at Zero
Currency is a safe asset paying zero return. Currency becomes financially attractive if other
safe assets pay negative returns. The Fed will always pay out currency in exchange for
reserves. If the market return for a bond fell below zero, the owner could sell it, convert
the proceeds to currency, and earn a safe higher return. Thus market prices of bonds would
fall so that their returns rose to zero. Consequently, as long as the Fed will give currency in
exchange for reserves dollar for dollar, the interest rate cannot be negative.
    Figure 11 shows that the Fed pushed the nominal interest rate to almost zero immediately
after the crisis and is expected to keep it there for a total of three full years at zero.
    The term real interest rate is generic for a concept more precisely identified as an own
rate. The latter is a rate measured in the physical units of some product. The own rates that


                                                                             16
matter in this analysis are those for consumption goods and services, for durables including
houses, and for business capital. In the model I denote the own rate on output as r, which I
call the real rate, and introduce the prices of other products relative to output as appropriate
to generate the corresponding own return. I denote the safe nominal rate as rn but for most
of the analysis take rn = 0. The real rate is the return measured in output units available
from a one-period investment at the safe nominal rate:
                                                        pt
                                    rt = (1 + rn,t )        − 1,                             (4)
                                                       pt+1
where p is the dollar price of output.
    Other real returns follow the same rule, all applying the same rate of inflation. I ne-
glect any changes in risk, so when I assume that the safe short-term real return is roughly
constant, I am assuming that returns for all assets of whatever risk are similarly constant.
Although there is good evidence against the hypothesis of constant risk premiums, especially
during crises, I do not believe that there is evidence of any significant difference between risk
premiums in prolonged slumps and in normal times. In particular, slumps are not times of
high volatility in asset markets or elsewhere in the economy.
    The real rate is a basic price that clears the current labor and output markets. If the
nominal rate is pinned at zero (rn = 0), the real rate is minus the rate of inflation:
                                                  pt+1 − pt
                                         rt = −                                              (5)
                                                     pt

6     Near-Exogeneity of the Rate of Inflation
The hypothesis of a given, unresponsive rate of inflation achieves a crucial simplification of
macro modeling. The hypothesis only makes sense in an economy that had adapted to stable
low inflation for many years. And it’s only an approximation.
    The U.S. entered the slump with a history of low and stable inflation. Cost-of-living
increases were concentrated in a narrow band around two percent per year since the mid-
1990s and were not much higher from the mid-1980s to 1990. An immediate issue following
the sharp contraction in the last quarter of 2008 was whether inflation would fall and even
turn into deflation as a result of the extreme slack that developed quickly. The answer,
luckily, was no.
    The Great Slump brought slacker product markets to the U.S. economy than had existed
at any time since the depression in the 1930s. A line of thought rather deeply embedded

                                                  17
in macroeconomics holds that product prices fall in slack markets. The logic is that sellers
have much to gain by increasing output when output is low. On the reasonable assumption
that marginal-cost curves slope upward, a contraction in output will cause a price-setting
firm, irrespective of its market power, to cut its price in an attempt to take business away
from its rivals.
   Recent experience requires a fundamental reconsideration of the view that producers find
it desirable to expand output by cutting prices. Their behavior across all industries suggests,
to the contrary, that price-cutting is not the answer to any problem they perceive in a time
of extreme slack.
   Monthly inflation rates contain a good deal of noise from components of the price index
with volatile prices, notably petroleum products and food. Practitioners have come up
with a variety of ways of extracting a less noisy inflation signal from the monthly data.
One approach is time aggregation—using annual or other multi-month changes. Another,
currently the most widely used, is to study core inflation, price changes excluding the volatile
food and energy components. The third—the one I favor—is to use inflation forecasts.
The volatile components lose their unpredictable noise components but are not completely
neglected in this approach. For the present purpose, forecasts seem the desirable approach,
because it is expected inflation that matters for the real rate.
   Figure 12 shows the one-year-ahead forecast of the GDP deflator from the Survey of
Professional Forecasters, maintained by the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank, along with
the unemployment rate. The period covered starts in 1987, the year that Alan Greenspan
took command of the Federal Reserve. It contains three contractions marked by rapid
increases in unemployment. Inflation fell in all three, but separating the response to slack
from other determinants is a challenge. The decline in the inflation rate was greatest in
the slump of 1991 through 1994, but the decline continued at about the same rate after
the slump turned into a remarkable boom. Inflation did not flatten until unemployment
reached 4.3 percent in 1999. Inflation was close to flat in the slump from 2001 through 2004,
with just a hint of decline during the period when unemployment was rising. Finally, in
the current slump, inflation took a discontinuous drop of about one percentage point early
in the contraction, when unemployment was still fairly low, then stabilized at just over one
percent per year when unemployment skyrocketed to the 9.5 percent level. Despite concerns
that continuing extreme slack might result in further declines toward deflation, the rate of



                                              18
              12



              10



              8                        Unemployment rate


              6



              4



              2        One‐year‐ahead inflation
                       forecast

              0
                   1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009


Figure 12: One-Year-ahead Inflation Forecast and Unemployment Rate, 1987 through 2010

inflation has remained remarkably stable at around one percent during the recent stable
period.
   The concept of the non-accelerating-inflation rate of unemployment or NAIRU has had
a firm grip since Friedman (1968) formulated the concept, though he called it the natural
rate. The idea is that there is a critical unemployment rate such that inflation will become
greater and greater if unemployment is below the rate. Today, the relevant version is the
non-decelerating-inflation rate of unemployment. By the theory underlying the concept, the
rate of change of prices should fall more and more if the unemployment rate is above the
critical rate. Generally the NAIRU is found to be around 6 percent. By this influential body
of thought, month after month of unemployment over 6 percent should bring more and more
deflation. Fortunately, the theory is wrong.
   It is not news that NAIRU theory is a failure. Stock and Watson (2010) report that
the best way to characterize the relation between inflation and unemployment is to measure
downward pressure on inflation as the difference between the current unemployment rate
and the lowest rate experienced in the previous 11 quarters. Thus, once a slump has lasted
11 quarters at, say, the same rate, no matter how high, unemployment loses its deflationary
effect. That is exactly the opposite of the NAIRU theory. The finding is plainly consistent
with the data in Figure 12. It’s also plainly the case that the negative effect of unemployment

                                                  19
                                                10


                                                 5



              Annual percent cchange in price
                                                                                                          MS                      FN FD
                                                                                                                         CS
                                                                                IE                   XS             SL
                                                 0                     IS            MG         CD             CN
                                                            IR                                            XG

                                                  5
                                                 ‐5


                                                ‐10
                                                 10


                                                 15
                                                ‐15


                                                ‐20
                                                      ‐20        ‐15         ‐10           ‐5                   0             5           10
                                                                            Annual percent change in output


      Figure 13: Annual Percent Changes in Output and Prices, 2007 Q4 to 2009 Q4

on inflation is small even during the time when it has any effect.
   The limited response of inflation applies at the level of components of output. Figure 13
shows annual rates of change of output and price for a number of components of GDP, over
the two-year period from 2007 Q4 to 2009 Q4. The points lie along a line with a slightly
positive slope—the line connecting the left-most observation to the right-most has a slope
of 0.22 percentage points of price change per point of output decline. The most informative
observation is for residential construction, where output declined at a 17-percent annual rate
but price declined by only 3.4 percent per year. Construction is a good test case, because
existing theories of sticky prices do not seem to apply to this component.
   An adverse shift in the terms of trade may be an influence favoring unresponsive prices.
If an increase in input prices occurs at the same time that product demand falls, product
prices may hardly move at the same time that output falls. A spike in oil prices occurred in
the summer of 2008. But the spike reversed by the end of 2008 and there was no meaningful
shift in the terms of trade during the two years included in Figure 13. The ratio of the price
indexes for imports and exports fell by 17 basis points per year during the period.
   Most economic models of pricing derive a reasonably stable markup of price over cost.
The dominant model of inflation embedded in practical macro models today hypothesizes
that firms would like to set prices according to a markup theory, but only do so at random

                                                                                      20
times. These models are inconsistent with the evidence above, because they imply that the
NAIRU principle holds. They cannot explain the stabilization of inflation at positive rates
in the presence of long-lasting slack.
    The remarkable stability of the rates of change of price indexes conceals the high volatility
and dramatic variations in trends of the prices of individual products. The prices of electronic
products fall every year, while the prices of services provided by highly educated workers—
notably health care—rise every year. An explosion of recent research on grocery-store prices
and on the prices of individual products in the Consumer Price Index shows huge volatility.
The stability of indexes cannot be explained by the stability of prices of individual products.
In particular, the idea that sellers resist cutting individual prices is a complete non-starter.
The explanation of stable overall inflation appears to involve factors that operate across
products and not in individual product markets.


7     How a Pinned Interest Rate Causes a Slump
7.1    The non-existence of a standard equilibrium in an economy
       where the government attempts to trade at the wrong price
To start the analysis of the implications of an interest rate that is too high because it is
pinned at zero, I’ll use the Fisher diagram–the standard indifference curve-isoquant story
applied to the intertemporal setting, shown in Figure 14. All households have the same
preferences. The indifference curve describes preferences for consumption in the first and
second periods. The isoquant expresses the fact that, by giving up current consumption,
the household can invest in productive capital and consume more in the second period. The
tangency of the isoquant and the indifference curve is the equilibrium of the economy. The
slope of the tangent line is one plus the real interest rate at equilibrium. The economy
achieves this equilibrium if there are no other opportunities open to households.
    At the beginning of period 1, the household has capital k0 . Employment is n1 and output
at the end of the period is y1 = f (k0 , n1 ), which is divided between immediate consumption
c1 and capital k1 to carry forward to date 2, when the household will consume the resulting
output and depreciated capital y2 = f (k1 , n2 ) resulting from employment n2 . The household
orders consumption pairs according to the utility function

                                         U (c1 ) + βU (c2 ).                                 (6)


                                                 21
                                  0.75




                                  0.70

                                                     Indifference


                   mption in second period
                                                     curve
                                  0.65




                                  0.60                   Isoquant

                                  0.55


                                                                             Standard
              Consum




                                  0.50
                                                                             equilibrium


                                  0.45
                                                                                                              Equilibrium
                                                                                                              interest rate
                                  0.40
                                             0.40              0.45          0.50           0.55       0.60             0.65


                                                                       Consumption in first period


                                                    Figure 14: Fisher Diagram of Two-Period Equilibrium

The utility function U is concave and differentiable. The household incurs no disamenity
from work, so it will normally choose to offer all of its time to the labor market: n1 = n2 = n̄.
   Figure 15 shows the standard equilibrium. At the equilibrium, the interest rate r∗ is
the common value of the marginal product of capital and the marginal rate of substitu-
tion between consumption in the first and second periods. The isoquant describes the full-
employment tradeoff between c1 and c2 :

                                                                      c2 = f (n̄, f (n̄, k0 − c1 )).                           (7)

   Equilibrium definitions play a big role in this discussion. I start with

Definition: A standard equilibrium in the two-period economy is a pair of consumption
levels (c1 , c2 ) and an interest rate r satisfying the equality of marginal rate of substitution
and marginal product of capital,
                                                                       U 0 (c1 )   ∂f
                                                                           0
                                                                                 =     =1+r                                    (8)
                                                                      βU (c2 )     ∂k2
and material balance at full employment:

                                                                      c2 = f (n̄, f (n̄, k0 − c1 )).                           (9)


                                                                                    22
                                                0.75




                                                0.70                           Superior indifference curve
                                                              Indifference


                                       period
                                                0.65
                                                              curve
                     mption in ssecond p                        Isoquant
                                                                                                          Trade to a higher indifference
                                                0.60
                                                                                                          curve by holding cash earning
                                                                                                          above the equilibrium rate
                                                0.55

                                                                                            Standard
                Consum




                                                                                            equilibrium
                                                0.50




                                                0.45
                                                                                                                                Equilibrium
                                                                                                                                interest rate
                                                0.40
                                                       0.40             0.45              0.50            0.55           0.60             0.65


                                                                                    Consumption in first period


                                                                  Figure 15: Fisher Diagram with Currency

   It’s obvious that r∗ is the unique equilibrium in this economy.
   But now suppose that the government issues a security with a guaranteed return that is
higher than the equilibrium real interest rate. Rather than stay at the standard equilibrium,
the big black dot, the household would like to hold that security and use it to trade along
the arrow. This will take the household to a superior indifference curve.
   Now consider the same economy with the addition of currency. I take currency as nothing
more than a government security that provides a fixed real return of r̄ ≥ r∗ . It has no
convenience yield or other monetary properties. This assumption is reasonable because
central banks typically saturate the economy with currency when the nominal interest rate
is zero. Saturation was the Fed’s policy in the Great Slump. One unit of output converted
to currency in the first period will buy 1 + r̄ units of output in the second period, because
the price level falls by the factor 1/(1 + r̄) from period 1 to period 2. Currency pays a real
return of r̄.

Definition: A standard equilibrium in the two-period endowment economy with currency is
a pair of consumption levels (c1 , c2 ) and an interest rate r satisfying the equality of marginal
rate of substitution and marginal product of capital,
                                                                                  U 0 (c1 )   ∂f
                                                                                            =     = 1 + r,                                       (10)
                                                                                 βU 0 (c2 )   ∂k2

                                                                                                 23
the condition for optimal trading with the government,
                                        U 0 (c1 )
                                                  = 1 + r̄,                                (11)
                                       βU 0 (c2 )
and material balance at full employment:

                                   c2 = f (n̄, f (n̄, k0 − c1 )).                          (12)


    It’s obvious that the only possible standard equilibrium with government trading occurs
when the government trades at the equilibrium price for the economy without government
trading, r̄ ≥ r∗ , in which case the government will not find any takers for its proposed trade.
    A government issuing currency with a return of r̄ ≥ r∗ is doing something fundamentally
uneconomic that no private organization would do—it is overcompensating people who lend
to it.
    The conclusion:

Proposition: In the presence of currency yielding more than the equilibrium real interest
rate, the economy has no standard equilibrium.

    It is important to emphasize that this proposition says nothing about what mischief
follows when the government goes ahead and offers to trade at a price above r∗ . As I noted
above, consumers would value the opportunity to trade at any price different from r∗ . They
would line up outside the government office where they could sign up for the deal. Something
would happen in that economy. The key question is what kind of non-standard equilibrium
results from the government’s offer to trade at the wrong price.
    Figure 15 also shows a line with a more negative slope than the dashed line corresponding
to the equilibrium real interest rate. The household can trade along this line by holding
currency and thus reach a superior indifference curve. The story behind that action is natural:
The household finds it desirable to reduce first-period consumption and increase second-
period consumption. Workers in the household are paid in currency, so all the household
does is hold onto the currency rather than spend it on current consumption.
    The point on the superior indifference curve cannot be an equilibrium under any reason-
able definition, because the economy is physically incapable of supplying that combination
of c1 and c2 . On the other hand, the standard equilibrium is also not an equilibrium of
the economy with high-yielding currency. Households will always break that equilibrium by
hanging on to their currency.

                                                24
                                             0.70




                                             0.65

                                                       Slope =


                                    period
                                                       real return
                                                       on
                   mption in second p
                                             0.60

                                                       currency
                                                                                                 Standard equilibrium without
                                             0.55                                                high return on currency

                                                           Low‐employment equilibrium
                                                           with high return on currency
              Consum




                                             0.50




                                             0.45




                                             0.40
                                                    0.40              0.45          0.50         0.55          0.60             0.65


                                                                              Consumption in first period


            Figure 16: Low-Employment Equilibrium with Pinned Interest Rate

7.2    Low-employment equilibrium
The availability of currency breaks the standard equilibrium. What then happens in this
economy? This question goes to the heart of the issue. The government is causing a major
problem in the economy by offering too good a deal. People try to hold onto any currency
that falls into their hands, rather than spending it right away.
   Economies in slumps with interest rates pinned at zero have excess unemployment. That
was true in the Great Depression, it’s been true in Japan for a while, and it’s true now
in the U.S. So it seems appropriate that a model generate some kind of a low-employment
equilibrium. Earlier work on this branch of macro model building including Krugman (1998),
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2009) has made
various assumptions that amount to letting unemployment account for the excess supply of
labor, as in Figure 3.
   Much of a story connecting the behavior induced by the inappropriately high return on
currency to the outbreak of unemployment is still untold. The goal is clear—an equilibrium
where some indifference curve is tangent to some isoquant. And the slope of the tangent line
needs to be one plus the real rate the government is paying on money—the negative of the
inflation rate. See Figure 16.


                                                                                           25
   In the low-employment equilibrium, first-period consumption is quite a bit lower and
second-period consumption—which the household hoped would be higher—is actually lower
as well. The desire to trade to a better indifference curve, by hoarding currency, is thwarted
in equilibrium.
   In the equilibrium shown, unemployment occurs in the first period but not in the second.
Less capital is carried from the first to the second period than in the standard equilibrium. In
the second period, that capital is combined with all available labor. Because the labor/capital
ratio is higher, the return to capital is higher and capital can compete with high-return
currency.
   To find an equilibrium of the economy with high-yielding currency, one needs an alter-
native concept of equilibrium. A long tradition of macroeconomics considers:

Definition: A low-employment equilibrium in the two-period economy at interest rate r
is a consumption pair (c1 , c2 ) and an employment pair (n1 , n2 ), with n1 ≤ n̄ and n2 ≤ n̄,
satisfying the equality of marginal rate of substitution and marginal product of capital at
the interest rate r,
                                    U 0 (c1 )    ∂f
                                        0
                                              =       = 1 + r,                             (13)
                                   βU (c2 )     ∂k2 )
and material balance:
                                  c2 = f (n2 , f (n1 , k0 − c1 )).                         (14)

   The two-period economy with currency yielding an excessive real return can have a
low-employment equilibrium. Figure 16 shows one calculated with reasonable parameter
values. First-period consumption is below its level in the standard equilibrium. That’s not
surprising, because the higher interest rate induces substitution to later consumption. But
second-period consumption is lower as well. Because labor input is below full employment,
the isoquant is closer to the origin.
   Table 1 shows values of the variables in the two economies portrayed in Figure 16. Un-
employment in the first period in the economy with high-yielding currency results in lower
output. The amount of capital in use from period 1 to period 2, k1 , is lower—thus raising
its rate of return—and first-period consumption is lower—thus raising the growth rate of
consumption so as to satisfy the household’s Euler equation at the higher real return. Notice
that the economy has full employment in the second period. The labor/capital ratio that
matters, n2 /k1 , is not depressed by lower employment; it is raised by lower capital.


                                                26
                   Variable                        Notation No currency   With currency

                                                                              Low
                   Equilibrium concept                         Standard
                                                                           employment
                   First-period employment            n1        1.000         0.874

                   Second-period employment           n2        1.000         1.000

                   First-period consumption           c1        0.541         0.514

                   Second-period consumption          c2        0.541         0.526

                   First-period output                y1        0.756         0.714

                   Second-period output               y2        0.541         0.526

                   Capital stock from 1 to 2          k1        0.215         0.200

                   Labor/capital ratio from 1 to    n 2 /k 1    4.644         4.995

                   Interest rate from 1 to 2          r1        0.005         0.050


Table 1: Comparison of the Standard Equilibrium without Currency and the Low-
Employment Equilibrium with Currency

   The existence of a low-employment equilibrium is not a given. The obstacle is the need to
generate a labor/capital ratio sufficiently higher than in the no-currency equilibrium to make
the rate of return on capital equal the higher level that currency earns, despite having less
labor. In other words, the first-period capital stock k1 needs to be proportionately lower by
more than is the second-period employment level, n2 . In the two-period case, this condition
is easy to satisfy—in the equilibrium shown in Figure 16, second-period employment is at
its full-employment level. With lower first-period employment, the capital stock k1 is lower
because output is lower and because the difference in first-period consumption is smaller
than is the difference in the capital stock.

7.3    Many periods
Economies lasting over many (or an infinity of) periods are less likely to have a low-
employment intertemporal equilibrium. Two factors stand in the way of that equilibrium.
First, in the two-period case, a reduction in first-period output can cause a meaningful pro-
portional reduction in the capital stock carried from the first to the second period, k1 . The
flow of output is a significant fraction of the stock of capital. As Table 1 shows, output is
two or three times higher than capital. In a standard calibration of a long-horizon model—


                                                        27
and in data for the U.S. economy—output is only a fraction of the capital stock. Even a
total collapse of output lowers the capital stock by a small percentage and may not be able
to match the increase in the real return to capital needed to generate a low-employment
equilibrium.
   The second factor that may block a low-employment equilibrium is keeping the level of
employment high enough to elevate the labor/capital ratio to the point needed to match the
high return to currency. On the one hand, a low-employment equilibrium needs to produce
a low level of output so as to cut the capital stock and raise the rate of return to capital. On
the other hand, the equilibrium needs to keep employment high to generate a high enough
labor/capital ratio. In the two-period low-employment equilibrium, there is no conflict—the
cut in employment occurs in the first period, while employment is at its maximal level in the
second period, so the labor capital ratio can be high. But in cases where the availability of
excessive returns on currency last multiple periods, no similar pattern can generate a high
enough labor/capital ratio.

7.4    Interpretation of no equilibrium
By equilibrium in a model, I mean a solution of its equations. Some macroeconomists
speak of “disequilibrium” models, meaning models that eliminate standard market-clearing
equilibrium conditions, especially in the labor market. I find that term confusing, but there’s
no substantive disagreement here, only a matter of taste.
   Non-existence of equilibrium is a defect of a model, not a statement about the behavior
of the economy. Something always happens in the economy and it is the job of the model to
replicate what happens. Non-existence of a low-employment equilibrium calls for considera-
tion of other mechanisms. The challenge is the following: At times when the real return to
currency is high enough to cause problems—such as the U.S. and many other countries since
late 2008 or in the Great Depression—the return to capital must match the return to cur-
rency, including the appropriate risk premium. But the collapse of the economy, especially
the decline in employment, seems to point in the direction of a low return to capital.

7.5    Capital utilization
One element that may help in building a model of a slump that has an equilibrium is a decline
in capital utilization. This idea is an important element of the New Keynesian model. If x


                                              28
is the fraction of capital in productive use, the economy’s technology is

                                        y = nα (xk)1−α .                                    (15)

The return to capital is the marginal product of capital. One notion of the marginal product
is
                                    ∂y             n α
                                       = (1 − α)x        .                                  (16)
                                    ∂k             xk
The factor x appears because of the implicit assumption that incremental capital suffers the
same utilization rate as existing capital. The presence of that factor implies that a decline
in capital utilization will lower the return to capital unless accompanied by an increase in
employment. A model incorporating the assumption that incremental capital is only partly
utilized is completely unpromising in delivering an equilibrium when high-yielding currency
is available.
     Under the alternative assumption that investment occurs only when full utilization is
expected, the marginal product of fully utilized capital as an increment to a partially utilized
stock is
                                    ∂y              n α
                                         = (1 − α)        .                                 (17)
                                   ∂(xk)            xk
In this case, if the decline in capital utilization is proportionally greater than the decline in
labor utilization, so n/(xk) rises, the return to capital can increase even though the economy
has entered a slump, with low utilization of both factors, even without a decline in k.

7.6     Role of adjustment costs
My discussion so far assumes costless adjustment of the capital stock. Under the more real-
istic assumption of positive adjustment costs, the return to capital differs from the marginal
product of capital. In the case of costs that increase smoothly with the magnitude of the
adjustment, Tobin’s q model applies; q is the market value of installed capital. The return
to capital is the marginal product of capital plus the capital gain in its market value. But it
turns out that the insights from the simple case of no adjustment cost carry over reasonably
accurately to the more complicated case of positive adjustment costs.
     The effect of adjustment costs is to cut the immediate response of the capital stock to
shocks and to spread the effect over time. With adjustment costs, the decline in installed
capital that would raise the return to capital happens slowly. But another factor replaces the



                                               29
quantity adjustment. Tobin’s q falls discontinuously when a negative shock occurs. From
that time on, q rises back to normal, resulting in capital gains on installed capital.


8     Long-Horizon Fully Specified Dynamic Model
Now I’ll move to a more complete model that builds around this picture of intertemporal
equilibrium. It looks into the indefinite future. It’s basically a Solow growth model in terms
of technology, but has life-cycle consumption for some households. Like the Solow model,
it has inelastic labor supply. It permits unemployment along the lines I just discussed and
capital utilization is proportional to employment, so capital can be unemployed too. The
model incorporates the stock of houses and consumer durables as well as business capital,
with adjustment cost for both kinds of capital. The Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides model
governs the labor market. Some households are liquidity-constrained and have debt service
commitments. Financial friction drives a wedge between the return that households earn
from savings and the rate at which businesses and households borrow.
    The economy in the model lasts for many years and households last as long as the
economy. Households consume nondurable goods and services and the services of durables,
including housing. Output is divided among three uses: nondurables consumption, invest-
ment in new durables and housing, and investment in business capital. The length of a
period is a calendar quarter. Because the real interest rate is bounded by the negative of
the rate of inflation, a low-employment equilibrium may occur in the product market in any
quarter. Both types of investment incur standard quadratic adjustment costs, captured by
Tobin’s model of investment. As before, household preferences have constant intertemporal
elasticity of substitution.
    Uncertainty is not an important element in the model. In particular, the model lacks
any second-moment effects. Decision-makers have perfect foresight. I don’t regard this as a
realistic assumption, but experience has shown that perfect-foresight models give surprisingly
good accounts of what happens in a dynamic model once a major surprise becomes known.
    I solve in two phases. First, for the model when the interest-rate bound does not bind,
I find the consumption function C(z), where z is a vector of endogenous and exogenous
state variables. The elements of z are the two types of capital, business capital (plant
and equipment) k and household capital (houses and consumer durables) d, the level of
committed debt service s, and the level of the financial friction f . To find the function, I


                                              30
solve the model for many different values of the vector z and fit an interpolation function.
The Appendix reports the function and explains its derivation.
     For T early periods, the lower bound on the real interest rate associated with government
currency is binding. I solve this part of the model for the values of all variables in all of the
binding periods. Thus I treat all the values of all the variables as one big vector of 5T-8
unknowns and solve that many nonlinear equations jointly for their exact values. The model
requires that the last value of consumption match the consumption function C(z) for that
period’s values of the state variables z. The Appendix supplies more information about the
solution process.

8.1      Technology, adjustment costs, rental prices, and capital de-
         mand
The technology for producing output y is Cobb-Douglas with labor elasticity α:

                                         yt = nαt (xt kt−1 )1−α .                                (18)

Here xt is the utilization rate for capital. Output is the production of goods, which are
used to make capital, houses, and consumer durables, or are consumed directly. The price
of output is py,t .
     The value of the marginal product of labor is
                                                      1−α
                                               xt kt−1
                                  mt = αpy,t                .                                    (19)
                                                  nt
     Capital installation occurs up to the point where the marginal adjustment cost equals
the difference between the price of installed capital qk and the price of uninstalled capital,
py,t :
                                   kt − kt−1
                                    py,t κk  = qk,t − py,t .                       (20)
                                      kt−1
The parameter κ measures capital adjustment cost—if κk = 0, qk is always py,t and there
are no adjustment costs. Housing installation follows a similar equation with subscript d
replacing k.
     The rental prices of capital and durables include the financial frictions fk,t and fd,t :

                          pk,t = (1 + rn,t−1 )(1 + fk,t )qk,t−1 − (1 − δk )qk,t                  (21)

and
                         pd,t = (1 + rn,t−1 )(1 + fd,t )qk,t−1 − (1 − δd )qd,t .                 (22)

                                                   31
Here rn,t−1 is the nominal rate of interest for borrowing at the end of period t−1 and repaying
at the end of period t.
   The market-clearing condition for capital equates the value of the marginal product of
capital to the rental price:
                                                   py,t yt
                                         (1 − α)           = pk,t .                       (23)
                                                   xt kt−1

8.2    Household product demand
Households fall into two categories, unconstrained ones who follow the standard life-cycle
intertemporal model, and constrained ones who are at the corner of their intertemporal choice
resulting from an inability to engage in unsecured borrowing beyond a modest limit. Both
types of households have active choices about the division of spending between consumption
of nondurable goods and services on the one hand and the services of durable goods including
housing, on the other hand. A tilde (˜) denotes unconstrained households and a bar (¯)
denotes constrained ones.
   Consumption is a Cobb-Douglas composite of consumption of standard output, cy,t , and
the services of durables, dt−1 :
                                              c̃t = c̃φy,t d˜1−φ
                                                             t−1 ,                        (24)

and similarly for constrained households. The price of composite consumption is

                                   pc,t = φ−φ (1 − φ)−(1−φ) pφy,t p1−φ
                                                                   d,t .                  (25)

Here pd,t is the rental price of durables, as above. The unconstrained household’s demand
for the goods component of consumption satisfies:

                                            py,t c̃y,t = φpc,t c̃t                        (26)

and similarly for constrained households. Total nondurable consumption is:

                                        py,t cy,t = φpc,t (c̃t + c̄t )                    (27)

   Unconstrained households order their paths of composite consumption according to the
intertemporal utility function
                                                         1−1/σ
                                            X       c̃
                                                  β t
                                                    t
                                                           ,                              (28)
                                              t
                                                   1 − 1/σ
where σ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.

                                                        32
   Constrained households’ consumption is

                                   pc,t c̄t = py,t (ωyt − st yt ),                    (29)

where ω is the fraction of constrained households and st is the burden of interest and debt
repayments of constrained households as a fraction of output.
   Consumption of durables services is:

                                pd,t dt−1 = (1 − φ)pc,t (c̃t + c̄t ),                 (30)

8.3    The price of output
I take the price of output, py,t , to be an upward trend at rate π:

                                       py,t = p̄(1 − π)−t .                           (31)

8.4    Employment
As in the standard Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides model, all workers desire to work a stan-
dard number of hours. The only source of variation in aggregate hours of work arises from
unemployment.
   Hall (2009) gives a compact summary of the search-and-matching model whose canon is
Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). My approach generalizes wage determination relative to
the Nash bargain in that paper. Also, I simplify the treatment of labor-market dynamics
by considering only the stochastic equilibrium of labor turnover, which means that the
employment rate n measures the tightness of the labor market. The vacancy rate enters the
picture only in fast transitional dynamics of the matching process, which can be ignored in
a quarterly model without losing much. Thus the recruiting success rate is a function q(n)
of the employment rate. Success is higher when employment is lower.
   Without loss of generality, the wage paid to the worker can be decomposed into two
parts, corresponding to a two-part pricing contract (the decomposition is conceptual, not a
suggestion that actual compensation practices take this form). The worker pays a present
value Jt to the employer for the privilege of holding the job and then receives a flow of
compensation equal to the worker’s marginal revenue product.
   The cost of recruiting (holding a vacancy open) is γ per period, taken to be constant
in output terms. The zero-profit condition for recruiting equates the expected benefit of

                                                 33
recruiting to its cost:
                                        q(nt )Jt = py,t γ.                                  (32)

Thus unemployment rises if J falls. I take

                                          Jt = J(mt ),                                      (33)

an increasing function of the marginal revenue product of labor, mt , so that, in slack markets
with high xt and thus lower mt , a worker pays less for a job. I solve for employment as a
function of mt and take the function as constant-elastic:
                                               m ψ
                                                  t
                                      nt = n̄        ,                                      (34)
                                                m̄
where the elasticity ψ is positive, m̄ is the normal level of mt which I take to be its full-
employment value,                                           1−α
                                                      kt−1
                                     m̄ = αpy,t                     .                       (35)
                                                       n̄
Solving,
                                                      (1−α)ψ
                                         nt = n̄xt             .                            (36)

   The contraction in J when the marginal product of labor falls can be interpreted as wage
stickiness, or, more accurately, compensation stickiness. If total compensation is sticky and
the net benefit falls, then J must fall, because J is the present value of the difference between
the net benefit and the worker’s actual compensation.
   The separation or turnover rate is a fraction ν of employment, a constant. The cost of
filling a vacancy, γ/q, is 14 percent of a quarter’s earnings, according to Silva and Toledo
(2008).

8.5       The financial market
Only unconstrained households participate in asset markets on the margin. They price assets
with returns measured in units of output by the discounter,
                                                          −1/σ
                                       pc,t /py,t    c̃t+1
                             µt = β                              .                          (37)
                                    pc,t+1 /py,t+1     c̃t
I use the term real interest rate to mean the own interest rate on output. The optimal choice
of consumption growth results in a discounter that discounts the market real interest rate
to one:
                                         (1 + rt )µt = 1.                                   (38)

                                                  34
   The real and nominal interest rates are related as
                                                               py,t
                                       1 + rt = (1 + rn,t )          .                           (39)
                                                              py,t+1
Thus the zero lower bound on the nominal rate rn,t implies
                                                       py,t
                                         rt ≥ r̄t =          − 1.                                (40)
                                                      py,t+1

From the earlier assumption in equation (31),

                                               r̄t = −π.                                         (41)

8.6       Material balance
At the beginning of a period, the stock of installed capital is kt−1 and the stock of housing is
dt−1 . At the end of the period, output yt becomes available and is allocated to consumption
of goods cy,t , and investment in capital and housing, including adjustment cost, resulting in
the new capital stock, kt and new housing stock dt . Firms expend γnt /q(nt ) in recruiting
cost. The equation for the economy’s material balance is
        κk (kt − kt−1 )2       κd (dt − dt−1 )2                                           nt
 kt +                    +dt +                  = (1−δk )kt−1 +(1−δd )dt−1 +yt −cy,t −νγ        . (42)
        2      kt−1            2      dt−1                                               q(nt )

8.7       Standard v. low-utilization periods
The cases that I consider all have equilibria in which the interest bound binds and the model
is in low-utilization equilibrium for t ∈ [1, T ] and in standard equilibrium in later quarters.
Although one could imagine an economy that went in and out of the interest bound, I only
consider cases involving a single transition away from the bound.

8.8       Parameter values
Table 2 gives the parameter values I use in the base case and their sources. I choose the
elasticity of employment with respect to the marginal revenue product ψ to make capital
utilization xt move in proportion to employment:
                                                       1
                                              ψ=          .                                      (43)
                                                      1−α
This choice is analogous to the high wage elasticity found necessary to rationalize the ob-
served volatility of employment in all types of macro models.

                                                   35
Parameter Description                            Value      Source
          Labor elasticity of production
   α                                             0.646      NIPA income share
          function
  κk      Capital adjustment cost                  8        Hall (2004)

  κd      Durables adjustment cost                 8        See text

  δk                                                        NIPA Fixed Asset
          Capital depreciation rate              0.0188
                                                            Tables
                                                            NIPA Fixed Asset
  δd      Durables depreciation rate             0.0129
                                                            T bl
                                                            Tables

   Ԅ      Nondurables consumption share           0.82      NIPA
                                                            Derived from real
   β      Utility discount factor                0.9950
                                                            federal funds rate
          Intertemporal elasticity of
   σ                                               0.5      Hall (2009)
          substitution
   ω      Fraction of constrained consumption     0.58      See text

          Normal employment rate                 0.945      Average, 1948-2007

   ψ      Elasticity of employment function        2.8      See text

                                                 .14 of
  γ/q     Job-filling cost                      quarterly   Silva-Todeto (2007)
                                                  wage

   υ      Separation rate                         0.12      JOLTS, adjusted



                 Table 2: Parameter Values and Sources




                                           36
9     The Model’s Implications for an Economy Hit by
      Adverse Forces when the Real Interest Rate is Pinned
9.1    Scenario
I focus on a particular scenario to illustrate the principles. The scenario is only loosely
connected to actual events in the current slump. I consider an economy with a fixed inflation
rate at just below zero (π = −0.12 percent per year decline). The stock of housing and
consumer durables is 14 percent above normal at the outset, which I take to be roughly
late 2008. The stock of business capital k starts at its normal, stationary level. 58 percent
of consumption is in liquidity-constrained households with debt-service commitments of 6.7
percent of GDP that are gradually declining by 2 percent per quarter (st = (0.067)(0.98t )).
There is a financial friction f equivalent to a property tax on both types of capital at 2
percent per year, gradually declining at the same rate as for s.
    I solve the model over a long horizon (40 years) with the initial conditions just described.
Macroeconomists often describe a dynamic model’s properties in terms of impulse response
functions showing how an unexpected shock affects the key variables starting from the time
of the shock. My approach is different, because the forces that became so harmful in the
Great Slump did not strike as a shock, except for the financial friction, but rather built
up over about half a decade. Appendix D discusses the relation between my approach and
impulse response functions.

9.2    Results
Figure 17 shows the response of the unemployment rate to the combined effects of the three
adverse forces. Unemployment starts at a very high rate above 30 percent and gradually
declines during the four years that the interest rate is blocked from declining below 0.12
percent. Once the economy is free of the limit on the interest rate, the unemployment rate
drops immediately to its normal 5.5 percent.
    Figure 18 shows the response of the consumption levels of the two types of households.
Consumers who are able to level consumption by adjusting saving have flat profiles, with no
discontinuity at the point when the interest rate is no longer pinned at too high a level. On
the other hand, liquidity-constrained households consume more when their incomes rise as
unemployment drops to normal.


                                               37
                                           40
                                                          Interest rate pinned                   Interest rate free
                                           35

                            ment rate      30

                                           25
                      employm




                                           20

                                           15
                    Une




                                           10

                                            5

                                            0
                                                1   3     5    7    9    11      13 15 17   19     21   23    25      27
                                                                                  Quarter

Figure 17: Response of the Unemployment Rate to All Three Adverse Forces Jointly




                                          1.0
                                                          Interest rate pinned                   Interest rate free
                                          0.9

                                          0.8
                          onary outtput




                                          07
                                          0.7
                                                        Consumption of liquidity‐
                                          0.6
                                                        constrained households
                n of statio




                                          0.5

                                          0.4
         Fraction




                                          0.3           Consumption of unconstrained
                                                        lifey‐cycle households
                                          02
                                          0.2

                                          0.1

                                          0.0
                                                1   3     5    7    9   11       13 15 17   19     21   23    25      27
                                                                                  Quarter

      Figure 18: Response of Consumption to all three adverse forces jointly



                                                                              38
                                               0.5
                                                                 Interest rate pinned                   Interest rate free
                                               0.5

                                               0.4
                                                         Business plant and equipment

                               onary outtput
                                               04
                                               0.4

                                               0.3
                     n of statio


                                               0.3

                                               0.2
              Fraction




                                               0.2

                                               0.1
                                                           Houses and consumer durables
                                               0.1

                                               0.0
                                                     1      3    5    7    9    11      13 15 17   19     21   23    25      27
                                                                                         Quarter

          Figure 19: Response of Investment to All Three Adverse Forces Jointly

   Figure 19 shows the response of investment. Business investment takes a modest hit at
the outset, then recovers gradually. Investment in houses and consumer durables falls to zero
immediately and does not recover much until the interest rate is unpinned, when it jumps
up to normal levels.
   Figure 20 shows the response of the interest rate. For 4 years, it is pinned at 0.12 percent.
At the end of the period of high interest, the rate drops discontinuously to -0.20 percent.
That is enough, at that time, to restore full employment. The rate then gradually rises as
the adverse forces dissipate.
   Figure 21 shows the responses of unemployment to other combinations of adverse forces.
The blue line takes the financial friction out of the mix. The initial increase in unemployment
is not as severe, but the recovery is not as fast. Taking tight credit out as well isolates the
effect of the bulge of housing and durables, which by itself pushes unemployment up to about
13 percent.

9.3    Responses of a similar economy without a pinned real interest
       rate
What if the economy had been hit by the same adverse forces but the interest rate was com-
pletely free to do its job? Figure 22 shows what the model implies for that counterfactual.

                                                                                     39
                                              0.20
                                                                       Interest rate pinned                           Interest rate free
                                              0.15

      Interestt rate, annual perccent         0.10

                                              0.05

                                              0.00

                                              ‐0.05

                                              ‐0.10

                                              ‐0.15

                                              ‐0.20

                                              ‐0.25
                                                          1        3       5       7       9    11    13 15 17   19      21   23   25      27
                                                                                                       Quarter

Figure 20: Response of the Interest Rate to All Three Adverse Forces Jointly




                                              40
                                                                       Interest rate pinned                           Interest rate free
                                              35
                                                          Elevated housing‐durables, tight credit, and financial friction
                                              30
                                  ment rate




                                                                                                           Elevated housing‐durables
                                              25                                                           and tight credit
                            employm




                                              20

                                              15
                          Une




                                              10              Elevated housing‐
                                                              durables
                                               5

                                               0
                                                      1        3       5       7       9       11    13 15 17    19     21    23   25      27
                                                                                                      Quarter

Figure 21: Responses of the Unemployment Rate to the Three Adverse Forces



                                                                                                     40
              0.8


              0
              0.7                                              Consumption of nondurables
                                                               and services
              0.6


              0.5


              0.4


              0.3
                                                               Investment in plant and
              0.2                                              equipment

                                                           Investment in houses and
              0.1
                                                           consumer durables
              0.0
                    2008   2010   2012   2014   2016    2018


                     Figure 22: Shares of Output with Flexible Interest Rate

Consumption would start out a bit low, because of the inheritance of heavy debt burdens
on constrained households. Business investment would be above normal, because resources
released from consumption and investment in houses would flow into business capital. Un-
employment would stay at its normal level of 5.5 percent. All this because, as Figure 23
shows, the interest rate would have started out at a dramatically negative level. The negative
interest rate would stimulate business investment, would offset most of the decline in housing
investment that actually occurred, and would stimulate the consumption of unconstrained
households.

9.4    Conclusions from the model
These results demonstrate the potential extreme sensitivity of economic activity in a low-
inflation economy whose real interest rate has inadequate room to decline to offset a force
that lowers the equilibrium real rate. The same economy without a lower limit on the real
rate is completely stable and always operates at full employment.
   The model shares a feature with almost all dynamic general-equilibrium models—it has
almost no ability to generate long slumps endogenously. The persistence of the driving
forces controls the persistence of low employment. In the case of the overhang of housing
and consumer durables, the model generates only moderate persistence. If that were the

                                                   41
                           0.0



                          ‐0.5



                          ‐1.0



                          ‐1.5



                          ‐2.0



                          ‐2.5



                          ‐3.0
                                 2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018


                       Figure 23: Market-Clearing Real Interest Rate

only factor explaining the slump, the economy would be well on the way to recovery as of
the end of 2010.
   Evidence on the persistence of the two credit-related driving forces—consumer credit
standards and the financial friction—is mixed. This topic needs a lot more investigation.
   The model solution here corresponds qualitatively with Romer’s 1992 account of the
Great Depression and subsequent recovery. She shows that real interest rates were cruelly
high during the period from 1929 to 1933, when deflation was rampant. Then the resumption
of inflation and the continuation of zero nominal rates through 1941 resulted in quite negative
real rates except around the recession of 1937. The economy expanded rapidly during the
periods of negative real rates. She attributes the inflation not to conscious acts of the Fed,
but to its passive response to gold inflows resulting from the increase in the pegged price of
gold and from events in Europe. Thus, as in the model solution, a period of a pinned real
interest rate caused a huge contraction in activity and the release from the high real rate
caused a rapid expansion of activity.




                                                      42
10        Simple Sticky-Price and Sticky-Wage Models
The model developed here has three important properties that are departures from standard
economic thinking: (1) the rate of inflation in the price of output is close to exogenous,
(2) capital utilization falls in slumps, and (3) real wages are sticky. Various forms of these
departures have been found necessary in a number of modern dynamic general-equilibrium
macro models. In this section, I investigate whether any simpler specifications, closer to
standard economic principles, might deliver reasonable accounts of the facts about persistent
slumps.
   One possibility is to drop property (3), sticky real wages, in favor of normal equilibrium
in a competitive labor market without search frictions. In the model, this alternative corre-
sponds to setting the parameter ψ, the elasticity of employment with respect to the marginal
product of labor, to zero. In effect, the model with these two modifications is a real business
cycle model, which determines the real interest rate. Forcing the interest rate upward by
imposing the zero lower bound places the model out of equilibrium. A standard solution to
this problem is to drop labor-market equilibrium and require intertemporal equilibrium in
the output market, which amounts to assuming a sticky real wage—it generates an implicit
flat labor supply relation.
   Another possibility is to drop properties (1) and (2), and instead to take the output
market to be perfectly competitive and always in equilibrium. The simplest version of the
model assumes that labor supply is perfectly elastic at a fixed real wage. Shimer (2010)
takes this approach. The resulting model generates persistent slumps if some force causes
a reduction in the full-employment marginal product of labor. A fall in productivity would
have that effect. Because productivity rose at only slightly below normal rates during the
contraction phase of the slump, explanations of the slump based on declining productivity
are not plausible.
   Shimer proposes a fall in the business capital stock as a driving force. Because that event
drives down the full-employment marginal product of labor, the loss of capital causes an
immediate contraction. The level of employment falls by the same proportion as the capital
stock, thus restoring the marginal product of labor to the level of the rigid real wage. A
slump ensues until capital accumulation and productivity growth raise the full-employment
marginal product of capital back to the level of the fixed real wage.
   Data on business capital show no decline around 2008. Thus Shimer’s model in its stated


                                              43
form does not explain the current slump unless there has been a decline in the effective
capital stock not captured in the standard data. My assumption of declining utilization
of the capital stock would have that effect. At the end of the paper he suggests another
approach that might have this implication.
   Shimer’s model differs from the one developed here mainly in its lack of concern with the
decline of the safe short-term nominal interest rate to zero during the current U.S. slump
and in other slumps, such as the one that began 20 years ago in Japan. An extension of
his model to this topic would require adding features that deal with the nominal interest
rate. The assumption of a competitive output market, together with almost any standard
specification of the determination of the price level, would probably imply that the zero lower
bound on the nominal interest rate does not matter. The reason is that, in flexible-price
monetary models, the immediate effect of an adverse shock is a discontinuous drop in the
price level followed by a gradual rise. The expected rate of inflation rises the moment the
shock hits. Thus the nominal interest rate rises and the lower bound of zero is irrelevant.
   Adding sticky inflation to Shimer’s model would also require the model to take a stand
on what happens when the intertemporal output market has excess current supply. The
simplest answer—embodied in Krugman (1998) and Christiano et al. (2009)—is that the
quantity transacted is the amount demanded. When combined with the assumption of a
fixed real wage, this results in a model that accounts nicely for slumps. It is a fairly close
cousin of the model developed here, which differs mainly in its addition of a DMP-style
model of the labor market.


11     How Keynesian is the Model?
Modern macroeconomics views John Maynard Keynes as one of the major contributors
to current thinking, along with others, including Robert Solow, Milton Friedman, Franco
Modigliani, James Tobin, and Robert Lucas. I still have and read the copy of the General
Theory that I bought in 1962. By far Keynes’s most important contribution to macroeco-
nomic modeling was his insistence that unemployment be a central element of our thinking
about the business cycle. Keynes successfully disputed the notion that market clearing de-
scribes the labor market. The reigning theory of the labor market in macroeconomics today,
created by Peter Diamond, Dale Mortensen, and Christopher Pissarides (Mortensen and
Pissarides (1994)), replaces the cleared labor market with sequences of idiosyncratic trans-


                                              44
actions between workers and employers. Unemployment arises because job-seekers have to
wait until they are able to make a transaction.
   Keynes embodied his approach to modeling unemployment in a concept called aggregate
demand. Although schools of thought are unimportant in macroeconomics today, macroe-
conomists do fall into two camps. One disregards aggregate demand and builds models that
may or may not include unemployment. The other thinks that aggregate demand is really
important, but does not try to formalize it. A group in the middle—including me—thinks
that Keynes was onto something, but that it’s better to build fully specified models that try
to get to the underlying issues than to try to create a variable labeled aggregate demand.
I’ve already considered this issue without mentioning it. The demand function in Figure 2
might be seen as an aggregate demand function. If so, it’s not the function that Keynes had
in mind, because in Chapter 13 of the General Theory, Keynes explicitly rejected the view
embodied in that figure, that the interest rate is the price that balances current purchases
against future purchases.
   Keynes was the leader in recognizing the dependence of consumption on current income,
though his view is now considerably altered and improved by the life-cycle-permanent-income
model of Friedman and Modigliani.
   Keynes’s position on wage and price flexibility is hard to figure out from the General
Theory, but the idea that prices and nominal wages are sticky has come to be a central
feature of many models of aggregate fluctuations. In the New Keynesian model (Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005)), the slow adjustment of wages and prices leads to persistent
departures from full employment and sensitivity of output to purely monetary shocks. In
the model I have presented here, the only role—but a central one—for price stickiness is to
turn the zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate into a limitation on the real interest
rate. It’s not stickiness of prices that matters, but stickiness of expected price changes.
   Outside the macroeconomics profession, Keynes is seen mainly as an advocate of gov-
ernment purchases to cure slumps. There’s essentially no dispute within that profession
that GDP rises and unemployment falls if the government buys more stuff. But the failure
of the government to buy more stuff in 2009, when the need seemed most intense and the
party favoring that policy had firm control of the government, seems to make government
purchases irrelevant to stabilization policy. It’s not that purchases are ineffective but that
the government is incapable of executing a rapid and large increase in purchases.



                                              45
   Keynes’s thinking informed and advanced macroeconomics. The analysis of slumps builds
on and advances his ideas and those of his successors. Paul Samuelson’s “neoclassical syn-
thesis” is alive and well in macroeconomics.


12     Macro Policy
Are there any policy moves available now that would speed up the slow recovery? Monetary
policy has gone to its limit in pushing interest rates down. The government seems to lack
the logistical tools to expand government expenditures significantly and the political wind
is blowing in the wrong direction to push that lever very hard.
   Earlier commentary, starting with Krugman (1998), has suggested that central banks
could overcome the problem of high real interest rates in slumps by raising expected inflation.
One popular proposal is to make the goal of monetary policy one of keeping the price level
on a growth path, rather than stabilizing inflation. Under this policy, the inflation rate
would rise to correct a shortfall in the price level that developed during a slump. Then
every episode of inadequate inflation would automatically generate expectations of corrective
higher inflation and the problem of excess real interest rate from low inflation would be self-
correcting. The Fed has declined to embrace this formulation of policy. Starting the policy in
the conditions of the beginning of 2011 seems unlikely to raise inflation expectations, given
the lack of any policy tool that seems capable of changing the rate of inflation under these
conditions. Adopting a price-level target as a longer-term formulation of monetary policy
could prove effective in raising expectations of inflation to head off incipient slumps.
   Buiter (2009) discusses ideas dating from the Great Depression that would depress the
return on currency during periods of deflation and permit adequately negative real interest
rates. He considers a number of alterations in currency policy that could have the same
effect in a modern economy, such as the abolition of government-issued currency. None of
these policies seem even remotely likely of adoption.
   Tax policies that emulate the effect of low real rates could ameliorate the burden of high
real rates by making current purchasing cheaper than future. A key feature of these policies
is to defer the time when the policy reverses itself until after full employment prevails. The
cash-for-clunkers program in 2009 induced a significant bulge in car purchases, but because
it lasted only a few months, it only deferred purchases for that many months and did little
to shift purchases from a time of full employment to the present, according to Mian and Sufi


                                               46
(2010a). The effective program would place a high subsidy on current purchasing and phase
out the subsidy, eventually becoming a consumption tax that financed the earlier subsidy.
The shrinkage rate of the subsidy would amount to a negative real interest rate in consumer
purchasing decisions.
   One idea is to phase in a tax that adds to the prices of goods, such as a value-added
tax (Feldstein (2002)). The anticipation of higher later prices incorporating higher tax rates
would have the same accelerating effect on spending as a negative interest rate. Income taxes
could be phased out at the same time, with no net budgetary effect. Britain did this when
it joined the European Union at a time when the resulting inflation was harmful. Now that
we need some inflation, the idea looks better. A second virtue is that a value-added tax is
a consumption tax, with well-known efficiency benefits.
   For a complete discussion involving a full set of fiscal instruments, but in the specific
context of the New Keynesian model, see Correia, Farhi, Nicolini and Teles (2010).
   The most important policy lesson is to prevent the repetition of the poor oversight of
government-protected financial institutions that gave us too much housing, too many cars,
and too much debt during the past decade.


13       Concluding Remarks
An economy with a disabled real interest rate is in deep trouble when one type of spending—
homebuilding and consumer durables in the current slump—declines. A slump will last until
the affected spending resumes its normal level. Consequently, the slump may last many
years.
   The analysis and calculations in this paper assume that the gradual price adjustment
described by the Phillips curve does not occur. Inflation remains at the same rate. If
inflation declines and turns into growing deflation, the slump will worsen, as the real interest
rate rises. So far in the current slump, notwithstanding episodes of grave concern, no slide
into deflation has occurred.




                                              47
References
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, “The Financial Accelerator in a
    Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in John Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,
    Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1B, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999, chapter 21,
    pp. 1341 – 1393.

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston, “Consumption Inequality and Partial
    Insurance,” American Economic Review, December 2008, 98 (5), 1887–1921.

Buiter, Willem H., “Negative Nominal Interest Rates: Three Ways to Overcome the Zero
    Lower Bound,” The North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 2009, 20 (3),
    213 – 238.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Understanding Booms and Busts
    in Housing Markets,” November 2010. Department of Economics, Northwestern Uni-
    versity.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Nominal Rigidities
    and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Jounal of Political Economy,
    2005, 113 (1), 1–45.

     ,         , and Sergio Rebelo, “When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?,”
    October 2009. NBER Working Paper 15394.

Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, “Policy at the Zero
    Bound,” December 2010. Banco de Portugal.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
    Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003, 2003 (1), pp.
    139–211.

Feldstein, Martin, “Commentary: Is There a Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy?,” Eco-
    nomic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2002, pp. 151–162.

Friedman, Milton, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 1968, 58
    (1), pp. 1–17.


                                            48
Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi, “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,” April 2009.

Hall, Robert E., “Measuring Factor Adjustment Costs,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    August 2004, 119 (3), 899–927.

     , “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and the Marginal
    Product of Labor,” Journal of Political Economy, April 2009, 117 (2), 281–323.

    , “Why Does the Economy Fall to Pieces after a Financial Crisis?,” Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, Fall 2010, 24 (4), 3–20.

    , “The High Sensitivity of Economic Activity to Financial Frictions,” Economic Journal,
    2011. Forthcoming.

Kocherlakota, Narayana, “Two Models of Land Overvaluation and Their Implications,”
    October 2010. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Krugman, Paul R., “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, September 1998, (2), 137–205.

Krusell, Per and Jr. Smith Anthony A., “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroe-
    conomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 1998, 106 (5), pp. 867–896.

Martin, Alberto and Jaume Ventura, “Theoretical Notes on Bubbles and the Current Crisis,”
    September 2010. NBER Working Paper 16399.

Mian, Atif R. and Amir Sufi, “The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 ‘Cash
    for Clunkers’ Program,” 2010.

     and       , “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007−09,” IMF Economic Re-
    view, July 2010, 58 (2), 74–117.

Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher Pissarides, “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
    Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 1994, 61 (0), 397–415.

Romer, Christina D., “What Ended the Great Depression?,” The Journal of Economic
    History, 1992, 52 (4), pp. 757–784.

Shimer, Robert, “Wage Rigidities and Jobless Recoveries,” November 2010. Department of
    Economics, University of Chicago.

                                             49
Silva, Jose A. and Manuel Toledo, “Labor Turnover Costs and the Cyclical Behavior of
   Vacancies and Unemployment,” February 2008. Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona
   and Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, “Modeling Inflation after the Crisis,” Economic
   Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2010. Forthcoming.

Townsend, Robert M., “Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state veri-
   fication,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1979, 21 (2), 265 – 293.




                                           50
