NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A MODEL OF MOMENTUM
Laura Xiaolei Liu
Lu Zhang
Working Paper 16747
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16747

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2011

For helpful comments, we thank Heitor Almeida, Ilona Babenko, Frederico Belo, John Campbell,
Hui Chen, Jerome Detemple, Bob Dittmar, Hui Guo, Dirk Hackbarth, Kewei Hou, Jennifer Huang,
Tim Johnson, Stavros Panageas, Neil Pearson, Marcel Rindisbacher, Mark Seasholes, Berk Sensoy,
Ren´e Stulz,˛Jules van Binsbergen, Mike Weisbach, Ingrid Werner, Peter Wong, Chen Xue, Motohiro
Yogo, Frank Yu, and other seminar participants at Boston University, Cheung Kong Graduate School
of Business, The China Europe International Business School, The 2010 HKUST Finance Symposium
on Asset Pricing/Investment,˛The Ohio State University, The Third Shanghai Winter Finance Conference,
The Minnesota Macro-Asset Pricing Conference in 2011, University of Cincinnati, and University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The portfolio data, the SAS programs for constructing the portfolio
data, and the Matlab programs for˛GMM estimation and tests are available upon request. The paper
supersedes our previous work titled “Investment-based momentum profits.” All remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Laura Xiaolei Liu and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

A Model of Momentum
Laura Xiaolei Liu and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 16747
January 2011, Revised March 2011, Revised June 2011
JEL No. G12,G14,G31
ABSTRACT
Optimal investment of firms implies that expected stock returns are tied with the expected marginal
benefit of investment divided by the marginal cost of investment. Winners have higher expected
growth and expected marginal productivity (two major components of marginal benefits of investment),
and earn higher expected stock returns than losers. Theinvestment-based model succeeds in capturing
average momentum profits, reversal of momentum in long horizons, as well as the interaction of
momentum with with market capitalization, firm age, trading volume, and stock return volatility.
However, the model fails to reproduce procyclical momentum profits.

Laura Xiaolei Liu
Finance Department
School of Business and Management
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Kowloon, Hong Kong
fnliu@ust.hk
Lu Zhang
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
760A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
zhanglu@fisher.osu.edu

1

Introduction

Momentum is a major puzzle in financial economics. Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) document that stocks with high recent performance continue to earn higher average returns over
the next three to twelve months than stocks with low recent performance. They interpret
the evidence as saying that “investor expectations are systematically biased (p. 90).”1 The
subsequent literature has mostly followed their interpretation. Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998), and Hong and Stein (1999), in particular, have constructed behavioral models to reproduce momentum with psychological biases
such as conservatism, self-attributive overconfidence, and slow information diffusion. This interpretation is disturbing because it calls into question rational expectations, an assumption
underlying the bulk of the modern literature on finance and macroeconomics.
We use the neoclassical theory of investment to examine whether momentum in asset
prices is correctly connected to investment through first-order conditions of firms. Under
constant returns to scale, the stock return equals the (levered) investment return (e.g.,
Cochrane (1991)). The investment return (the next-period marginal benefit of investment
divided by the current-period marginal cost of investment) is tied with firm characteristics
via firms’ optimality conditions. Intuitively, winners have higher expected growth and higher
expected marginal productivity (two major components of the expected marginal benefit of
investment). As such, winners earn higher expected stock returns than losers.
We use generalized method of moments (GMM) to match average levered investment
returns to average stock returns. The model does a good job in capturing average momentum profits across ten momentum deciles from Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). The winnerminus-loser decile has a small model error (alpha) of 0.44% per annum, which is negligible
compared to the alpha of 16.95% from the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) and the
1
Many subsequent studies have confirmed and refined this finding. Rouwenhorst (1998) documents
momentum profits in international markets. Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999) report large momentum profits
in industry portfolios. Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000) show that small firms with low analyst coverage display
stronger momentum. Lee and Swaminathan (2000) document that momentum is more prevalent in stocks
with high trading volume. Jegadeesh and Titman (2001) show that momentum remains large in the post-1993
sample. Jiang, Lee, and Zhang (2005) and Zhang (2006) report that momentum profits are higher among
firms with higher information uncertainty measured by, for example, size, firm age, and stock return volatility.

2

alpha of 19.15% from the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model. The alphas of individual
deciles in our model are also substantially smaller than those in the two alternative models.
In particular, the mean absolute error across the deciles is 0.80% per annum in our model,
but is 3.68% in the CAPM and 4.08% in the Fama-French model.
The model suggests several connections between asset price momentum and quantity
variables. All else equal, firms with low investment-to-capital, high expected investment-tocapital growth, high expected sales-to-capital, high market leverage, low expected rates of depreciation, and low expected corporate bond returns should earn high expected stock returns.
Comparative statics show that expected investment-to-capital growth is the most important,
and expected sales-to-capital is the second most important component of momentum. Without the cross-sectional variation in the expected growth, the alpha of the winner-minus-loser
decile jumps to 11.37% per annum from 0.44% in the benchmark estimation. Without the
cross-sectional variation in the expected sales-to-capital, the alpha becomes 7.14%.
Going beyond matching average momentum profits via GMM, the model is also consistent with several other stylized facts of momentum. Momentum predicted in the model
reverts beyond the second year after portfolio formation. The low persistence of the expected
investment-to-capital growth is the underlying force of this reversal. As in the data, the predicted momentum profits cannot be captured by the CAPM or the Fama-French model. The
cash flow component of the investment return also displays long run risks similar to the dividend component of the stock return as in Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005). However,
contrary to Cooper, Gutierrez, and Hameed’s (2004) evidence on stock returns, the predicted
momentum profits are not substantially higher following up markets than down markets.
Finally, our model goes a long way in capturing the interaction of momentum with firm
characteristics. The model outperforms the CAPM and the Fama-French model in fitting the
average returns across two-way three-by-three portfolios from interacting momentum with
size, firm age, trading volume, or stock return volatility. The alphas in our model do not
vary systematically with prior six-month returns. In particular, across the small, median,
and big size terciles the winner-minus-loser tercile alphas are −0.93%, −0.98%, and −0.83%
per annum, respectively. In contrast, the CAPM alphas are 10.16%, 7.89%, and 6.09%, and
3

the Fama-French alphas are 11.55%, 9.64%, and 7.77%, respectively. However, the mean
absolute error across the nine size and momentum portfolios has a similar magnitude in our
model as those in the CAPM and the Fama-French model.
Cochrane (1991, 1996, 1997) is the first to use the neoclassical investment model to study
asset prices. Lettau and Ludvigson (2002) examine the impact of time-varying risk premiums
on aggregate investment. Merz and Yashiv (2007) quantify the role of labor in stock market
valuation. Belo (2010) uses the marginal rate of transformation as the stochastic discount
factor. Gourio (2010) examines the effect of putty-clay technology on stock market volatility.
Jermann (2010) studies the equity premium derived from firms’ optimality conditions. While
these prior studies focus on aggregate stock market, we focus on the cross section of returns.
How to interpret the cross section is one of the biggest questions in financial economics.2 Liu,
Whited, and Zhang (2009) start to use the neoclassical investment model to examine how
stock returns relate to earnings surprises, book-to-market equity, and investment in the cross
section. We study momentum, which, as noted, is a major puzzle in financial economics.
The rest of the paper unfolds as follows. Section 2 sets up the model. Section 3 describes
our research design and data. Section 4 presents our estimation results. Section 5 concludes.

2

The Model of the Firms

The neoclassical investment model is standard. Firms use capital and costlessly adjustable
inputs to produce a homogeneous output. These inputs are chosen each period to maximize
operating profits, defined as revenue minus the expenditure on the inputs. Taking operating profits as given, firms choose investment to maximize the market value of equity. Let
Π(Kit , Xit ) denote the operating profits of firm i at time t, in which Kit is capital and Xit is a
vector of exogenous aggregate and firm-specific shocks. We assume that Π(Kit , Xit ) exhibits
2

For example, Barberis and Thaler (2003, p. 1085) argue: “While the behavior of the aggregate stock
market is not easy to understand from the rational point of view, promising rational models have nonetheless
been developed and can be tested against behavioral alternatives. Empirical studies of the behavior of
individual stocks have unearthed a set of facts which is altogether more frustrating for the rational paradigm.
Many of these facts are about the cross-section of average returns: they document that one group of stocks
earns higher average returns than another. These facts have come to be known as ‘anomalies’ because they
cannot be explained by the simplest and most intuitive model of risk and return in the financial economist’s
toolkit, the Capital Asset Pricing Model, or CAPM (original emphasis).”

4

constant returns to scale, that is, Π(Kit , Xit ) = Kit ∂Π(Kit , Xit )/∂Kit . In addition, firms
have a Cobb-Douglas production function, meaning that the marginal product of capital is
∂Π(Kit , Xit )/∂Kit = κYit /Kit , in which κ > 0 is the capital’s share in output and Yit is sales.
Capital evolves as Kit+1 = Iit + (1 − δit )Kit , in which capital depreciates at an exogenous
proportional rate of δ it . We allow δ it to be firm-specific and time-varying. Firms incur adjustment costs when investing. The adjustment cost function, denoted Φ(Iit , Kit ), is increasing
and convex in Iit , decreasing in Kit , and of constant returns to scale in Iit and Kit . We use
the standard quadratic functional form: Φ(Iit , Kit ) = (a/2)(Iit /Kit )2 Kit , in which a > 0.
Firms can borrow with one-period debt. At the beginning of time t, firm i issues debt,
Bit+1 , which must be repaid at the beginning of t+1. Firms take as given the gross risky
interest rate on Bit , denoted ritB , which varies across firms and over time. Taxable corporate
profits equal operating profits less capital depreciation, adjustment costs, and interest expenses: Π(Kit , Xit )−δ it Kit −Φ(Iit , Kit )−(ritB −1)Bit . Let τ t be the corporate tax rate, τ t δ it Kit
be the depreciation tax shield, and τ t (ritB −1)Bit be the interest tax shield. Firm i’s payout is:
Dit ≡ (1 − τ t )[Π(Kit , Xit ) − Φ(Iit , Kit )] − Iit + Bit+1 − ritB Bit + τ t δ it Kit + τ t (ritB − 1)Bit . (1)
Let Mt+1 be the stochastic discount factor from t to t + 1. Taking Mt+1 as given, firm i
maximizes its cum-dividend market value of equity:
Vit ≡

max

{Iit+s ,Kit+s+1 ,Bit+s+1 }∞
s=0

Et

"∞
X
s=0

#

Mt+s Dit+s ,

(2)

subject to a transversality condition: limT →∞ Et [Mt+T Bit+T +1 ] = 0. The firm’s first-order
I
I
condition for investment implies Et [Mt+1 rit+1
] = 1, in which rit+1
is the investment return:


2 
h

i
Iit+1
Iit+1
Yit+1
a
+ τ t+1 δ it+1 + (1 − δ it+1 ) 1 + (1 − τ t+1 )a Kit+1
(1 − τ t+1 ) κ Kit+1 + 2 Kit+1
I
 
. (3)
rit+1 ≡
1 + (1 − τ t )a KIitit

The investment return is the marginal benefit of investment at t + 1 divided by the
marginal cost of investment at t. The optimality condition says that the marginal cost of
investment equals the marginal benefit of investment discounted to t. In the numerator of
5

the investment return, (1 − τ t+1 )κYit+1 /Kit+1 is the after-tax marginal product of capital,
(1 − τ t+1 )(a/2)(Iit+1 /Kit+1 )2 is the after-tax marginal reduction in adjustment costs, and
τ t+1 δ it+1 is the marginal depreciation tax shield. The last term in the numerator is the
marginal continuation value of an extra unit of capital net of depreciation, in which the
marginal continuation value equals the marginal cost of investment in the next period.
Ba
B
B
Define the after-tax corporate bond return as rit+1
≡ rit+1
− (rit+1
− 1)τ t+1 . Firm i’s
Ba
first-order condition for new debt implies Et [Mt+1 rit+1
] = 1. Define Pit ≡ Vit − Dit as the
S
ex-dividend market value of equity, rit+1
≡ (Pit+1 + Dit+1 )/Pit as the stock return, and

wit ≡ Bit+1 /(Pit + Bit+1 ) as the market leverage. The investment return then equals the
weighted average of the stock return and the after-tax corporate bond return:
I
Ba
S
rit+1
= wit rit+1
+ (1 − wit ) rit+1
.

(4)

Equations (3) and (4) provide the microfoundation for the weighted average cost of capital
approach to capital budgeting in corporate finance (e.g., Berk and DeMarzo (2010, chapter
18)). Intuitively, firm i will optimally choose investment such that the marginal benefit of
investment at t+1 discounted by the weighted average cost of capital equals the marginal cost
of investment. At the margin, the net present value of the last infinitesimal project is zero.
S
Solving for the stock return, rit+1
, from equation (4) yields:
S
Iw
rit+1
= rit+1
≡

I
Ba
rit+1
− wit rit+1
,
1 − wit

(5)

Iw
in which rit+1
is the levered investment return. If wit = 0, equation (5) collapses to the equiv-

alence between the stock return and the investment return, a relation due to Cochrane (1991).

3

Econometric Design

We lay out the GMM application in Section 3.1, and describe our data in Section 3.2.

6

3.1

GMM Estimation and Tests

We use GMM to test the first moment restriction implied by equation (5):
 S

Iw
E rit+1
− rit+1
= 0.

(6)

 S

Iw
αqi ≡ ET rit+1
− rit+1
,

(7)

In particular, we define the model error (alpha) from the model as:

in which ET [·] is the sample mean of the series in the brackets.
We estimate the parameters a and κ using GMM on equation (6) applied to momentum
portfolios. We use one-stage GMM with the identity weighting matrix to preserve the economic structure of the portfolios (e.g., Cochrane (1996)). This choice befits our economic
question because short-term prior returns are economically important in providing a wide
spread in the cross section of average stock returns. Following the standard GMM procedure
(e.g., Hansen and Singleton (1982)), we estimate the parameters, b ≡ (a, κ), by minimizing
a weighted combination of the sample moments (6). Let gT be the sample moments. The
GMM objective function is a weighted sum of squares of the model errors across a given
set of assets, gT′ WgT , in which W = I, the identity matrix. Let D = ∂gT /∂b and S a
consistent estimate of the variance-covariance matrix of the sample errors gT . We estimate
S using a standard Bartlett kernel with a window length of five. The estimate of b, denoted
b̂, is asymptotically normal with variance-covariance matrix:
var(b̂) =

1 ′
(D WD)−1 D′ WSWD(D′WD)−1 .
T

(8)

To construct standard errors for the alphas on individual portfolios, we use the variancecovariance matrix for the model errors, gT :
var(gT ) =

 
′
1
I − D(D′ WD)−1 D′ W S I − D(D′ WD)−1 D′ W .
T

(9)

We follow Hansen (1982, lemma 4.1) to form a χ2 test that all model errors are jointly zero:
gT′ [var(gT )]+ gT

∼

χ2 (# moments − # parameters),
7

(10)

in which χ2 is the chi-square distribution, and the superscript + is pseudo-inversion.

3.2

Data

Firm-level data are from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) monthly stock
file and the annual 2008 Standard and Poor’s Compustat industrial files. Firms with primary SIC classifications between 4900 and 4999 (regulated firms) or between 6000 and 6999
(financial firms) are omitted. The sample is from 1963 to 2008. We keep only firm-year
observations with positive total assets (Compustat annual item AT>0), positive sales (item
SALE>0), nonnegative debt (item DLTT+DTC≥0), positive market value of assets (item
DLTT+DTC+CSHO×PRCC F>0), positive gross capital stock (item PPEGT>0) at the
most recent fiscal yearend as of portfolio formation, and positive gross capital stock one year
prior to the most recent fiscal year. Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), we exclude
stocks with prices per share less than $5 at the portfolio formation month.
3.2.1

Testing Portfolios

We use ten momentum deciles as the benchmark set of testing portfolios. We construct
the portfolios by sorting all stocks at the end of every month t on the basis of their past
six-month returns from t − 6 to t − 1, and holding the resulting deciles for the subsequent
six months from t + 1 to t + 6. We skip one month between the end of the ranking period
and the beginning of the holding period (month t) to avoid potential microstructure biases.
Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), we equal-weight all stocks within a given portfolio.
Because we use the six-month holding period while forming the portfolios monthly, we have
six sub-portfolios for each decile in a given holding month. We average across these six
sub-portfolios to obtain the monthly returns of a given decile.
3.2.2

Variable Measurement

The capital stock, Kit , is net property, plant, and equipment (Compustat annual item
PPENT). Investment, Iit , is capital expenditures (item CAPX) minus sales of property,
plant, and equipment (item SPPE). We set SPPE to be zero if the item is missing. The
capital depreciation rate, δit , is the amount of depreciation (item DP) divided by the capital
8

stock. Output, Yit , is sales (item SALE). Total debt, Bit+1 , is long-term debt (item DLTT)
plus short term debt (item DLC). Market leverage, wit , is the ratio of total debt to the sum
of total debt and market value of equity. The tax rate, τ t , is the statutory corporate income
tax rate from the Commerce Clearing House’s annual publications.
In the model time-t stock variables are at the beginning of year t, and time-t flow variables are over the course of year t. However, both stock and flow variables in Compustat
are recorded at the end of year. We take, for example, for the year 2003 any time-t stock
variable such as Ki2003 from the 2002 balance sheet, and any flow variable such as Ii2003 from
the 2003 income or cash flow statement. Firm-level corporate bond data are rather limited,
and few or even none of the firms in several testing portfolios have corporate bond returns.
To measure the pre-tax corporate bond returns in a broad sample, we follow Blume, Lim,
and MacKinlay (1998) to impute the credit ratings for firms with no crediting ratings data
in Compustat. We then assign the corporate bond returns for a given credit rating from
Ibbotson Associates to the firms with the same credit rating.3 Corporate bond returns are
equal-weighted across the firms in a given portfolio.
3.2.3

Timing

Momentum portfolios are rebalanced monthly, but Compustat variables are available annually.4 Aligning the timing of portfolio stock returns with the timing of portfolio investment
3

Specifically, we first estimate an ordered probit model that relates credit ratings to observed explanatory
variables. The model is estimated using all the firms that have data on credit ratings (Compustat annual
item SPLTICRM). We then use the fitted value to calculate the cutoff value for each credit rating. For
firms without credit ratings we estimate their credit scores using the coefficients estimated from the ordered
probit model and impute credit ratings by applying the cutoff values of different credit ratings. We assign the
corporate bond returns for a given credit rating from Ibbotson Associates to all the firms with the same credit
rating. The ordered probit model contains the following explanatory variables: interest coverage, the ratio
of operating income after depreciation (item OIADP) plus interest expense (item XINT) to interest expense;
the operating margin, the ratio of operating income before depreciation (item OIBDP) to sales (item SALE),
long-term leverage, the ratio of long-term debt (item DLTT) to assets (item AT); total leverage, the ratio of
long-term debt plus debt in current liabilities (item DLC) plus short-term borrowing (item BAST) to assets;
the natural logarithm of the market value of equity (item PRCC C times item CSHO) deflated to 1973 by
the consumer price index; as well as the market beta and residual volatility from the market regression. We
estimate the beta and residual volatility for each firm in each calendar year with at least 200 daily returns from
CRSP. We adjust for nonsynchronous trading with one leading and one lagged values of the market return.
4
We have explored quarterly Compustat data set. The results on matching average momentum profits are
largely similar to those obtained with annual Compustat data. We opt to use annual data for several reasons.
First, doing so provides a longer sample starting from 1963. In contrast, because of data availability of

9

returns is intricate because the momentum portfolios’ composition changes monthly. This
measurement difficulty should, ex ante, go against any effort in identifying fundamental driving forces underlying momentum profits. Also, any timing misalignment should have less
impact on the magnitude of average momentum profits than on the dynamics of momentum.
We construct monthly levered investment returns of a momentum portfolio from its annual accounting variables to match with its monthly stock returns. Consider the loser decile.
In any given month we have six sub-portfolios for the decile because of the six-month holding
period. For instance, for the loser decile in July of year t, the first sub-portfolio is formed
at the end of January of year t based on the prior six-month return from July to December
of year t − 1. Skipping the month of January of year t, this sub-portfolio’s holding period is
from February to July of year t. The second sub-portfolio is formed at the end of February
of year t, based on the prior six-month return from August of year t − 1 to January of year
t, and its holding period is from March to August of year t. The last (sixth) sub-portfolio is
formed at the end of June of year t, and its holding period is from July to December of year t.
Our timing alignment contains three steps. The first step is to determine the timing of
firm-level characteristics at the sub-portfolio level. The general approach is to combine the
holding period information with the time interval from the midpoint of the current fiscal year
to the midpoint of the next fiscal year to decide from which fiscal yearend we take firm-level
characteristics. As noted, in Compustat stock variables are measured at the end of the fiscal
year and flow variables are over the course of the fiscal year. As such, the investment return
constructed from annual accounting variables goes roughly from the midpoint of the current
fiscal year to the midpoint of the next fiscal year. For firms with December fiscal yearend,
for example, the midpoint time interval is from July of year t to June of year t + 1. For firms
with June fiscal yearend, the time interval is from January to December of year t + 1.
Figure 1 illustrates the timing of firm-level characteristics for firms with December fiscal
quarterly property, plant, and equipment, the quarterly sample can only start from 1977. Second, quarterly
data display strong seasonality that affects the dynamic properties of momentum profits. A common way
of controlling for seasonality is to average the quarterly observations within a given year. But doing so is
equivalent to using the annual data. Finally, the annual data are of higher quality than the quarterly data
because quarterly accounting statements are not required by law to be audited by an independent auditor.

10

yearend.5 Take, for example, the first sub-portfolio of the loser decile in July of year t. As
noted, this sub-portfolio’s holding period is from February of year t to July of year t. For
firms in this sub-portfolio with December fiscal yearend, the first five months (February to
June) lie to the left of the applicable time interval. For these five months we use accounting
variables at the fiscal yearend of calendar year t to measure economic variables dated t + 1
in the model, and use accounting variables at the fiscal yearend of t − 1 to measure economic
variables dated t in the model. However, for the last month in the holding period (July), because the month is within the time interval, we use accounting variables at the fiscal yearend
of t + 1 to measure economic variables dated t + 1 in the model, and use accounting variables
at the fiscal yearend of t to measure economic variables dated t in the model.
For firms with December fiscal yearend in the sixth sub-portfolio of the loser decile in
July of year t, all the holding period months (July to December of year t) lie within the
applicable time interval. As such, we use accounting variables at the fiscal yearend of t + 1
to measure economic variables dated t + 1 in the model, and use accounting variables at the
fiscal yearend of t to measure economic variables dated t in the model. We apply the same
general approach to firms with non-December fiscal yearend (see Appendix A).
The second step is to construct the components of the levered investment return at the
sub-portfolio level. For each month we calculate characteristics for a given sub-portfolio by
aggregating firm characteristics over the firms in the sub-portfolio (e.g., Fama and French
(1995)). For example, the sub-portfolio investment-to-capital for month t, Iit /Kit , is the sum
of investment for all the firms within the sub-portfolio in month t divided by the sum of capital for the same set of firms in month t. Other components such as Yit+1 /Kit+1 , Iit+1 /Kit+1 ,
and δ it+1 are calculated analogously. Because portfolio composition changes from month to
month, the sub-portfolio characteristics also change from month to month.
The final step is to construct the levered investment returns for a given testing portfolio to
match with its stock returns. Continue to use the loser decile as the example. After obtaining
the decile’s sub-portfolio characteristics, for each month we take the cross-sectional average
5

In the Compustat sample from 1961 to 2008, the five most frequent months in which firms end their
fiscal year are December (60.4%), June (8.7%), September (6.9%), March (5.3%), and January (3.9%).

11

characteristics over the six sub-portfolios to obtain the characteristics for the loser decile for
that month. We then use these characteristics to construct the investment returns for each
month using equation (3). The investment returns are in annual terms but vary monthly because the sub-portfolio characteristics change monthly. After obtaining firm-level corporate
bond returns from Blume, Lim, and MacKinlay’s (1998) imputation procedure, we construct
portfolio bond returns for a testing portfolio in the same way as portfolio stock returns.
Finally, we construct levered investment returns at the portfolio level using equation (5).

4

Estimation Results

We study average momentum profits in Section 4.1, the dynamics of momentum in Section
4.2, and the interaction of momentum with firm characteristics in Section 4.3.

4.1

Average Momentum Profits

We ask whether the model captures the average returns across ten momentum deciles, and
compare the model’s performance with that of the CAPM and the Fama-French model.
4.1.1

Tests of Asset Pricing Models on the Benchmark Momentum Deciles

Panel A of Table 1 reports the tests of the CAPM and the Fama-French model. The data for
the Fama-French factors are from Kenneth French’s Web site. The average return increases
monotonically from 3.39% per annum for the loser decile to 20.75% for the winner decile.
The average return spread of 17.36% is more than seven standard errors from zero. The
CAPM alpha and the Fama-French alpha of the winner-minus-loser decile are 16.95% and
19.15%, respectively, both of which are more than eight standard errors from zero. Both
models are strongly rejected by the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989, GRS) test.6
6

We have also tested the standard consumption-CAPM. The stochastic discount factor is given by the
power utility, Mt+1 = ρ(Ct+1 /Ct )−γ , in which ρ is the time preference, γ is risk aversion, and Ct is annual
per capita consumption of nondurables and services from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The moment
S
S
conditions are E[Mt+1 (rit+1
− rf t+1 )] = 0 and E[Mt+1 rf t+1 ] = 1, in which rit+1
is the stock return of
testing portfolio i, and rf t+1 is the risk-free interest rate. The consumption-CAPM alpha is calculated as
S
ET [Mt+1 (rit+1
−rf t+1 )]/ET [Mt+1 ]. Without showing the details, we can report that the consumption-CAPM
results are largely similar to those for the CAPM and the Fama-French model. The consumption-CAPM
alpha of the winner-minus-loser decile has a similar magnitude as its CAPM and Fama-French alphas. In
addition, the time preference estimate is above two, and the risk aversion estimate is above 75.

12

There are only two parameters in our model: the adjustment cost parameter, a, and the
capital’s share, κ. We estimate a to be 2.81 with a standard error of 0.96 and the capital’s
share κ to be 0.12 with a standard error of 0.02. Both estimates are reasonable in terms of economic magnitude. The overidentification test shows that the model is not formally rejected.
From Panel A of Table 1, the p-value of the χ2 -test given by equation (10) is 0.10. The mean
absolute error (m.a.e. hereafter) across the momentum deciles is 0.80% per annum in our
model. In contrast, the m.a.e. is 3.68% for the CAPM and 4.08% for the Fama-French model.
We also report individual alphas from our model, αqi , defined in equation (7) in the last
two rows of Panel A. The levered investment returns are constructed using the estimates
of a and κ from one-stage GMM. We also report t-statistics testing that a given αqi equals
zero, using standard errors calculated from one-stage GMM. The individual alphas range
from −1.50% per annum for the loser decile to 1.39% for the fifth decile. In contrast, the
CAPM alphas range from −9.50% for the loser decile to 7.45% for the winner decile, and
the Fama-French alphas go from −11.51% for the loser decile to 7.64% for the winner decile.
The winner-minus-loser alpha in our model is 0.44%, which is within 0.2 standard errors
from zero. This alpha is negligible compared to those from the CAPM, 16.95%, and the
Fama-French model, 19.15%, both of which are more than eight standard errors from zero.
Figure 2 illustrates the performance of different models by plotting the average predicted
returns of the momentum deciles against their average realized returns. If a model’s performance is perfect, all the observations should lie exactly on the 45-degree line. From Panel
A, the scatter plot from our model is closely aligned with the 45-degree line. In contrast,
Panels B and C show that the scatter plots from the CAPM and the Fama-French model are
roughly horizontal. As such, the investment-based alphas do not vary systematically across
the momentum deciles, whereas the CAPM alphas and the Fama-French alphas do.7
7

In untabulated results, we also find that our model fits well Moskowitz and Grinblatt’s (1999) industry
momentum quintiles. They document that trading strategies buying stocks from past winning industries
and selling stocks from past losing industries are profitable. Excluding financial firms and regulated
utilities from their 20 industry classifications, we have 18 industries left in our sample. At the end of each
portfolio formation month t, we sort the 18 industry portfolios into quintiles based on their prior six-month
value-weighted returns from t − 6 to t − 1. The top and bottom quintiles each have three industries while
the other three quintiles each have four industries. We form quintiles instead of deciles because the number
of industries is too small to construct deciles. We hold the resulting quintile portfolios (value-weighted

13

4.1.2

Expected Return Components

How does the model match average momentum profits? The unlevered and levered investment return equations (3) and (5) identify several components of expected stock returns.
The first component is investment-to-capital, Iit /Kit , in the denominator of the
investment return. The second component is the growth rate of marginal q, defined as qit ≡
1+(1−τ t )a(Iit /Kit ). The growth rate of q can be interpreted as the “capital gain” portion of
the investment return because marginal q is related to the stock price. The third component
is the marginal product of capital, Yit+1 /Kit+1 , in the numerator of the investment return.
The fourth component is the depreciation rate, δ it+1 , which has a negative relation
between δ it+1 and the investment return. The fifth component is the market leverage, wit , in
the levered investment return, which shows a positive relation between wit and the expected
Ba
stock return. The sixth component is the after-tax corporate bond return, rit+1
. In all, all else

equal, firms with low Iit /Kit , high expected qit+1 /qit , high expected Yit+1 /Kit+1 , low expected
Ba
δ it+1 , high wit , and low expected rit+1
should earn higher expected stock returns at time t.

Panel B of Table 1 reports the averages for four components of levered investment returns
across the momentum deciles: Iit /Kit , qit+1 /qit , Yit+1 /Kit+1 , and wit . For the growth rate of
qit , because qit involves the unobserved adjustment cost parameter, we instead report the
average growth rate of investment-to-capital, (Iit+1 /Kit+1 )/(Iit /Kit ). We see that the winner
decile has a higher average growth rate of investment-to-capital than the loser decile: 1.16
versus 0.83 per annum. The winner decile also has a higher next-period sales-to-capital,
Yit+1 /Kit+1 , than the loser decile: 4.19 versus 3.18. Both components go in the right direction to capture average momentum profits. However, going in the wrong direction, the
winner decile has a higher current-period investment-to-capital, Iit /Kit , than the loser decile,
0.26 versus 0.22. Also going in the wrong direction, the winner decile has a lower market
leverage than the loser decile: 0.22 versus 0.34. Finally, the averages of the depreciate rate
and the after-tax corporate bond return are largely flat across the momentum deciles, and
across industry portfolios) for the subsequent six months from t + 1 to t + 6. The investment-based alphas
range from −0.97% to 0.88% per annum, all of which are within 0.4 standard errors from zero. The
winner-minus-loser quintile has a small alpha of 0.44%, which is within 0.2 standard errors from zero. This
alpha is smaller than 9.15% from the CAPM and 9.40% from the Fama-French model.

14

their impact on the estimation results is small.8
4.1.3

Accounting for Average Momentum Profits

To quantify the sources of momentum, we conduct the following comparative static experiments. We set a given component of the levered investment return to its cross-sectional
average in each month at the sub-portfolio level. We then use the estimates of a and κ to
reconstruct levered investment returns, while fixing all the other components. We examine
the resulting change in the magnitude of the model errors. A large change would mean that
the component in question is quantitatively important for the model’s performance.
From Panel C of Table 1, the growth rate of marginal q is the most important, and
sales-to-capital is the second most important source of moment. Without the cross-sectional
variation in the growth rate of qit , the winner-minus-loser alpha in our model jumps to 11.37%
per annum. In contrast, this alpha is only 0.44% in the benchmark estimation. Without the
cross-sectional variation in sales-to-capital, the winner-minus-loser alpha becomes 7.14%.
Because the market leverage goes to the wrong direction, eliminating its cross-sectional
variation reduces the winner-minus-loser alpha further to 0.25%. Finally, fixing investmentto-capital to its cross-sectional average produces a winner-minus-loser alpha of −5.51%.

4.2

The Dynamics of Momentum

We have so far only examined average momentum profits. However, several stylized facts
of momentum involve its dynamics. The dynamics are particularly interesting because the
model parameters are estimated from matching average momentum profits. As such, the
dynamics of momentum can serve as additional diagnostics on the model’s performance.
8

The evidence that the average corporate bond returns are flat across the momentum deciles contrasts
with Gebhardt, Hvidkjaer, and Swaminathan (2005), who show that stock momentum spills over to bond
returns. Our evidence is different for several reasons. First, their evidence is based on a small sample
from the Lehman Brothers Fixed Income Database, which is substantially smaller in the coverage of the
cross section than the CRSP-Compustat universe. Second, Gebhardt et al. consider only investment grade
corporate bonds, while we use both investment grade and non-investment grade credit ratings. Finally, to
study the broader cross section in the CRSP-Compustat universe, we follow Blume, Lim, and MacKinlay
(1998) to assign the corporate bond returns for a given credit rating to all the firms with the same credit
rating. This procedure likely restricts the cross-sectional variation in average corporate bond returns.

15

4.2.1

Reversal of Momentum Profits in Long Horizons

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) and Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996) show that momentum profits are short-lived. In particular, Chan et al. show that the winner-minus-loser
return is on average 15.4% per annum at the one-year horizon, but is close to zero during the
second year and the third year after portfolio formation. Table 2 replicates their evidence
in our sample. From the first row in each panel, the winner-minus-loser return is on average
9.16% over the first six-month period, 11.02% for the first year, −5.90% for the second year,
and −5.43% for the third year after the portfolio formation.
The second row in each panel of Table 2 shows that our model reproduces this reversal
Iw
behavior at longer horizons. The levered investment return, rit+1
, for the winner-minus-loser

decile is on average 8.59% for the first six-month period and 12.09% for the first year after
portfolio formation. Afterward, the average predicted return turns negative: −1.93% for the
second year and −4.93% for the third year after the portfolio formation.
The remaining three rows in each panel show that it is the expected growth component of
the levered investment return that drives the short-lived nature of momentum profits. Using
the average growth rate of qit to measure the expected growth, we observe that it starts at
10% for the first six-month period, weakens to 7% at the one-year horizon, and turns −2%
and −3% at the two-year and the three-year horizons, respectively. Using the average growth
rate of investment-to-capital yields a similar pattern: 34% at the six-month horizon, 24% at
the one-year horizon, −8% for the second year, and −11% for the third year after the portfolio
formation. In contrast, the sales-to-capital ratio is more persistent: it starts at 1.02 for the
first six-month period and remains at 0.44 for the third year after the portfolio formation.
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993, Table IX) document that the average three-day returns
(from day −2 to 0) around quarterly earnings announcement dates represent about 25% of
momentum for the first six-month holding period, and the announcement date returns also
display reversal in long horizons. Unfortunately, we cannot replicate this pattern quantitatively because daily data on characteristics are not available due to data limitations. Qualitatively, however, equation (5) implies that levered investment returns should equal stock

16

returns in realization, state by state and period by period. If daily investment returns were
available, it is not inconceivable that their ex post pattern mimics that of daily stock returns.
Intuitively, positive earnings shocks at t + 1 would increase the marginal product of capital
at t + 1, and increase the investment returns from t to t + 1. The positive earnings shocks
should also increase the investment-to-capital growth from t to t + 1 because investment
increases with the marginal product of capital. Given the low persistence of the expected
investment-to-capital growth documented in Table 2, the investment returns around earnings
announcement dates should then inherit the reversal of announcement date stock returns.
4.2.2

The Failure of Traditional Asset Pricing Models

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) show that the CAPM cannot capture momentum because the
market beta of the winner-minus-loser decile is weakly negative. Fama and French (1996)
show that their three-factor model cannot capture momentum either because the loser decile
loads positively and the winner decile loads negatively on their value factor. We confirm
these findings. The CAPM alpha and the Fama-French alpha for the winner-minus-loser
decile are 16.95% and 19.15%, respectively, both of which are more than eight standard
errors from zero (see Table 1). In untabulated results, the winner-minus-loser decile has a
weakly positive market beta of 0.08, which is within one standard error of zero. In the FamaFrench regression, the winner-minus-loser decile has a weakly negative market beta of −0.08
(t = −1.05), a size factor beta of 0.22 (t = 1.12), and a value factor beta of −0.40 (t = −2.03).
To examine if our model replicates this evidence, Table 3 performs the CAPM and the
Fama-French regressions using levered investment returns of the momentum deciles in excess of the one-month Treasury bill rate as the dependent variables. From Panel A, the
winner-minus-loser alphas are 16.56% and 16.24% in the CAPM and in the Fama-French
model, respectively, consistent with stock returns. However, inconsistent with stock returns,
the winner-minus-loser betas are significantly positive: 0.83 in the CAPM and 0.73 in the
Fama-French model, both of which are more than 2.4 standard errors from zero.
Lettau and Ludvigson (2002) argue that investment lags (time lags between investment
decision and actual investment expenditure) can temporally shift the correlation between in17

vestment returns and stock returns. The contemporaneous correlation is negative, but that
between lagged stock returns and current investment returns is positive. To see how this
temporal shift affects the factor regressions, Panel B of Table 3 regresses levered investment
excess returns of the momentum deciles on the six-month lagged factor (stock) returns. The
winner-minus-loser alphas are unaffected. But the factor loadings are more in line with the
data: the CAPM beta of the winner-minus-loser decile becomes −0.21 (t = −0.88), and its
market beta in the Fama-French model becomes 0.18 (t = 0.75). However, the value factor
loading remains insignificantly positive, whereas it is significantly negative in stock returns.
4.2.3

Long Run Risks in Investment Returns

Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) show that aggregate consumption risks in cash flows
help interpret the average return spread across momentum portfolios. We replicate their
basic results in our 1963–2008 sample. Specifically, we perform the following regression:
!
K
1 X
gc,t−k + ui,t,
(11)
gi,t = γ i
K k=1
in which K = 8, gi,t is demeaned log real dividend growth rates on momentum decile i, and gc,t
is demeaned log real growth rate of aggregate consumption. The slope, γ i , measures the cash
flow’s exposure to the long-term aggregate consumption growth (long run risk).9 Consistent
with Bansal et al., Panel A of Table 4 shows that winners have a higher slope than losers:
15.88 versus 0.33. The risk spread between the two extreme deciles is 17.14, albeit with a large
standard error of 13.50. Winners also have a higher cash flow growth rate than losers: 2.85%
versus −2.07% per annum. The spread of 4.54% again has a large standard error of 3.49%.10
9
Aggregate consumption is seasonally adjusted real per capital consumption of nondurables and services.
The quarterly real per capita consumption data are from NIPA at the Bureau of Economic Analysis. We
use personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator from NIPA to convert nominal variables to real
variables. We calculate portfolio dividend growth following Bansal et al. (p. 1648–1649). In particular, we
take into account stock repurchases in calculating dividends. We also use a trailing four-quarter average of
the quarterly cash flows to adjust for seasonality in quarterly dividends.
10
Because of a few observations with negative cash flows (dividends plus net repurchases), which we treat
as missing, the slope, γ i , for the winner-minus-loser decile is not identical to the spread in γ i between winners
and losers. Similarly, the cash flow growth rate of the winner-minus-loser decile is not exactly the growth rate
spread between winners and losers. If we do not include net repurchases into the calculation of cash flows, the
projection coefficients for losers, winners, and the winner-minus-loser decile are 0.8, 12.1, and 11.3, and the
cash flow growth rates are −2.0%, 1.8%, and 3.8% per annum, respectively. The γ i for the winner-minus-loser
decile has a standard error of 12.1, and the growth rate spread has a standard error of 3.2%.

18

In Panel B of Table 4, we report similar evidence of long run risks in investment returns.
Based on the investment return
equation (3), we define a new fundamental cash flow mea

2
Iit+1
a
⋆
+
+ τ t+1 δ it+1 . Because the denominator of the
sure as Dit+1
≡ (1 − τ t+1 ) κ KYit+1
2 Kit+1
it+1
i
h
Iit
⋆
investment return equals marginal q, equation (3) implies that Dit+1 / 1 + (1 − τ t )a Kit

is analogous to the dividend yield, and the remaining piece of the investment return,
i
h
i h
Iit+1
Iit
(1−δ it+1 ) 1 + (1 − τ t+1 )a Kit+1 / 1 + (1 − τ t )a Kit , is analogous to the rate of capital gain.
⋆
As such, Dit+1
in the investment return is analogous to dividends in the stock return.

The first column in Panel B of Table 4 shows that the fundamental cash flow growth rate
has higher long run consumption risk in winners than in losers: 13.22 versus 5.18. The spread
of 8.04 is significant with a standard error of 3.16. The fundamental cash growth rate is also
higher in winners than in losers: 17.12% versus −2.46%, and the spread is highly significant.
The remainder of Panel B shows further that winners have significantly higher cash flow
risks than losers in the sales-to-capital growth and in the growth of depreciation rate, but
not in the growth rate of squared investment-to-capital. This evidence connects long run
risks in dividends documented in Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) to long run risks
in fundamentals such as the growth rate of sales-to-capital via firms’ optimality conditions.
As such, our evidence sheds light on why winners have higher long run risks than losers.
4.2.4

Market States and Momentum

Momentum depends on market states. Cooper, Gutierrez, and Hameed (2004) show that
the average winner-minus-loser (decile) return during the six-month period after portfolio
formation is 0.93% per month following non-negative prior 36-month market returns (UP
markets), but is −0.37% following negative prior 36-month market returns (DOWN markets).
The subsequent reversal of momentum is stronger following DOWN markets.
The first six rows in each panel of Table 5 replicate Cooper, Gutierrez, and Hameed’s
(2004) results. If we categorize the UP and DOWN markets based on the value-weighted
CRSP index returns over the prior 12-month period, Panel A shows that the winner-minusloser decile return over the six-month period after portfolio formation is on average 10.68%
following the UP markets but 3.77% following the DOWN markets. Over the 12-month pe19

riod after portfolio formation, the winner-minus-loser return is on average 13.68% following
the UP markets but 1.58% following the DOWN markets.
Our model fails to reproduce the procyclicality of momentum. From rows seven to 12 in
Panels A and B of Table 5, if anything, the model predicts that momentum is stronger in
DOWN markets. Panel B shows that based on prior 12-month market returns, the predicted
winner-minus-loser return over the 12-month period after portfolio formation is 10.75% following the UP markets, but 16.86% following the DOWN markets. The temporal shift in
the correlation structure between stock returns and investment returns is partially responsible for this result. If we lead the levered investment returns by 12 months, the predicted
winner-minus-loser return over the 12-month holding period is weakly procyclical: 12.75%
following the UP markets and 11.30% following the DOWN markets. However, the degree
of procyclicality in the model falls short of that in the data.

4.3

The Interaction of Momentum with Firm Characteristics

Going beyond the momentum deciles, the literature has documented stylized facts on the
interaction of momentum with firm characteristics (see footnote 1). By applying our model to
two-way sorted momentum portfolios, we show that it goes a long way to capture these facts.
4.3.1

Two-Way Momentum Portfolios

We use four sets of two-way (three-by-three) portfolios by interacting prior six-month returns
with size, firm age, trading volume, and stock return volatility. These four firm characteristics are all updated monthly. Size is market capitalization at the end of the portfolio
formation month t. We require firms to have positive market capitalization before including
them in the sample. Firm age is the number of months elapsed between the month when
a firm first appears in the monthly CRSP database and the portfolio formation month t.
Trading volume is the average daily turnover during the past six months from t − 6 to t − 1,
in which daily turnover is the ratio of the number of shares traded each day to the number of
shares outstanding at the end of the day. Following Lee and Swaminathan (2000), we restrict
our sample to include only NYSE and AMEX stocks when forming the trading volume and

20

momentum portfolios (the number of shares traded for Nasdaq stocks is inflated relative to
NYSE and AMEX stocks because of double counting of dealer trades).
We measure stock return volatility as the standard deviation of weekly excess returns over
the past six months (e.g., Lim (2001)). Weekly returns are from Thursday to Wednesday
to mitigate bid-ask effects in daily prices. We calculate weekly excess returns as raw weekly
returns minus weekly risk-free rates. The daily risk-free rates are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. The daily rates are available only after July 1, 1964. For days prior to that date, we use
the monthly rate for a given month divided by the number of trading days within the month
to obtain daily rates. We require a stock to have at least 20 weeks of data to enter the sample.
To form the two-way momentum portfolios such as, for example, the nine size and momentum portfolios, we sort stocks into terciles at the end of each portfolio formation month
t on the market capitalization at the end of the month, and then independently on the prior
six-month return from t − 6 to t − 1. Taking intersections of the three size and the three momentum terciles, we form nine size and momentum portfolios. Skipping the current month
t, we hold the resulting portfolios for the subsequent six months from month t + 1 to t + 6.
We equal-weight all stocks within a given portfolio.
From Panel A of Table 6, momentum is stronger in small firms than in big firms. The
winner-minus-loser tercile in small firms has a CAPM alpha of 10.16% per annum, which is
larger than that in big firms, 6.09%. From Panel B, momentum also decreases with firm age.
The CAPM alpha and the Fama-French alpha of the winner-minus-loser tercile in young
firms are 11.98% and 13.34%, which are higher than those in old firms, 4.98% and 6.12%, respectively. Consistent with Lee and Swaminathan (2000), momentum increases with trading
volume (Panel C). The CAPM alpha and the Fama-French alpha of the winner-minus-loser
tercile in low volume firms are 6.97% and 8.13%, which are lower than those in high volume
firms, 12.11% and 13.65%, respectively. Finally, momentum also increases with stock return
volatility (Panel D). The CAPM alpha of the winner-minus-loser tercile increases from 6.50%
in the low volatility tercile to 13.63% in the high volatility tercile. Across all testing portfolios, both the CAPM and the Fama-French model are strongly rejected by the GRS test.

21

4.3.2

GMM Parameter Estimates and Tests of Overidentification

Table 7 reports the GMM estimation and tests of overidentification for the two-way momentum portfolios. The estimates of the adjustment cost parameter, a, range from 2.54 for the
size and momentum portfolios to 3.57 for the volatility and momentum portfolios. Their
standard errors range from 0.72 to 0.94. As such, the estimates of a are all significantly
positive, meaning that the adjustment cost function is increasing and convex in investment.
These estimates are close to the benchmark estimate of 2.81 from the benchmark momentum
deciles. The estimates of the capital’s share, κ, are between 0.10 to 0.13 across different sets
of two-way momentum portfolios, and are close to 0.12 in the benchmark estimation.
The mean absolute errors from our model are mostly smaller than those from the CAPM
and the Fama-French model. For example, the m.a.e. of the age and momentum portfolios
is 1.19% per annum in our model, which is smaller than those from the CAPM, 3.45%, and
the Fama-French model, 3.66%. The only exception is the size and momentum portfolios.
Our model produces an m.a.e. of 3.33%, which is slightly higher than that from the CAPM,
3.16%, but slightly lower than that from the Fama-French model, 3.60%.
In contrast to the benchmark estimation with the momentum deciles, our model is
strongly rejected using the two-way momentum portfolios. This evidence means that our
test design has sufficient power to reject the null hypothesis that all the individual alphas for
a given set of testing portfolios are jointly zero. This benefit results from our construction
of monthly levered investment returns to match with monthly stock returns.
4.3.3

Individual Alphas

From the last two rows in Panel A of Table 6, the alphas from our model for the nine size and
momentum portfolios range from −3.98% to 5.79% per annum. Although not small, these
alphas do not vary systematically with momentum. In particular, across the small, median,
and big size terciles the winner-minus-loser alphas are −0.93%, −0.98%, and −0.83%, which
are all within one standard error from zero. These alphas are all lower in magnitude than
those from the CAPM: 10.16% in the small tercile, 7.89% in the median tercile, and 6.09%
in the big tercile, as well as those from the Fama-French model: 11.55%, 9.64%, and 7.77%,
22

respectively. Panel A of Figure 3 shows that the scatter plot from our model is largely aligned
with the 45-degree line. However, the fit is not as good as the fit for the momentum deciles.
In contrast, the scatter plot from the Fama-French model is largely horizontal (Panel B).
The evidence the CAPM is similar to that from the Fama-French model (untabulated).
The last two rows in Panel B of Table 6 report smaller individual alphas but larger
winner-minus-loser alphas for the firm age and momentum portfolios. The individual alphas range from −2.40% to 2.46% per annum, and the winner-minus-loser alphas are 2.46%,
−1.38%, and −3.59% across the young, median, and old age terciles, respectively. However,
the winner-minus-loser alphas are still smaller in magnitude than those from the CAPM,
11.98%, 7.57%, and 4.98%, as well as those from the Fama-French model, 13.34%, 8.92%,
and 6.12%, respectively. The scatter plots in Panels C and D of Figure 3 confirm the performance difference between our model and the Fama-French model.
From the last two rows in Panel C of Table 6, the individual alphas from our model across
the nine volume and momentum portfolios range from −1.94% to 4.68% per annum. None of
the alphas are significant at the 5% level, likely due to measurement errors in characteristics.
As such, we only emphasize the economic magnitude of the alphas, instead of their statistical insignificance. More important, the individual alphas do not vary systematically with
prior six-month returns. The winner-minus-loser alphas are −1.82%, −0.09%, and −0.34%
in the low, median, and high volume terciles, respectively. These alphas are again all lower
in magnitude than those from the CAPM, 6.97%, 7.93%, and 12.11%, as well as those from
the Fama-French model, 8.13%, 9.15%, and 13.65%, respectively. Panels E and F of Figure
3 illustrate the model fit graphically for the volume and momentum portfolios.
From the last two rows in Panel D of Table 6, the individual alphas from our model across
the volatility and momentum portfolios are large, ranging from −3.72% to 3.61% per annum.
The winner-minus-loser alphas are −1.93%, 0.40%, and −2.91% in the low, median, and high
volatility terciles, which are again lower in magnitude than those from the CAPM, 6.50%,
10.68%, and 13.63%, as well as those from the Fama-French model, 8.38%, 12.54%, and
15.15%, respectively. Panels G and H of Figure 3 illustrate our model’s fit for the volatility
and momentum portfolios in comparison with the Fama-French model. Although the individ23

ual alphas can be large in our model, the alphas do not vary systematically with prior shortterm returns. In contrast, the scatter plot from the Fama-French model is largely horizontal.

5

Summary and Interpretation

Optimal investment implies that expected stock returns are tied with the expected marginal
benefit of investment divided by the marginal cost of investment. We show via GMM that
the investment model captures average momentum profits. Intuitively, winners have higher
expected investment-to-capital growth and expected sales-to-capital (two major components
of the expected marginal benefit), and earn higher expected stock returns than losers. The
model also captures the reversal of momentum in long horizons, the failure of traditional
asset pricing models in capturing momentum, long run risks in the momentum deciles, as well
as the interaction of momentum with market capitalization, firm age, trading volume, and
stock return volatility. However, the model fails to reproduce procyclical momentum profits.
Momentum is often interpreted as a sign of investor irrationality. For example, Jegadeesh
and Titman (1993, p. 90) write “the market underreacts to information about the short-term
prospects of firms but overreacts to information about their long-term prospects,” and conclude that “investor expectations are systematically biased.” Our results show that firms’
investment decisions are connected properly to the momentum phenomenon in asset markets: firms invest more when expected returns and the cost of capital are low, and vice versa.
This observation directly says nothing about investor rationality or irrationality. A low cost
of capital could reflect rationally low market prices of risk demanded by investors, or it could
reflect sentiment of investors who are irrationally optimistic.
Our results do provide some implications for the “rationality” of equilibrium asset prices.
We see that firms invest more when prices are high. Such investment expands the supply
of investment to match the demand, whatever the source of such demand. If adjustment
costs were zero and firms acted rationally, then no amount of investor sentiment could affect
prices. It would only affect quantities instead. Our finding that firms react with greater, but
not infinite investment, reflecting adjustment costs, indicates that the room for any investor
irrationality to affect prices is limited by firms’ offsetting response.
24

In contrast to standard asset pricing theories that have predictions only about expected
returns, equation (5) speaks to not only expected returns but also ex-post returns. It predicts
that the levered investment return should equal the stock return for every stock, every period,
and every state of the world. Because no choice of parameters satisfies such an extremely
refutable prediction, the equation is rejected at any level of significance. Although we only use
GMM to test the ex-ante prediction that expected levered investment returns equal expected
stock returns across momentum portfolios, this test design befits our economic question: why
winners earn higher returns on average than losers. As noted (see Section 4.2.1), the ex-post
prediction in fact helps us interpret the ex-post pattern of earnings announcement returns.
We do not claim that the investment model “explains” momentum. The investment model
is based on first-order conditions of firms, which do not establish causality from investment to
expected returns. The model is as consistent with the view that investment growth “explains”
expected returns as with the view that expected returns “explain” investment growth.
However, our finding is no more and no less important or “explanatory” than a would-be
S
finding that momentum was consistent with consumption Euler equation, Et [Mt+1 rit+1
]=
S
1.11 Suppose one found a utility function and consumption data such that Et [Mt+1 rit+1
]=1

holds across ten momentum deciles. It is tempting to claim that the consumption model “explains” momentum. However, the would-be finding does not support this claim. Consumption first-order conditions say that consumers adjust consumption correctly in response to
asset price movements. If the stock price moves arbitrarily with the lunar cycle, consumption
first-order conditions will just line up consumption accordingly. Consumption is as endogenous to consumption first-order conditions as investment to investment first-order conditions.
In general equilibrium, consumption (consumption betas), expected returns, and investment (characteristics) are all endogenous variables determined by a system of simultaneous
equilibrium conditions. Neither consumption nor investment causes expected returns to
vary across firms. Neither consumption nor investment is more primitive than the other in
“explaining” expected returns. Instead of causality, we can only learn about structural corre11

This equation holds in our framework as well. Rewriting firm i’s objective function given by equation
(2) in recursive form yields: Vit − Dit = Et [Mt+1 Vit+1 ]. Dividing both sides by Pit = Vit − Dit yields
S
S
Et [Mt+1 rit+1
] = 1, in which rit+1
= (Pit+1 + Dit+1 )/Pit .

25

lations between consumption, expected returns, and investment from equilibrium conditions.
The investment approach thinks about asset pricing very differently from the consumption approach, but in a complementary way. The consumption approach tries to figure out
unobservable and hard-to-measure expected returns from equally unobservable and hardto-measure consumption betas. In contrast, the investment approach tries to figure out
expected returns from observable and easier-to-measure characteristics. Standard finance
textbooks teach students to estimate the discount rate from the CAPM or multifactor models, and then use the estimated discount rate to calculate net present values for new projects
to decide which ones to take in capital budgeting. The investment approach turns finance on
its head: because the levered investment return equals the weighted average cost of capital,
we can back out the discount rate from observable investment decisions. The investment
approach completes the consumption approach in general equilibrium!

References
Asness, Clifford S., 1997, The interaction of value and momentum strategies, Financial
Analysts Journal March–April, 29–36.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert F. Dittmar, and Christian T. Lundblad, 2005, Consumption,
dividends, and the cross-section of equity returns, Journal of Finance 60, 1639–1672.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, A model of investor sentiment,
Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307–343.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Richard Thaler, 2003, A survey of behavioral finance, in G. M.
Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance
1052–1121.
Belo, Frederico, 2010, Production-based measures of risk for asset pricing, Journal of
Monetary Economics 57, 146–163.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Peter DeMarzo, 2009, Corporate Finance, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall.
Blume, Marshall E., Felix Lim, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1998, The declining credit quality
of U.S. corporate debt: Myth or reality? Journal of Finance 53, 1389–1413.
Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok, 1996, Momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 51, 1681–1713.

26

Cochrane, John H., 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns
and economic fluctuations, Journal of Finance 46, 209–237.
Cochrane, John H., 1996, A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model,
Journal of Political Economy 104, 572–621.
Cochrane, John H., 1997, Where is the market going? Uncertain facts and novel theories,
Economic Perspectives 21: November/December, 3–37.
Cooper, Michael J., Roberto C. Gutierrez Jr., and Allaudeen Hameed, 2004, Market states
and momentum, Journal of Finance 59, 1345–1365.
Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology
and security market under- and over-reaction, Journal of Finance 53, 1839–1886.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings
and returns, Journal of Finance 50, 131–155.
Gebhardt, William R., Soeren Hvidkjaer, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2005, Stock and
bond market interaction: Does momentum spill over? Journal of Financial Economics
75, 651–690.
Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the efficiency of
a given portfolio, Econometrica 57, 1121–1152.
Gourio, François, 2010, Putty-clay technology and stock market volatility, forthcoming,
Journal of Monetary Economics.
Hansen, Lars Peter, 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators, Econometrica 40, 1029–1054.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1982, Generalized instrumental variables
estimation of nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica 50, 1269–1288.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum
trading, and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143–2184.
Hong, Harrison, Terence Lim, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, Bad news travels slowly: Size,
analyst coverage, and the profitability of momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 55,
265–295.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling
losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 2001, Profitability of momentum strategies:
An evaluation of alternative explanations, Journal of Finance 56, 699–720.
27

Jermann, Urban J., 2010, The equity premium implied by production, Journal of Financial
Economics 98, 279–296.
Jiang, Guohua, Charles M. C. Lee, and Yi Zhang, 2005, Information uncertainty and expected returns, Review of Accounting Studies 10, 185–221.
Lee, Charles M. C., and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2000, Price momentum and trading
volume, Journal of Finance 55, 2017–2069.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2002, Time-varying risk premia and the cost of capital: An alternative implication of the Q theory of investment, Journal of Monetary
Economics 49, 31–66.
Lim, Terence, 2001, Rationality and analysts’ forecast bias, Journal of Finance 56, 369–385.
Liu, Laura Xiaolei, Toni M. Whited, and Lu Zhang, 2009, Investment-based expected stock
returns, Journal of Political Economy 117, 1105–1139.
Merz, Monika, and Eran Yashiv, 2007, Labor and the market value of the firm, American
Economic Review 97, 1419–1431.
Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Mark Grinblatt, 1999, Do industries explain momentum? Journal of Finance 54, 1249–1290.
Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 1998, International momentum strategies, Journal of Finance, 53,
267–284.
Zhang, X. Frank, 2006, Information uncertainty and stock returns, Journal of Finance 61,
105–136.

28

Table 1 : The Benchmark Momentum Deciles, Tests of Asset Pricing Models,
Economic Characteristics, and Comparative Statics on the Investment Model

For each momentum decile, we report (in annual percent) average stock return, riS , stock
return volatility, σ Si , the CAPM alpha from monthly market regressions, αi , the alpha from
monthly Fama-French (1993) three-factor regressions, αFi F , and their t-statistics adjusted
for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. αqi is the alpha from our model, calculated
S
Iw
Iw
as ET [rit+1
− rit+1
], in which ET is the sample mean, and rit+1
is the levered investment
return. m.a.e. is the mean absolute error. The p-values (p-val) are from the Gibbon,
Ross, and Shanken (1989) tests of the null that the alphas across the ten momentum
deciles are jointly zero. Panel B reports average characteristics for each momentum decile
including current-period investment-to-capital, Iit /Kit ; the growth rate of investment-to/Kit+1
; next-period sales-to-capital, Yit+1 /Kit+1 ; market leverage, wit ; the nextcapital, Iit+1
Iit /Kit
B
period rate of depreciation, δ it+1 ; and the corporate bond returns in annualized percent, rit+1
.
In Panel C, we perform four comparative static experiments on our model: Iit /Kit , qit+1 /qit ,
Yit+1 /Kit+1 , and w it , in which qit+1 /qit = [1+(1−τ t+1 )a(Iit+1 /Kit+1 )]/[1+(1−τ t )a(Iit /Kit )].
In the experiment denoted Yit+1 /Kit+1 , we set Yit+1 /Kit+1 for a given set of testing portfolios
to be its cross-sectional average in year t + 1. We use the model parameters from onestage GMM to reconstruct the levered investment returns, while keeping all the other
characteristics unchanged. The other three experiments are designed analogously. αqi is
the average difference between stock returns and reconstructed levered investment returns.
L is the loser decile, W is the winner decile, and W−L is the winner-minus-loser portfolio.
Panel A: Tests of the CAPM, the Fama-French model, and the investment model
riS
σ Si
αi
[t]
F
αF
i
[t]
αqi
[t]

L

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

3.39
25.56
−9.50
−4.32
−11.51
−7.49
−1.50
−0.36

8.49
20.95
−3.35
−1.77
−6.37
−5.69
0.37
0.10

10.45
19.24
−0.98
−0.55
−4.28
−4.08
1.01
0.30

11.66
18.39
0.41
0.25
−2.79
−3.14
0.87
0.27

12.69
18.06
1.48
0.93
−1.52
−1.82
1.39
0.45

13.49
18.07
2.23
1.43
−0.48
−0.67
0.64
0.22

13.81
18.59
2.40
1.56
−0.08
−0.14
−0.06
−0.02

15.47
19.88
3.72
2.30
1.89
3.23
−0.63
−0.21

17.56
21.99
5.32
2.91
4.23
5.19
−0.43
−0.13

W W−L m.a.e. p-val
20.75
26.97
7.45
2.99
7.64
5.18
−1.07
−0.25

17.36
16.22
16.95
8.49
19.15
8.22
0.44
0.13

3.68 0.00
4.08 0.00
0.80 0.10

Panel B: Economic characteristics
Iit /Kit
Iit+1 /Kit+1
Iit /Kit

Yit+1 /Kit+1
wit
δ it+1
B
rit+1

L

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0.22
0.83
3.18
0.34
0.14
0.68

0.21
0.92
3.04
0.29
0.14
0.66

0.20
0.94
2.99
0.27
0.13
0.65

0.20
0.97
3.00
0.25
0.13
0.65

0.20
0.99
3.00
0.25
0.13
0.65

0.20
1.02
3.14
0.24
0.13
0.65

0.21
1.03
3.23
0.23
0.13
0.65

0.21
1.07
3.43
0.22
0.14
0.65

0.23
1.09
3.65
0.21
0.14
0.66

W W−L

0.26 0.04 3.71
1.16 0.33 16.05
4.19 1.01 5.86
0.22 −0.12 −7.44
0.18 0.03 1.92
0.68 0.00 0.11

Panel C: The investment-based alphas, αqi , from comparative static experiments
L
Iit /Kit
qit+1 /qit
Yit+1 /Kit+1
w it

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

W W−L

−2.65 0.87 2.71 3.65 4.26 2.81 1.55 −0.39 −2.69 −8.16 −5.51
−7.90 −2.33 −0.76 −0.01 1.02 1.04 0.72 1.20 2.17 3.47 11.37
−2.41 −1.43 −1.14 −1.26 −0.70 −0.50 −0.58 0.33 1.93 4.73 7.14
−1.50 0.10 1.01 0.76 1.24 0.47 −0.12 −0.96 −0.86 −1.25 0.25

29

[t]

Table 2 : Reversal of Momentum in Long Horizons
S
We report the average buy-and-hold stock returns, rit+1
, over periods following portfolio
formation in the following six months and in the first, second, and third subsequent years for
each momentum decile as in Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996). We also report the
Iw
levered investment return, rit+1
, sales-to-capital, Yit+1 /Kit+1 , the growth rate of q, qit+1 /qit ,
/Kit+1
, over the same time horizons. Stock returns
and the investment-to-capital growth, Iit+1
Iit /Kit
and levered investment returns are in semi-annual percent in Panel A, and are in annual
percent in the remaining panels. The three characteristics are in annual terms. L is the loser
decile, W is the winner decile, and W−L is the winner-minus-loser decile.

L

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

W

W−L

8.11
8.10
3.44
1.02
1.07

9.24
9.05
3.66
1.03
1.10

11.00
11.01
4.19
1.05
1.17

9.16
8.59
1.02
0.10
0.34

15.08
15.26
3.43
1.01
1.05

16.24
16.75
3.63
1.02
1.07

17.68
19.01
4.14
1.03
1.11

11.02
12.09
0.96
0.07
0.24

12.53
12.66
3.53
0.99
0.97

10.29
12.31
3.94
0.98
0.95

−5.90
−1.93
0.67
−0.02
−0.08

13.47
11.78
3.48
0.99
0.96

12.10
11.20
3.82
0.98
0.94

−5.43
−4.93
0.44
−0.03
−0.11

Panel A: Six months after portfolio formation
S
rit+1
Iw
rit+1

Yit+1 /Kit+1
qit+1 /qit
Iit+1 /Kit+1
Iit /Kit

1.84
2.42
3.17
0.95
0.83

4.53
4.02
3.04
0.98
0.92

5.52
4.71
3.00
0.99
0.95

6.14
5.34
2.99
0.99
0.97

6.67
5.59
3.00
1.00
0.99

7.07
6.43
3.14
1.00
1.02

7.23
6.92
3.23
1.01
1.04

Panel B: First year after portfolio formation
S
rit+1
Iw
rit+1
Yit+1 /Kit+1
qit+1 /qit
Iit+1 /Kit+1
Iit /Kit

6.66
6.92
3.18
0.96
0.87

10.51
8.81
3.05
0.98
0.93

12.07
9.89
3.00
0.99
0.95

12.85
10.94
2.99
0.99
0.98

13.51
11.09
3.00
1.00
0.99

14.09
12.52
3.14
1.00
1.01

14.47
13.36
3.22
1.01
1.03

Panel C: Second year after portfolio formation
S
rit+1
Iw
rit+1

Yit+1 /Kit+1
qit+1 /qit
Iit+1 /Kit+1
Iit /Kit

16.19
14.24
3.27
1.00
1.03

14.52
11.97
3.09
1.00
1.00

14.20
11.57
3.03
1.00
1.00

14.19
11.51
3.01
1.00
0.99

14.02
11.37
3.01
1.00
0.99

14.09
11.84
3.13
1.00
0.99

13.68
12.08
3.20
1.00
0.99

13.54
12.34
3.38
0.99
0.98

Panel D: Third year after portfolio formation
S
rit+1
Iw
rit+1

Yit+1 /Kit+1
qit+1 /qit
Iit+1 /Kit+1
Iit /Kit

17.54
16.13
3.38
1.01
1.05

16.03
13.26
3.15
1.00
1.02

15.25
12.60
3.07
1.00
1.01

14.80
11.81
3.01
1.00
1.00

14.63
11.90
3.03
1.00
1.01

30

14.41
11.90
3.13
1.00
0.99

14.15
11.86
3.19
1.00
0.99

13.94
12.24
3.36
0.99
0.98

Table 3 : Regressing Levered Investment Excess Returns on the CAPM and the
Fama-French Factors

For each momentum decile i, we conduct monthly CAPM regressions and Fama-French
regressions using levered investment returns in excess of the one-month Treasury bill rate.
The data for the Treasury-bill rate and the Fama-French factors are from Kenneth French’s
Web site. For the CAPM regressions, we report the intercept, αi , and the market beta,
β i . For the Fama-French regressions, we report the intercept, αFi F , and the loadings on the
KT
B
L
market factor, β M
, the size factor, β SM
, and the value factor, β HM
. We also report
i
i
i
t-statistics adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations.
L

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

W

W−L

Panel A: Regressing levered investment excess returns on contemporaneous factor returns
The CAPM regressions
αi
[t]
βi
[t]

5.00
3.12
−1.30
−4.59

8.06
6.59
−0.92
−4.40

9.29
8.62
−0.70
−5.01

10.62
11.14
12.65
13.66
15.86
11.26
12.47
14.20
16.46
17.87
−0.71 −0.68 −0.61 −0.59 −0.52
−5.99 −5.39 −5.30 −5.53 −4.66
The Fama-French three-factor regressions

17.72
17.62
−0.46
−4.39

21.56
10.26
−0.47
−2.34

16.56
6.93
0.83
2.85

F
αF
i
[t]
β MKT
i
[t]
β SMB
i
[t]
β HML
i
[t]

5.67
3.75
−1.44
−5.65
−0.67
−1.90
−1.05
−3.04

8.52
7.39
−1.00
−5.58
−0.49
−2.03
−0.71
−3.74

9.59
9.32
−0.77
−5.62
−0.26
−1.71
−0.48
−2.92

10.88
11.87
−0.78
−6.83
−0.19
−1.59
−0.43
−3.25

17.92
18.19
−0.54
−4.92
−0.08
−0.51
−0.34
−1.76

21.90
11.14
−0.71
−3.80
0.23
1.05
−0.71
−1.62

16.24
7.01
0.73
2.45
0.90
2.44
0.34
0.90

11.35
13.05
−0.72
−5.80
−0.23
−1.99
−0.34
−2.57

12.86
14.60
−0.66
−5.84
−0.18
−1.37
−0.35
−2.41

13.91
17.05
−0.65
−6.21
−0.21
−1.91
−0.41
−2.59

16.07
18.69
−0.58
−5.30
−0.16
−1.26
−0.34
−1.96

Panel B: Regressing levered investment excess returns on six-month lagged factor returns
The CAPM regressions
αi
[t]
βi
[t]
F
αF
i
[t]
β MKT
i
[t]
β SMB
i
[t]
β HML
i
[t]

4.20
2.56
0.48
2.70

7.51
5.67
0.31
1.49

8.91
7.91
0.15
1.13

4.36
2.68
0.31
1.77
0.32
1.11
−0.36
−1.05

7.51
5.46
0.26
1.29
0.17
0.64
−0.03
−0.11

8.92
7.97
0.17
1.22
−0.06
−0.32
−0.01
−0.03

10.25
10.75
10.30
11.43
0.14
0.19
1.30
1.73
The Fama-French
10.24
10.37
0.14
1.33
0.02
0.15
0.01
0.09

10.71
11.45
0.20
1.92
0.03
0.16
0.06
0.46

31

12.31
13.31
15.52
13.45
15.86
17.63
0.16
0.20
0.23
1.66
2.19
2.61
three-factor regressions

17.38
17.87
0.30
3.05

21.22
10.63
0.27
1.45

17.02
7.14
−0.21
−0.88

12.21
13.53
0.16
1.81
0.14
0.87
0.14
1.11

17.17
17.77
0.31
3.04
0.32
1.70
0.29
1.54

20.64
9.36
0.49
2.67
0.21
0.62
1.00
1.48

16.27
6.29
0.18
0.75
−0.11
−0.29
1.36
1.74

13.19
16.11
0.22
2.42
0.13
0.91
0.18
1.32

15.38
17.62
0.24
2.61
0.23
1.51
0.21
1.58

Table 4 : Long Run Risks in Momentum Profits

Panel A reports the long run risk measure per Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005) across the momentum deciles. The
data are quarterly from 1963 to 2008. γ i is the projection coefficient from the regression:
!
8
1X
gc,t−k + ui,t ,
(12)
gi,t = γ i
8 k=1
in which gi,t is demeaned log real cash flow growth rates on portfolio i, and gc,t is demeaned log real growth rate in aggregate
consumption. Negative cash flow observations are treated as missing. ḡi is the sample average log real dividend growth rate.
Standard errors are reported in the columns denoted “ste.” In Panel B, γ ⋆i is the projection coefficient from the regression:
!
8
X
1
⋆
gi,t
= γ ⋆i
gc,t−k + ui,t ,
(13)
8 k=1

32

⋆
⋆
in which gi,t
is demeaned log real fundamental cash flow growth rates on decile i. This cash flow is Dit+1
≡ (1 −



2
Yit+1
τ t+1 ) κ K
+ a2 KIit+1
+ τ t+1 δ it+1 , in which τ t+1 is corporate tax rate, Yit+1 is sales, Kit+1 is capital, Iit+1 is investment,
it+1
it+1

δ it+1 is the rate of depreciation, κ is the estimated capital’s share, and a is the estimated adjustment cost parameter. ḡi⋆ is
⋆
the sample average of log real fundamental cash flow growth rates. γ ⋆1i is the slope from regressing g1i,t
, demeaned log real

2
Yit+1
⋆
growth rates of (1 − τ t+1 )κ Kit+1 , γ ⋆2i is the slope from regressing g2i,t
, demeaned log real growth rates of (1 − τ t+1 ) a2 KIit+1
,
it+1
P
8
⋆
and γ ⋆3i is the slope from regressing g3i,t
, demeaned log real growth rates of τ t+1 δ it+1 on 18 k=1 gc,t−k . We convert nominal to
real variables using the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. The growth rates are in annual percent.
Panel A: Stock returns
L
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
W
W−L

Panel B: Investment returns

γi

ste

ḡi

ste

γ ⋆i

ste

ḡi⋆

ste

γ ⋆1i

ste

γ ⋆2i

ste

γ ⋆3i

ste

0.33
−1.01
−2.22
−0.43
−0.70
1.39
1.76
2.56
2.84
15.88
17.14

4.95
2.66
1.93
1.98
1.47
1.83
2.85
3.83
5.45
10.56
13.50

−2.07
−0.65
−0.33
−0.05
0.05
0.32
0.55
0.74
1.10
2.85
4.54

1.29
0.69
0.50
0.52
0.38
0.48
0.74
1.00
1.42
2.74
3.49

5.18
6.44
6.80
6.87
6.41
6.15
7.04
5.96
7.91
13.22
8.04

2.27
1.60
1.51
1.32
1.29
1.33
1.36
1.49
1.91
3.08
3.16

−2.46
1.48
2.45
3.47
4.30
5.57
6.52
8.55
11.51
17.12
19.58

0.60
0.43
0.41
0.37
0.36
0.36
0.38
0.40
0.52
0.84
0.83

5.44
5.59
5.47
5.87
5.83
5.86
6.41
6.23
7.42
10.62
5.18

1.76
1.40
1.35
1.31
1.30
1.31
1.25
1.33
1.50
2.03
2.04

16.79
19.85
23.67
22.45
17.40
13.58
16.63
11.06
11.27
5.95
−10.85

8.91
7.11
6.52
5.50
5.60
5.65
5.89
5.96
6.52
8.39
9.93

−0.43
0.40
1.20
0.92
1.40
2.20
3.84
2.57
5.69
11.38
11.81

2.34
1.77
1.70
1.57
1.64
1.66
1.79
1.95
2.60
4.22
3.66

Table 5 : Market States and Momentum Profits

At the end of each month t, all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms are sorted into deciles
based on their prior six-month returns from t−5 to t−1, skipping month t. Stocks with prices
per share under $5 at month t are excluded. We categorize month t as UP (DOWN) markets
if the value-weighted CRSP index returns over months t − N to t − 1 with N = 36, 24, or 12
are nonnegative (negative). Profits of the winner-minus-loser decile are cumulated across two
holding periods: months t + 1 to t + 6 (Panel A) and months t + 1 to t + 12 (Panel B). Profits
(average returns) are in semi-annual percent in Panel A and in annual percent in Panel B.
We report average stock returns (r S ), average contemporaneous levered investment returns
Iw
(r Iw ), average six-month leading levered investment returns (r[+6]
), and average 12-month
Iw
leading levered investment returns (r[+12] ).
Panel A: Months 1–6
State
DOWN
DOWN
DOWN
UP
UP
UP
DOWN
DOWN
DOWN
UP
UP
UP
DOWN
DOWN
DOWN
UP
UP
UP
DOWN
DOWN
DOWN
UP
UP
UP

Panel B: Months 1–12

Profits

[t]

N -month
market

Returns

6.14
4.64
3.77
9.51
9.75
10.68
9.49
9.25
10.57
8.03
8.04
7.50
8.98
7.58
9.83
8.28
8.45
7.93
7.10
7.24
6.60
8.54
8.54
8.90

3.76
4.08
2.18
7.84
8.11
9.02
4.86
4.67
6.87
5.95
5.91
5.20
6.81
3.97
7.57
6.13
6.25
5.29
5.12
4.48
4.91
6.27
6.25
5.79

36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12

rS
rS
rS
rS
rS
rS

State
DOWN
DOWN
DOWN
UP
UP
UP
DOWN
DOWN
DOWN
UP
UP
UP
DOWN
DOWN
DOWN
UP
UP
UP
DOWN
DOWN
DOWN
UP
UP
UP

rIw
rIw
rIw
rIw
rIw
rIw
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]

33

Profits

[t]

N -month
market

Returns

5.34
−0.49
1.58
11.67
12.49
13.68
15.60
15.41
16.86
11.69
11.67
10.75
14.74
12.09
15.77
12.14
12.45
11.45
10.85
11.54
11.30
12.60
12.54
12.75

1.81
−0.19
0.46
5.25
5.81
5.90
3.97
4.05
6.06
4.42
4.37
3.73
5.12
3.14
6.12
4.57
4.66
3.81
4.87
3.75
3.85
4.67
4.64
4.25

36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12
36
24
12

rS
rS
rS
rS
rS
rS
rIw
rIw
rIw
rIw
rIw
rIw
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+6]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]
Iw
r[+12]

Table 6 : Tests of the CAPM, the Fama-French Model, and the Investment Model
for Two-Way Sorted Momentum Portfolios

For each testing portfolio, we report (in annual percent) the CAPM alphas, αi , the
Fama-French alphas, αFi F , and their t-statistics adjusted for heteroscedasticity and
autocorrelations. m.a.e. is the mean absolute error for a given set of testing portfolios.
The p-values (p-val) are from the Gibbon, Ross, and Shanken (1989) tests of the null that
the alphas for a given set of testing portfolios are jointly zero. The investment-based alphas
and t-statistics are from one-stage
GMM
 S
 with an identity weighting matrix. These alphas
q
Iw
are calculated as αi ≡ ET rit+1 − rit+1 , in which ET [·] is the sample mean of the series in
S
Iw
brackets, rit+1
is stock returns, and rit+1
is levered investment returns. L is the loser tercile,
W is the winner tercile, and W−L is the winner-minus-loser tercile.
Panel A: Nine size and momentum portfolios
Small
L
αi
[t]
F
αF
i
[t]
αqi
[t]

−3.69
−1.61
−7.50
−6.41
−3.06
−0.77

2

2

W W−L

3.05 6.47 10.16
1.40 2.66 8.59
−1.01 4.05 11.55
−1.20 4.36 9.26
−3.88 −3.98 −0.93
−1.14 −1.02 −0.56

L

Big

2

W W−L

−4.09 1.22
−2.35 0.82
−6.24 −1.52
−4.59 −1.55
1.68 0.71
0.48 0.24

3.80 7.89
2.38 5.73
3.40 9.64
3.78 6.08
0.70 −0.98
0.22 −0.56

L

2

−3.35 0.03
−2.90 0.04
−3.94 −0.91
−2.87 −1.20
5.79 5.26
1.82 2.03

W W−L m.a.e. p-val
2.74 6.09
2.48 3.52
3.83 7.77
4.00 4.09
4.96 −0.83
1.70 −0.42

3.16 0.00
3.60 0.00

Panel B: Nine firm age and momentum portfolios
Young
L

2

2
W W−L

αi
−6.00 1.45
[t]
−2.44 0.70
F
αF
−10.15
−2.39
i
[t]
−5.73 −1.66
αqi
−2.40 −0.40
[t]
−0.59 −0.12

L

2

W W−L

5.99 11.98 −1.77 2.91 5.80 7.57
2.53 9.24 −0.79 1.58 2.91 5.99
3.19 13.34 −6.09 −0.86 2.83 8.92
2.12 10.60 −4.63 −0.78 2.70 7.04
0.06 2.46
0.60 0.99 −0.78 −1.38
0.02 1.23
0.16 0.33 −0.25 −0.74

Low
L

2

Old
L

L

2

W W−L m.a.e. p-val

−0.91 2.14 4.07 4.98
−0.49 1.52 2.80 3.84
−4.97 −1.30 1.15 6.12
−3.73 −1.32 1.21 4.76
2.05 1.89 −1.54 −3.59
0.61 0.71 −0.59 −1.89

2
W W−L

2

3.45 0.00
3.66 0.00

High
W W−L

L

2

W W−L m.a.e. p-val

Panel C: Nine trading volume and momentum portfolios
αi
[t]
F
αF
i
[t]
αqi
[t]

0.70
0.37
−3.86
−2.82
2.28
0.70

4.26
2.65
0.46
0.41
4.68
1.64

7.67 6.97 −1.80 2.74 6.13 7.93 −7.01 −0.46 5.10 12.11
4.41 6.97 −0.84 1.57 3.37 6.36 −2.89 −0.22 2.11 7.46
4.27 8.13 −6.12 −1.01 3.03 9.15 −10.85 −3.58 2.81 13.65
3.67 7.78 −4.30 −0.88 2.57 7.42 −6.16 −2.37 1.81 8.20
0.46 −1.82 −0.35 0.29 −0.44 −0.09 −1.60 −1.54 −1.94 −0.34
0.18 −1.07 −0.09 0.09 −0.15 −0.05 −0.39 −0.42 −0.53 −0.17

3.98 0.00
4.00 0.00

Panel D: Nine stock return volatility and momentum portfolios
αi
[t]
F
αF
i
[t]
αqi
[t]

0.90
0.50
−3.02
−2.65
3.28
1.05

3.95
2.71
0.77
0.81
3.61
1.36

7.40 6.50
5.31 6.31
5.36 8.38
6.20 8.66
1.36 −1.93
0.56 −1.23

−3.35 1.97
−1.69 1.10
−6.90 −1.11
−5.99 −1.41
0.67 0.40
0.17 0.12

7.33 10.68 −10.89 −4.52 2.75 13.63
4.14 9.66 −4.26 −1.85 1.01 8.22
5.64 12.54 −12.31 −5.64 2.85 15.15
7.36 10.05 −8.12 −5.70 1.97 7.93
1.07 0.40 −0.71 −3.72 −3.62 −2.91
0.33 0.22 −0.16 −0.87 −0.80 −1.18

34

4.78 0.00
4.84 0.00

Table 7 : GMM Parameter Estimates and Tests of Overidentification, Two-Way
Sorted Momentum Portfolios

Results are from one-stage GMM with an identity weighting matrix. a is the adjustment cost
parameter and κ is the capital’s share. The standard errors, denoted [ste], are beneath the
point estimates. χ2 , d.f., and p-val are the statistic, the degrees of freedom, and the p-value
testing that the expected return errors across a given set of testing assets are jointly zero.
m.a.e. is the mean absolute error in annualized percent for a given set of testing portfolios.

a
[ste]
κ
[ste]
χ2
d.f.
p-val
m.a.e.

Size and
momentum

Age and
momentum

Volume and
momentum

stock return volatility
and momentum

2.54
0.72
0.10
0.01
21.14
7
0.00
3.33

2.80
0.94
0.12
0.01
23.80
7
0.00
1.19

3.10
0.87
0.13
0.01
20.21
7
0.01
1.51

3.57
0.77
0.13
0.02
18.44
7
0.01
2.05

35

Figure 1: Timing of Firm-Level Characteristics, Firms with December fiscal
yearend
This figure illustrates the timing alignment between monthly stock returns and annual acI
counting variables from Compustat for firms with December fiscal yearend. rit+1
is the
investment return of firm i constructed from characteristics from the current fiscal year and
the next fiscal year. τ t and Iit are the corporate income tax rate and firm i’s investment for
the current fiscal year, respectively. δ it+1 and Yit+1 are the depreciate rate and sales from
the next fiscal year, respectively. Kit is firm i’s capital observed at the end of the last fiscal
year (or at the beginning of the current fiscal year).



-

I
rit+1

(from July of year t
to June of t + 1)



-

τ t , Iit
(from January of year t

t
Kit 6
The holding period,
February–July of year t,

to December of t + 1)

December/January
June/July
6

6

-

(from January of year t + 1

to December of t)
December/January

τ t+1 , δ it+1
Yit+1 , Iit+1



t+1

December/January
June/July

Kit+1

t+2
Kit+2

6
The holding period, July–December of year t,
for the sixth sub-portfolio of a momentum

for the first sub-portfolio of
a momentum portfolio

portfolio in July of year t

in July of year t

36

Figure 2 : Average Predicted Stock Returns vs. Average Realized Stock Returns,
Ten Momentum Deciles
Iw
In our model, the average predicted stock returns are given by ET [rit+1
], in which ET is
Iw
the sample mean, and rit+1 is levered investment returns given by equation (5). We use the
parameter estimates from one-stage GMM to construct the levered investment returns. In
the CAPM, the average predicted stock returns are the time series average of the product
between the market beta and market excess returns. In the Fama-French model, the average
predicted stock returns are the time series average of the sum of three products: the market
beta times market excess returns, the size factor loading times the size factor returns, and
the value factor loading times the value factor returns.

Average predicted returns

Panel A: Our model
Winner

↓

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

Loser

↓

0.05
0
0

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

Panel C: The Fama-French model

0.25

Average predicted returns

Average predicted returns

Panel B: The CAPM

0.2
Loser

0.15

↓

Winner

↓

0.1
0.05
0
0

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

0.3

0.3

37

0.25
0.2
0.15

Loser

↓

Winner

↓

0.1
0.05
0
0

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

0.3

Figure 3 : Average Predicted Stock Returns vs. Average Realized Stock Returns
Panel B: The Fama-French model, size and
momentum

Panel A: Our model, size and momentum

↓

Average predicted returns

Average predicted returns

Small−winner

0.25
0.2
Small−loser

0.15

↓

0.1
0.05
0
0

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

Average predicted returns

Average predicted returns

Young−winner

↓

0.15
Young−loser

↓

0.05
0
0

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

Average predicted returns

↓

0.15
High−loser

↓

0.05

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

Average predicted returns

0.25
Middle−winner

↓

38

0.15
0.1
High−loser

0.05
0
0

↓

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

0.05

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

0.3

0.25
0.2

Young−loser

↓

Young−winner

↓

0.15
0.1
0.05

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

0.3

0.25
0.2

High−loser

↓

0.15

Low−winner

↓

0.1
0.05

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

0.3

Panel H: The Fama-French model, stock return
volatility and momentum

Panel G: Our model, stock return volatility and
momentum

0.2

↓

0.1

0
0

0.3

0.3

Average predicted returns

Average predicted returns

Low−winner

0
0

Small−winner

Panel F: The Fama-French model, trading
volume and momentum

0.25

0.1

0.15

0
0

0.3

Panel E: Our model, trading volume and
momentum

0.2

↓

Panel D: The Fama-French model, firm age and
momentum

0.25

0.1

Small−loser

0.2

0
0

0.3

Panel C: Our model, firm age and momentum

0.2

0.25

0.25
0.2 High−loser

↓

Middle−winner

↓

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

0.05

0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Average realized returns

0.3

A

Timing Alignment: Further Details

Section 3.2.3 describes the timing convention for firms with December fiscal yearend. This
appendix details how we handle firms with non-December fiscal yearend. We use firms with
June fiscal yearend as an example to illustrate our procedure. Firms with fiscal year ending
in other months are handled in an analogous way.
Figure A1 shows the timing of firm-level characteristics for firms with June fiscal yearend.
Their applicable midpoint time interval is from January to December of year t + 1. For those
firms in the first sub-portfolio of the loser decile in July of year t, all the holding period
months (February to July of year t) lie to the left of the time interval. As such, we use
accounting variables at the fiscal yearend of t to measure economic variables dated t + 1 in
the model, and use accounting variables at the fiscal yearend of t − 1 to measure economic
variables dated t in the model. For firms with June fiscal yearend in the sixth sub-portfolio
of the loser decile in July of year t, their holding period months (July to December of year t)
also lie to the left of the applicable time interval. As such, their timing is exactly the same
as the timing for the firms in the first sub-portfolio.

39

Figure A1: Timing of Firm-Level Characteristics, Firms with Non-December
fiscal yearend
This figure illustrates the timing alignment between monthly stock returns and annual acI
counting variables from Compustat for firms with June fiscal yearend. rit+1
is the investment
return of firm i constructed from characteristics from the current fiscal year and the next
fiscal year. τ t and Iit are the corporate income tax rate and firm i’s investment for the
current fiscal year, respectively. δit+1 and Yit+1 are the depreciate rate and sales from the
next fiscal year, respectively. Kit is firm i’s capital observed at the end of the last fiscal year
(or at the beginning of the current fiscal year).



-

I
rit+1

(from January of year t + 1
to December of t + 1)



τ t , Iit

-

(from July of year t
to June of t + 1)
June/July
t
6

Kit 6

τ t+1 , δ it+1



(from July of year t + 1
to June of t + 2)
June/July

December/January
6

-

Yit+1 , Iit+1

t+1

June/July
December/January

Kit+1

6
The holding period,
February–July of
year t, for the

The holding period, July–December of year t,
for the sixth sub-portfolio of a momentum
portfolio in July of year t

first sub-portfolio of a momentum portfolio in July of year t

40

t+2
Kit+2

