NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY:
LESSONS FROM THE CRISIS
Frederic S. Mishkin
Working Paper 16755
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16755

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

Prepared for the ECB Central Banking Conference, “Monetary Policy Revisited: Lessons from the
Crisis,” Frankfurt, November 18-19, 2010. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily
those of Columbia University or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Disclosure of my outside
compensated activities can be found on my website at http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/fmishkin/.
I would like to thank Jean Boivin, Christopher Sims, Michael Woodford, Jean Pisani-Ferry, William
White and participants at the brown bag lunch workshop at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
the New York Area Workshop on Monetary Policy held at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
and the ECB Central Banking Conference for their helpful comments.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons from the Crisis
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 16755
February 2011
JEL No. E44,E52,E58,G01
ABSTRACT
This paper examines what we have learned and how we should change our thinking about monetary
policy strategy in the aftermath of the 2007-2009 financial crisis. It starts with a discussion of where
the science of monetary policy was before the crisis and how central banks viewed monetary policy
strategy. It will then examine how the crisis has changed the thinking of both macro/monetary economists
and central bankers. Finally, it looks how much of the science of monetary policy needs to be altered
and draws implications for monetary policy strategy.

Frederic S. Mishkin
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu

Up until August 2007, advances in both theory and empirical work in the study of
monetary economics had led both academic economists and policymakers to argue that there was
now a well defined “science of monetary policy”. There was a general consensus in central
banks about most elements of monetary policy strategy, and monetary policy was perceived as
being highly successful in OECD countries, with not only low inflation, but also low variability
of inflation. In addition, output volatility had declined in these countries, and the period since
the early 1980s was dubbed the “Great Moderation”. Monetary economists and central bankers
were feeling pretty good about themselves.
Then, starting in August 2007, the world was hit by what Alan Greenspan, former
Chairman of the Fed, described in Congressional testimony as a “once-in-a-century credit
tsunami”. The tsunami from the 2007-2009 financial crisis, not only flattened economic activity,
producing the most severe world-wide economic contraction since the Great Depression, but it
also seemed to sweep away confidence in the ability of central bankers to successfully manage
the economy.
This paper examines what we have learned and how we should change our thinking about
monetary policy strategy in the aftermath of the 2007-2009 financial crisis. It starts with a
discussion of where the science of monetary policy was before the crisis and how central banks
viewed monetary policy strategy. It will then examine how the crisis has changed the thinking of
both macro/monetary economists and central bankers. Finally, it will look at what implications
this change in thinking has had on monetary policy science and strategy.

I.
The Science of Monetary Policy Before the Crisis

To examine where the state of monetary policy analysis was before the crisis, I will draw
heavily on a paper that I wrote just before crisis began, which was presented at a conference at
the Bundesbank in September of 2007 (2009a). In that paper I outlined nine basic scientific
principles, derived from theory and empirical evidence that guided thinking at almost all central
banks: 1) inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon; 2) price stability has
-2-

important benefits; 3) there is no long-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation; 4)
expectations play a crucial role in the determination of inflation and in the transmission of
monetary policy to the macroeconomy; 5) real interest rates need to rise with higher inflation,
i.e., the Taylor Principle; 6) monetary policy is subject to the time-inconsistency problem; 7)
central bank independence helps improve the efficiency of monetary policy; 8) commitment to a
strong nominal anchor is central to producing good monetary policy outcomes; and 9) financial
frictions play an important role in business cycles.
The first eight of these principles are elements of what has been dubbed the new
neoclassical synthesis (Goodfriend and King, 1997) and were agreed to by almost all academic
economists and central bankers. The last principle that financial frictions play and important role
in business cycles was not explicitly part of models used for policy analysis in central banks, but
was well understood by many, although not all central bankers. Because a key issue will be
whether recent events overturn these principles, it is worth spending a fair amount of time
understanding the theoretical and empirical basis for each of them below.

Nine Basic Principles

1. Inflation is Always and Everywhere a Monetary Phenomenon.
By the 1950s and 1960s, the majority of macroeconomists had converged on a consensus
view of macroeconomic fluctuations that downplayed the role of monetary factors. Much of this
consensus reflected the aftermath of the Great Depression and Keynes’ seminal The General
Theory of Employment, Interest, and Prices, which emphasized shortfalls in aggregate demand
as the source of the Great Depression and the role of fiscal factors as possible remedies. In
contrast, research by Milton Friedman and others in what became known as the “monetarist”
tradition (Friedman and Meiselman, 1963; Friedman and Schwartz, 1963a,b) attributed much of
the economic malaise of the Depression to poor monetary policy decisions and more generally
argued that the growth in the money supply was a key determinant of aggregate economic
activity and, particularly, inflation. Over time, this research, as well as Friedman’s predictions
that expansionary monetary policy in the 1960s would lead to high inflation and high interest
rates (Friedman, 1968), had a major impact on the economics profession, with almost all
economists eventually coming to agree with the Friedman’s famous adage, “Inflation is always
-3-

and everywhere a monetary phenomenon” (Friedman 1963, p. 17), as long as inflation is
referring to a sustained increase in the price level (e.g., Mishkin, 2010a).1
General agreement with Friedman’s adage did not mean that all economists subscribed to
the view that the money growth was the most informative piece of information about inflation,
but rather that the ultimate source of inflation was overly expansionary monetary policy. In
particular, an important imprint of this line of thought was that central bankers came to recognize
that keeping inflation under control was their responsibility.

2. Price Stability Has Important Benefits.
With the rise of inflation in the 1960s and 1970s, economists, and also the public and
politicians, began to discuss the high costs of inflation (for example, see the surveys in Fischer,
1993; and Anderson and Gruen, 1995). High inflation undermines the role of money as a
medium of exchange by acting as a tax on cash holdings. On top of this, a high-inflation
environment leads to overinvestment in the financial sector, which expands to help individuals
and businesses escape some of the costs of inflation (English, 1996). Inflation leads to
uncertainty about relative prices and the future price level, making it harder for firms and
individuals to make appropriate decisions, thereby decreasing economic efficiency (Lucas, 1972;
Briault, 1995). The interaction of the tax system and inflation also increases distortions that
adversely affect economic activity (Feldstein, 1997). Unanticipated inflation causes
redistributions of wealth, and, to the extent that high inflation tends to be associated with volatile
inflation, these distortions may boost the costs of borrowing. Finally, some households
undoubtedly do not fully understand the implications of a general trend in prices--that is, they
may suffer from nominal illusion--making financial planning more difficult.2 The total effect of
1

Although inflation can be characterized as a monetary phenomenon, it is crucial to recognize that fiscal policy can
drive monetary policy if there is fiscal dominance, that is, government budget deficits get so large that they force
monetary authorities to expand the money supply to pay for government spending. Monetary authorities are only
able to keep inflation under control if governments pursue responsible fiscal policy so that fiscal dominance does not
occur. The usual view is that fiscal dominance is rarely a feature of advanced countries and instead is limited to
developing countries. However, the recent massive government budget deficits in advanced countries and the
reluctance of politicians in these countries to rein in future entitlements may indicate that fiscal dominance is now a
danger even for advanced economies.
2

Of course, economic theory implies that inflation can be either too high or too low. The discussion has
emphasized costs associated with high inflation. But there are also potentially important costs associated with rates
of inflation that are very low. For example, Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996) suggest that downward nominal
wage rigidity could result in severe difficulties for economic performance at some times when inflation is too low.
-4-

these distortions became more fully appreciated over the course of the 1970s, and the recognition
of the high costs of inflation led to the view that low and stable inflation can increase the level of
resources productively employed in the economy.3, 4

3. There is No Long-Run Tradeoff Between Unemployment and Inflation.
A paper published in 1960 by Paul Samuelson and Robert Solow (1960) argued that work
by A.W. Phillips (1958), which became known as the Phillips curve, suggested that there was a
long-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation and that this tradeoff should be exploited.
Under this view, the policymaker would have to choose between two competing goals--inflation
and unemployment--and decide how high an inflation rate he or she would be willing to accept to
attain a lower unemployment rate. Indeed, Samuelson and Solow even mentioned that a
nonperfectionist goal of a 3 percent unemployment rate could be achieved at what they
considered to be a not-too-high inflation rate of 4 percent to 5 percent per year. This thinking
was influential, and probably contributed to monetary and fiscal policy activism aimed at
bringing the economy to levels of employment that, with hindsight, were not sustainable.
Indeed, the economic record from the late 1960s through the 1970s was not a happy one:
Inflation accelerated, with the inflation rate in the United States and other industrialized
countries eventually climbing above 10 percent in the 1970s, leading to what has been dubbed
“The Great Inflation.”
The tradeoff suggested by Samuelson and Solow was hotly contested by Milton Friedman
(1968) and Edmund Phelps (1968), who independently argued that there was no long-run
tradeoff between unemployment and the inflation rate: Rather, the economy would gravitate to
some natural rate of unemployment in the long run no matter what the rate of inflation was. In
other words, the long-run Phillips curve would be vertical, and attempts to lower unemployment
Other research has shown that the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates can lower economic efficiency if
inflation is too low (e.g., Reifschneider and Williams, 2000). Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) discuss strategies to
address the zero-lower-bound problem.
3
A further possibility is that low inflation may even help increase the rate of economic growth. While time-series
studies of individual countries and cross-national comparisons of growth rates were not in total agreement
(Anderson and Gruen, 1995), the consensus grew that inflation is detrimental to economic growth, particularly when
inflation rates are high.
4
The deleterious effects of inflation on economic efficiency implies that the level of sustainable employment is
probably lower at higher rates of inflation. Thus, the goals of price stability and high employment are likely to be
complementary, rather than competing, and so there is no policy tradeoff between the goals of price stability and
maximum sustainable employment, the so-called dual mandate that the Federal Reserve has been given by Congress
(Mishkin, 2007a).
-5-

below the natural rate would result only in higher inflation. The Friedman-Phelps natural rate
hypothesis was immediately influential and fairly quickly began to be incorporated in formal
econometric models.
Given the probable role that the attempt to exploit a long-run Phillips curve tradeoff had
in the ‘Great Inflation,” central bankers adopted the natural rate, or no-long-run-tradeoff, view.
Of course, the earlier discussion of the benefits of price stability suggests a long-run
tradeoff--but not of the Phillips curve type. Rather, low inflation likely contributes to improved
efficiency and hence higher employment in the long run.

4. Expectations Play a Crucial Role in the Macro Economy.
A key aspect of the Friedman-Phelps natural rate hypothesis was that sustained inflation
may initially confuse firms and households, but in the long run sustained inflation would not
boost employment because expectations of inflation would adjust to any sustained rate of
increase in prices. Starting in the early 1970s, the rational expectations revolution, launched in a
series of papers by Robert Lucas (1972, 1973, and 1976), took this reasoning a step further and
demonstrated that the public and the markets’ expectations of policy actions have important
effects on almost every sector of the economy.5 The theory of rational expectations emphasized
that economic agents should be driven by optimizing behavior, and therefore their expectations
of future variables should be optimal forecasts (the best guess of the future) using all available
information. Because the optimizing behavior posited by rational expectations indicates that
expectations should respond immediately to new information, rational expectations suggests that
the long run might be quite short, so that attempting to lower unemployment below the natural
rate could lead to higher inflation very quickly.
A fundamental insight of the rational expectations revolution is that expectations about
future monetary policy have an important impact on the evolution of economic activity. As a
result, the systematic component of policymakers’ actions--i.e., the component that can be
anticipated--plays a crucial role in the conduct of monetary policy. Indeed, the management of
expectations about future policy has become a central element of monetary theory, as

5

The 1976 Lucas paper was already very influential in 1973, when it was first presented at the Carnegie-Rochester
Conference. Note that although Muth (1961) introduced the idea of rational expectations more than ten years
earlier, his work went largely unnoticed until resurrected by Lucas.
-6-

emphasized in the recent synthesis of Michael Woodford (2003).6 And this insight has
far-reaching implications, for example, with regard to the types of systematic behavior by
policymakers that are likely to be conducive to macroeconomic stability and growth.7

5. The Taylor Principle is Necessary for Price Stability.
The recognition that economic outcomes depend on expectations of monetary policy
suggests that policy evaluation requires the comparison of economic performance under different
monetary policy rules.8 One type of rule that has received enormous attention in the literature is
the Taylor rule (Taylor, 1993), which describes monetary policy as setting an overnight bank rate
(federal funds rate in the United States) in response to the deviation of inflation from its desired
level or target (the inflation gap) and the deviation of output from its natural rate level (the
output gap).9 Taylor (1993) emphasized that a rule of this type had desirable properties and in
particular would stabilize inflation only if the coefficient on the inflation gap exceeded unity.
This conclusion came to be known as the “Taylor principle” (Woodford, 2001) and can be
described most simply by saying that stabilizing monetary policy must raise the nominal interest
rate by more than the rise in inflation. In other words, inflation will remain under control only if
real interest rates rise in response to a rise in inflation. Although, the Taylor principle now
seems pretty obvious, estimates of Taylor rules, such as those by Clarida, Gali, and Gertler
(1998), indicate that during the late 1960s and 1970s many central banks, including the Federal
Reserve, violated the Taylor principle, resulting in the “Great Inflation” that so many countries

6

Indeed, one implication of rational expectations in a world of flexible wages and prices was the policy
ineffectiveness proposition, which indicated that if monetary policy was anticipated, it would have no real effect on
output; only unanticipated monetary policy could have a significant impact. Although evidence for the policy
ineffectiveness proposition turned out to be weak (Barro, 1977; Mishkin, 1982a,b, 1983), the rational expectation
revolution’s point that monetary policy’s impact on the economy is substantially influenced by whether it is
anticipated or not has become widely accepted.
7
Of course, the recognition that management of expectations is a central element in monetary policymaking raises
to the forefront the credibility of monetary policy authorities to do what they say they will do. It does not diminish,
however, the importance of actions by the monetary authorities because “actions speak louder than words”:
Monetary authorities will be believed only if they take the actions consistent with how they want expectations to be
managed.
8
Although Lucas (1976) was a critique of the then-current practice of using econometric models to evaluate specific
policy actions, it leads to the conclusion that monetary policy analysis should involve the comparison of economic
performance arising from different rules.
9
Variants of the Taylor rule also allow for interest rate smoothing, as in Taylor (1999).
-7-

experienced during this period.10 Indeed, as inflation rose in the United States, real interest rates
fell.11

6. The Time-Inconsistency Problem is Relevant to Monetary Policy.
Another important development in the science of monetary policy that emanated from the
rational expectations revolutions was the discovery of the importance of the time-inconsistency
problem in papers by Kydland and Prescott (1977), Calvo (1978), and Barro and Gordon (1983).
The time-inconsistency problem can arise if monetary policy conducted on a discretionary, dayby-day basis leads to worse long-run outcomes than could be achieved by committing to a policy
rule. In particular, policymakers may find it tempting to exploit a short-run Phillips curve
tradeoff between inflation and employment; but private agents, cognizant of this temptation, will
adjust expectations to anticipate the expansionary policy, so that it will result only in higher
inflation with no short-run increase in employment In other words, without a commitment
mechanism, monetary policy makers may find themselves unable to consistently follow an
optimal plan over time; the optimal plan can be time-inconsistent and so will soon be abandoned.
The notion of time-inconsistency has led to a number of important insights regarding central
bank behavior--such as the importance of reputation (formalized in the concept of reputational
equilibria) and institutional design.

7. Central Bank Independence Improves Macroeconomic Performance.
Indeed, the potential problem of time-inconsistency has led to a great deal of research
that examines the importance of institutional features that can give central bankers the
commitment mechanisms they need to pursue low inflation. Perhaps the most significant has
been research showing that central bank independence, at least along some dimensions, is likely
very important to maintaining low inflation. Allowing central banks to be instrument
independent, i.e., to control the setting of monetary policy instruments, can help insulate them

10

In contrast, Orphanides (2003) argues that the Federal Reserve did abide by the Taylor principle but pursued
overly expansionary policies during this period because of large and persistent misperceptions of the level of
potential output and the natural unemployment rate.
11
E.g., the estimates in Mishkin (1981, 1992).
-8-

from short-run pressures to exploit the Phillips-curve tradeoff between employment and inflation
and thus avoid the time-inconsistency problem.12
Evidence supports the conjecture that macroeconomic performance is improved when
central banks are more independent. When central banks in industrialized countries are ranked
from least legally independent to most legally independent, the inflation performance is found to
be the best for countries with the most independent central banks (Alesina and Summers, 1993;
Cukierman, 1993; Fischer, 1994; and the surveys in Forder, 2000, and Cukierman, 2006).13
Although there is a strong case for instrument independence, the same is not true for goal
independence, the ability of the central bank to set its own goals for monetary policy.14
In a democracy, the public exercises control over government actions, and policymakers are
accountable, which requires that the goals of monetary policy be set by the elected government.
Although basic democratic principles argue for the government setting the goals of monetary
policy, the question of whether it should set goals for the short-run or intermediate-run is more
controversial. For example, an arrangement in which the government set a short-run inflation or
exchange rate target that was changed every month or every quarter could easily lead to a serious
time-inconsistency problem in which short-run objectives would dominate. In practice, however,
this problem does not appear to be severe because, for example, in many countries in which the
government sets the annual inflation target, the target is rarely changed once price stability is
achieved. Even though, in theory, governments could manipulate monetary policy goals to
pursue short-run objectives, they usually do not if the goal-setting process is highly transparent.
12

For an example of how the time-inconsistency problem can be modeled as resulting from political pressure, see
Mishkin and Westelius (2008). Instrument independence also insulates the central bank from the myopia that can be
a feature of the political process. Instrument independence thus makes it more likely that the central bank will be
forward looking and adequately allow for the long lags from monetary policy actions to inflation in setting their
policy instruments.

13

A case study that provides a striking example of the benefits of instrument independence.
occurred with the granting of instrument independence to the Bank of England in May of 1997 (Mishkin and Posen,
1997; Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen, 1999); before that date, the Chancellor of the Exchequer (the finance
minister) set the monetary policy instrument, not the Bank of England. During 1995-96 the U.K. retail inflation rate
(RPIX) was fairly close to 3 percent, but the spread between nominal and indexed bond yields--referred to as 10year breakeven inflation--was substantially higher, in the range of 4 percent to 5 percent, reflecting investors’
inflation expectations as well as compensation for perceived inflation risk at a 10-year horizon. Notably, breakeven
inflation declined markedly on the day that the government announced the Bank of England’s independence and has
remained substantially lower ever since.
14

The distinction between goal and instrument independence was first made by Debelle and Fischer (1994) and
Fischer (1994).
-9-

However, the length of the lags from monetary policy to inflation is a technical issue that
the central bank is well placed to determine. Thus, for example, deciding how long it should take
for inflation to return to a long-run goal necessarily requires judgment and expertise regarding the
nature of the inflation process and its interaction with real activity. That need for judgment and
expertise argues for having the central bank set medium-term goals because the speed with which it
can achieve them depends on the lags of monetary policy. Whether the central bank or the
government should set medium-term inflation targets is therefore an open question.

8. Credible Commitment to a Nominal Anchor Promotes Price and Output Stability.
The inability of monetary policy to boost employment in the long run, the importance of
expectations, the benefits of price stability, and the time-inconsistency problem are the reasons
that a credible commitment to a nominal anchor--i.e., stabilization of a nominal variable such as
the inflation rate, the money supply, or an exchange rate--is crucial to successful monetary policy
outcomes.
An institutional commitment to price stability via establishing a nominal anchor provides
a counterbalance to the time-inconsistency problem because it makes it clear that the central
bank must focus on the long-run and thus resist the temptation to pursue short-run expansionary
policies that are inconsistent with the nominal anchor. Commitment to a nominal anchor can
also encourage the government to be more fiscally responsible, which also supports price
stability. For example, persistent fiscal imbalances have, in the absence of a strong nominal
anchor, led some governments, particularly in less-developed economies, to resort to the socalled inflation tax--the issuing/printing of money to pay for goods and services that leads to
more inflation and is thus inconsistent with price stability.
Commitment to a nominal anchor also leads to policy actions that promote price stability,
which helps promote economic efficiency and growth. A credible commitment to a nominal
anchor helps stabilize inflation expectations, which reduce the likelihood of “inflation scares,” in
which expected inflation and interest rates shoot up (Goodfriend, 1993). Inflation scares lead to
bad economic outcomes because the rise in inflation expectations leads not only to higher actual
inflation but also to monetary policy tightening to get inflation back under control that often
results in large declines in economic activity. A credible commitment to a nominal anchor is
therefore a crucial element in the successful management of expectations; and it is a key feature
- 10 -

of the new-neoclassical synthesis (Goodfriend and King, 1997; Clarida, Gali, and Gertler, 1999;
Woodford, 2003).

A successful commitment to a nominal anchor has been found to produce

not only more-stable inflation but lower volatility of output fluctuations ( Fatás, Mihov, and
Rose, 2007; Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2002, 2007).
Commitment to a nominal anchor can also help stabilize output and employment.
Specifically, to counter a contractionary demand shock, the monetary authorities response is to
reduce the short-run nominal interest rate; however, the effectiveness of such a policy action may
be hindered if long-run inflation expectations are not firmly anchored. For example, if the
private sector becomes less certain about the longer-run inflation outlook, then an increase in the
inflation risk premium could boost longer-term interest rates by more than the increase in
expected inflation. The higher inflation risk premium would place upward pressure on the real
costs of long-term financing for households and businesses (whose debt contracts are almost
always expressed in nominal terms) and hence might partially offset the direct monetary
stimulus. Thus, a central bank commitment that firmly anchors long-run inflation expectations
can make an important contribution to the effectiveness of the central bank’s actions aimed at
stabilizing economic activity in the face of adverse demand shocks.

9. Financial Frictions Play and Important Role in the Business Cycle.
Research that outlined how asymmetric information could impede the efficient
functioning of the financial system (Akerlof, 1970; Myers and Majluf, 1984; and Greenwald,
Stiglitz, and Weiss, 1984) suggests an important link between business cycle fluctuations and
financial frictions. When shocks to the financial system increase information asymmetry so that
financial frictions increase dramatically, financial instability results, and the financial system is
no longer able to channel funds to those with productive investment opportunities, with the result
that the economy can experience a severe economic downturn (Mishkin, 1997). The rediscovery
of Irving Fisher’s (1933) paper on the Great Depression led to the recognition that financial
instability played a central role in the collapse of economic activity during that period (Mishkin,
1978; Bernanke, 1983; and the survey in Calomiris, 1993), and it spawned a large literature on
the role of financial frictions in business cycle fluctuations (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler, 1999,
2001; Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1999; Kashyap and Stein, 1994). The empirical evidence
- 11 -

also strongly supported the proposition that the most severe business cycle downturns are always
associated with financial instability, not only in advanced countries but also in emerging-market
countries (Mishkin, 1991, 1996).
Even before the crisis, most central bankers understood that financial disruptions could
be very damaging to the economy and this explains the extraordinary actions that central banks
took during the crisis to shore up financial markets (Mishkin, 2011). However, the
macroeconomic models used for forecasting and policy analysis, whether they were dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models or more traditional macroeconometric models
like FRBUS in use at the Federal Reserve, did not allow for the impact of financial frictions and
disruptions on economic activity.

Theory of Optimal Monetary Policy
The theory of optimal monetary policy starts by specifying an objective function that
represents economic welfare, that is, the well-being of households in the economy, and then
maximizes this objective function subject to constraints that are provided by a model of the
economy.

Before the crisis, both the objective function and the model of the economy were

based on the principles of the new neoclassical synthesis.

Objective Function. Standard descriptions of the central bank’s objective function have been
expressed in terms of two components (e.g., Svensson, 1997, Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 1999,
and Woodford, 2003). The benefits of price stability (principle 2) is reflected in the first
component which involves minimizing the deviations of inflation from its optimal rate, which
most central bankers take to be around the 2% level. The second component reflects the costs of
underutilized resources in the economy and involves minimizing deviations of real economic
activity from its natural rate level, which is the efficient level determined by the productive
potential of the economy. Because expectations about the future play a central role in the
determination of inflation and in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy (principle 4),
optimal monetary policy requires taking account of the intertemporal nature of economic welfare
and requires maximizing the objectives both for the present state of the economy and the
expected path in future periods. Because inflation is a monetary phenomenon and is thus viewed
- 12 -

as controllable by monetary policy (principle 1), the central bank sets its policy instruments (in
normal times, a short-term interest rate) to maximize the objective function subject to the
constraints.

Constraints: The Model. The constraints as embodied in macro-econometric models in use at
central banks before the crisis also reflected the principles of the new neoclassical synthesis.
These models display no long-run tradeoff between unemployment and inflation (principle 3).
Expectations play a central role in household and business behavior (principle 4) and lead to the
existence of the time-inconsistency problem (principle 5). The models also display the
importance of a credible commitment to a strong nominal anchor to produce good monetary
policy outcomes (principle 8), which requires an independent central bank (principle 7).
Because the transmission of monetary policy to the economy operates through the real interest
rate, real interest rates have to rise in order to stabilize inflation (Taylor principle 5).

Linear Quadratic Framework. As we have seen, the objective function and the model
(constraints) used by central banks before the crisis reflected all eight principles of the
neoclassical synthesis. However, the approach to analyzing optimal monetary policy used by
central banks had an additional important feature: it made use of a linear quadratic (LQ)
framework in which the equations describing the dynamic behavior of the economy are linear, a
basic feature of DSGE models, and the objective function specifying the goals of policy is
quadratic. For example, the objective function was characterized as a loss function comprising
the squared value of the inflation gap (that is, actual inflation minus desired inflation) and the
squared value of the output gap (that is, actual output minus potential output).

Representative-Agent Framework. The models also contained another additional feature, a
representative-agent framework in which all agents are alike so that financial frictions are not
present because they require that agents differ, particularly in the amount of information they
have. With asymmetric information ruled out, the financial sector has no special role to play in
economic fluctuations. Thus although central bankers were aware of principle 9 that financial
frictions could have an important effect on economic activity, financial frictions were not a key

- 13 -

feature in the macro-econometric models used in central banks and were not an element of the
pre-crisis theory of optimal monetary policy.

II.
Monetary Policy Strategy Before the Crisis
The science of monetary policy described above had several implications for the strategy
of monetary policy, some of which were generally agreed to by almost all central bankers and
others which were accepted by most central bankers, but for which there was not complete
consensus.

Flexible Inflation Targeting
The monetary policy strategy that follows from the eight principles of the new
neoclassical synthesis is referred to in the academic literature as “flexible inflation targeting”
(Svensson, 1997). It involves a strong, credible commitment by the central bank to stabilize
inflation in the long run, often at an explicit numerical level, but also allows for the central bank
to pursue policies to stabilize output around its natural rate level in the short run.
The phrase “inflation targeting” to describe this monetary policy strategy is somewhat
unfortunate. Although I would argue that almost all central banks that have an independent
monetary policy follow the general principles of flexible inflation targeting, they do have very
different approaches to the communication strategy surrounding it. Some central banks have
announced an explicit numerical inflation objective and treat it as a target, and these are
classified a full-fledged inflation targeters, while others are reluctant to be so explicit.
For example, the Federal Reserve has espoused a strong commitment to stabilize
inflation, but has not been willing to announce an explicit inflation objective. Instead, the
Federal Reserve reports on the individual FOMC participants’ projection of inflation in the long
run under “appropriate monetary policy”. In effect, the Fed provides the long-run inflation
- 14 -

objective for each FOMC participant, but has not required that the participants agree on a
common objective for inflation. The Federal Reserve has therefore not yet adopted an agreed
upon inflation objective and so it is not classified as being in the inflation targeting camp. On
the other hand, the FOMC participants long-run inflation projections all have been in a pretty
tight range between 1 ½ and 2%, and so they are not far from committing to a specific inflation
objective and not very large modifications in their communication strategy would move them to
the inflation targeting camp (Mishkin, 2008).
In other cases, such as the European Central Bank or the Swiss National Bank, central
banks have been willing to announce an explicit numerical inflation objective, but are reluctant
to treat it as a target because they believe that this would not give them sufficient flexibility.
They are unwilling to be classified as inflation targeters because they believe that the use of the
word “target” might lead the public to expect them to hit the inflation targets too precisely or
over too specific a horizon.
Despite these apparent differences in communication strategy, the basic approach of
central banks with an independent monetary policy before the crisis was very similar. They
adhered to the eight principles of the new neoclassical synthesis and were willing to conduct
monetary policy under a strong commitment to stabilize inflation in the long run. Indeed,
Svensson (2002) argues that any central bank that indicates that it will pursue the standard
objective function which involves minimizing both inflation and output gap in an intertemporal
setting is effectively a flexible inflation targeter. Before the crisis, almost all central banks with
an independent monetary policy fell into this classification.

Certainty Equivalence, Gradualism and Risk Management
Under the assumptions of the linear quadratic framework, the optimal policy is certainty
equivalent: This policy can be characterized by a linear time-invariant response to each shock,
and the magnitude of these responses does not depend on the variances or any other aspect of the
probability distribution of the shocks. In such an environment, optimal monetary policy does
not focus on tail risk which might require risk management. Furthermore, when financial market
participants and wage and price setters are relatively forward-looking, the optimal policy under
- 15 -

commitment is characterized by considerable inertia, which is commonly referred to as
gradualism.15
Indeed, the actual course of monetary policy before the crisis was typically been very
smooth in the United States as well as in many other industrial economies.

For example, the

Federal Reserve usually adjusted the federal funds rate in increments of 25 or 50 basis points
(that is, 1/4 or 1/2 percentage point) and sharp reversals in the funds rate path were rare.
Numerous empirical studies have characterized monetary policy before the crisis using Taylorstyle rules in which the policy rate responds to the inflation gap and the output gap; these studies
have generally found that the fit of the regression equation is improved by including a lagged
interest rate that reflects the smoothness of the typical adjustment pattern.16
Although in many ways central banks have conducted monetary policy under a certainty
equivalence strategy, central bankers were not completely comfortable with this approach to
monetary policy. While a linear-quadratic framework may provide a reasonable approximation
to how optimal monetary policy operates under fairly normal circumstances, this approach is less
likely to be adequate for thinking about monetary policy when there is risk, even if small, of
particularly poor economic performance. First, the dynamic behavior of the economy may well
exhibit nonlinearities, at least in response to some shocks (Hamilton, 1989; Kim and Nelson,
1999; and Kim, Morley, and Piger, 2005). Furthermore, the use of a quadratic objective
function does not reflect the extent to which most individuals have strong preferences for
minimizing the incidence of worst-case scenarios. Therefore, given that the central bank’s
ultimate goal of maximizing the public welfare, there is a case for monetary policy to reflect the
public’s preferences to avoid particularly adverse economic outcomes.
The discomfort with a certainty equivalence approach to monetary policy led central
bankers to exposit a “risk management” approach to the conduct of monetary policy even before
the crisis. Alan Greenspan indeed described his thinking about monetary policy as exactly such
an approach (Greenspan, 2003), although he was not very explicit about what this meant.
However, it is clear that even before the crisis, central bankers were aware that they had to worry
15

The now-classic reference on this approach is Woodford (2003). Also see Goodfriend and King (1997);
Rotemberg and Woodford (1997); Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999); King and Wolman (1999); Erceg, Henderson,
and Levin (2000); Benigno and Woodford (2003); Giannoni and Woodford (2005); Levin, Onatski, and Williams
(2005); and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2005).
16
Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1998, 2000); Sack (2000); English, Nelson, and Sack (2003); Smets and Wouters
(2003); Levin, Onatski, and Williams (2005); further discussion is in Bernanke (2004).
- 16 -

about risks of very bad economic outcomes. Specifically, they were aware that in some
circumstances the shocks hitting the economy might exhibit excess kurtosis, commonly referred
to as “tail risk” in which the probability of relatively large disturbances is higher than would be
implied by a Gaussian distribution.

Dichotomy Between Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Policy
Even before the crisis, central bankers were aware that financial disruptions could have a
serious negative impact on the economy. This is why many central banks not only issued reports
on monetary policy, but also published Financial Stability Reports to discuss potential threats to
the financial system. Nonetheless, the general equilibrium modeling frameworks at central
banks did not incorporate financial frictions as a major source of business cycle fluctuations.
This naturally led to a dichotomy between monetary policy and financial stability policy in
which these two types of policies are conducted separately. Monetary policy instruments would
focus on minimizing inflation and output gaps. It would then be up to prudential regulation and
supervision to prevent excessive risk taking that could promote financial instability.
Although I would characterize most central bankers as having supported the dichotomy
between monetary policy and financial stability policy, there were views that monetary policy
should address financial stability issues, particularly with regard to responding to potential asset
price bubbles, as discussed below.

Response of Monetary Policy to Asset Price Bubbles: the “Lean” Versus
“Clean” Debate
An active debate in central banks before the crisis focused on how central banks should
respond to potential asset price bubbles. Because asset prices are a central element in the
transmission mechanisms of monetary policy, the theory of optimal monetary policy requires
that monetary policy responds to asset prices in order to obtain good outcomes in terms of
inflation and output. Hence, the issue of how monetary policy might respond to asset-price
movements is whether it should respond at all but whether it should respond over and above the
- 17 -

response called for in terms of objectives to stabilize inflation and employment. Another way of
stating the issue is whether monetary policy should try to pop, or slow the growth of possibly
developing asset-price bubbles to minimize damage to the economy when these bubbles burst?
Alternatively, should the monetary authorities not respond directly to possible asset price
bubbles, but instead should respond to asset price declines only after a bubble bursts to stabilize
both output and inflation? These two positions have been characterized as leaning against asset
price bubbles versus cleaning up after the bubble bursts and so the debate over what to do about
asset price bubbles has been characterized as the “lean” versus “clean” debate.
Even before the crisis, there was no question that asset price bubbles have negative
effects on the economy. As Dupor (2005) has emphasized, the departure of asset prices from
fundamentals can lead to inappropriate investments that decrease the efficiency of the economy.
Furthermore, the bursting of bubbles throughout history has been followed by sharp declines in
economic activity, as Kindleberger’s (1978) famous book demonstrated.
The clear cut dangers of asset-price bubbles led some economists before the crisis, both
inside and outside central banks —such as Cecchetti and others (2000), Borio and Lowe (2002),
Borio, English, and Filardo (2003), and White (2004)—to argue that central banks should at
times “lean against the wind” by raising interest rates to stop bubbles from getting out of hand.
They argued that raising interest rates to slow a bubble’s growth would produce better outcomes
because it would either prevent the bubble or would result in a less severe bursting of the bubble,
with far less damage to the economy.
The opposing view to the “leaning against the wind” view that asset prices should have a
special role in the conduct of monetary policy over and above that implied by their foreseeable
effect on inflation and employment is often referred to as the “Greenspan doctrine,” because he
strenuously argued that monetary policy should not try to lean against asset price bubbles, but
rather should just clean up after they burst (Greenspan, 2002).17 There are several elements of
this argument.
First, bubbles are hard to detect. In order to justify leaning against a bubble, a central
bank must assume that it can identify a bubble in progress. That assumption was viewed as
highly dubious because it is hard to believe that the central bank has such an informational
advantage over private markets. If the central bank has no informational advantage, and if it
17

I was also a proponent of this view (Mishkin, 2001a, 2007b)
- 18 -

knows that a bubble has developed, the market will almost surely know this too, and the bubble
will burst. Thus, any bubble that could be identified with certainty by the central bank would be
unlikely ever to develop much further.
A second objection against leaning against bubbles is that raising interest rates may be
very ineffective in restraining the bubble, because market participants expect such high rates of
return from buying bubble-driven assets.18 By definition, bubbles are departures from the
behavior that is normally incorporated within models, and so the tools of monetary policy are
unlikely to work normally in abnormal conditions.
A third objection is that there are many asset prices, and at any one time a bubble may be
present in only a fraction of assets. Monetary policy actions are a very blunt instrument in such a
case, as such actions would be likely to affect asset prices in general, rather than solely those in a
bubble.
Fourth, although some theoretical models suggested that raising interest rates could
diminish the acceleration of asset prices, others suggest that raising interest rates would cause a
bubble to burst more severely, thus doing even more damage to the economy (Bernanke, Gertler,
and Gilchrist, 1999; Greenspan, 2002; Gruen, Plumb, and Stone, 2005; and Kohn, 2006). This
view was supported by historical examples, such as the monetary tightening that occurred in
1928 and 1929 in the United States and 1989 in Japan, suggesting that raising interest rates may
cause a bubble to burst more severely, thereby increasing the damage to the economy.19 Another
way of saying this is that bubbles are departures from normal behavior, and it is unrealistic to
expect that the usual tools of monetary policy will be effective in abnormal conditions. Attempts
to prick bubbles were thus viewed as possibly violating the Hippocratic oath of “do no harm”.
Finally, there was a view that the monetary authorities had the tools to keep the harmful
effects of a bursting bubble at a manageable level, as long as they respond in a timely fashion.
This was true even if interest rates fell and approached the zero lower bound, and so the
conventional tool of lowering the policy interest rate was no longer an option. The economy
could be stimulated by either: 1) managing expectations so that the policy rate would be viewed
as staying low for an extended period, thereby lowering long-term interest rates, 2) risk and term
premiums could be lowered by purchasing securities, thereby changing their relative supply, and
18

For example, see the discussion in Greenspan (2002).
For example, see Gruen, Plumb, and Stone (2005), Hamilton (1987), Cargill, Hutchison and Ito (2000), Jinushi,
Kuroki and Miyao (2000) and Posen (2003).
- 19 19

3) by exchange rate interventions to lower the value of the domestic currency, thereby increasing
foreign demand for domestic production.20
One counterargument to this view was the disastrous experience of Japan after the
bursting of the stock market and real estate bubbles. However, as Posen (2003) pointed out,the
problem in Japan was not so much the bursting of the bubble as it was the subsequent policies.
The imbalances in Japan’s banking sector were not resolved, so they continued to get worse well
after the bubble had burst. In addition, as pointed out in Ahearne and others (2002), the Bank of
Japan did not ease monetary policy sufficiently or rapidly enough in the aftermath of the crisis.
The bottom line from this analysis was that the cost of leaning against asset-price bubbles
was likely to be high, while the costs of a bursting bubbles could be kept low. Instead of trying
to lean against bubbles, this analysis supported an approach in which central banks just clean up
after the bubble afterwards. This approach was fully consistent with monetary policy focusing
on stabilizing inflation and employment without a special focus on asset price bubbles.
Another argument against focusing on asset prices, is that it could lead to public
confusion about its objectives. As reported in Giavazzi and Mishkin (2006), interviews with
participants from different sectors of Swedish society suggested that statements on house prices
by the Riksbank confused the public and led to a general weakening of confidence in the
Swedish central bank.
I would argue that the Greenspan doctrine, which was strongly supported by Federal
Reserve officials, held great sway in the central banking world before the crisis. However, there
were dissenting voices. For example, over several meetings in 2004, a minority of members of
the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Bank of England argued for raising interest rates
more than could be justified in terms of the Bank of England’s objectives for inflation over its
normal policy horizon.21 According to the minutes of those meetings, the advocates believed
that such a move would reduce the risks that high house-price appreciation and the rapid
accumulation of household debt would lead to an abrupt adjustment process, with serious
negative consequences for the economy.22 Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England,
did not advocate leaning against the wind but did suggest that, to prevent a buildup of financial
imbalances, a central bank might extend the horizon over which inflation is brought back to
20

E.g., see Svensson (2001), Reinhart (2003), Bernanke (2004).
Bank of England (2004), MPC Minutes, January, p. 8; March, p. 9; April, p. 9; and August, p. 9.
22
Bank of England (2004), MPC Minutes, March, p. 8.
- 20 21

target (King, 2004a,b). Statements from officials at the European Central Bank and other central
banks also suggested that the possibility of an asset boom or bust might require a longer period
than the usual one to two years in assessing whether the price stability goal was being met
(Issing, 2003a,b; Stevens, 2004; Selody and Wilkins, 2004; Bank of Canada, 2006; and
Rosenberg, 2006).

III.
How Has the Crisis Changed Our Thinking?
The global financial crisis of 2007-2009 was not only a tsunami that flattened the
economy, but in the eyes of some commentators it has flattened the science of monetary policy,
requiring a total rethink. Armed with the understanding of where the science of monetary policy
was before the crisis, we can ask what aspects of the events that unfolded during the crisis
require us to modify our earlier analysis. From my reading of the crisis there are five lessons
that should change how we think about the science of monetary policy and monetary policy
strategy.

1. Developments in the financial sector have a far greater impact on economic activity than we
earlier realized.
Although central bankers generally recognized that financial frictions could play an
important role in business cycle fluctuations, the 2007-2009 financial crisis made it clear that the
adverse effects of financial disruptions on economic activity could be far worse than was
anticipated for advanced economies. When the financial crisis started in August 2007, central
bank actions to contain it seemed to be working. Many officials at the central banks, although
still concerned about the disruption to the financial markets, hoped that the worst was over and
that the financial system would begin to recover (see Mishkin, 2011). The subprime mortgage
sector was after all only a small part of the overall capital market, and the losses in the subprime
mortgage market, although substantial, still seemed manageable. By the summer of 2008,
central banks were even turning their attention to the very high inflation rates at the time: for
- 21 -

example, there were discussions inside the Federal Reserve whether the easing phase of
monetary policy might have to be reversed in order to contain inflation (e.g., see Wessel, 2009).
But then came a set of shocks which sent the financial system and the economy over the
cliff: the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy on September 15, 2008, the AIG collapse on September
16, the run on the Reserve Primary Fund on the same day, and the U.S. Treasury’s struggle to get
the TARP plan approved by U.S. Congress over the next couple of weeks (Mishkin, 2011). The
financial crisis now morphed into a global crisis that caused a sharp drop in economic activity in
the United States – real GDP declined at an annual rate of -1.3% in 2008, Q4, -5.4% in 2009 Q1
and -6.4% in 2009 Q2 – but in the rest of the world as well – with real GDP falling at a -6.4%
rate in the fourth quarter of 2008 and a -7.3% rate in the first quarter of 2009. The
unemployment rate shot up to over 10% in the United States and in many other advanced
economies, with the unemployment rate remaining stubbornly high even after the world
economy started to recover. The world-wide recession that resulted from the financial crisis
turned out to be the most severe economic contraction since the world-wide depression of the
1930s.
The global financial crisis of 2007-2009 therefore demonstrated that financial frictions
should be front and center in macroeconomic analysis: they no longer could be ignored in the
macro-econometric that models that central banks use for forecasting and policy analysis, as we
saw was the case before the crisis. As a result, there is a resurgence of interest in the interaction
of finance and macroeconomics. Economists, both in academia and in central banks, are now
actively trying to build financial frictions into their general equilibrium models, and there is a
new literature that is in its infancy to explore how financial frictions would modify the
prescriptions provided by the science of monetary policy.23

2. The macro economy is highly nonlinear.
Because economic downturns typically result in even greater uncertainty about asset
values, such episodes may involve an adverse feedback loop whereby financial disruptions cause
investment and consumer spending to decline, which, in turn, causes economic activity to
contract. Such contraction then increases uncertainty about the value of assets, and, as a result,

23

For example, set Gertler and Karadi (2009) and Curdia and Woodford (2009).
- 22 -

the financial disruption worsens. In turn, this development causes economic activity to contract
further in a perverse cycle.
Deterioration of balance sheets during a recession can also intensify problems of adverse
selection and moral hazard because it removes an important channel through which information
asymmetries are mitigated--the use of collateral. If a borrower defaults on a loan backed by
collateral, the effects of the adverse selection problem are less severe because the lender can take
title to the collateral and thus make up for the loss. In addition, the threat of losing the collateral
gives the borrower more incentives not to take unmanageable risks that might ultimately lead to
a default, and it thus reduces the moral hazard problem. These mechanisms work only as long as
the collateral is of sufficient quality; during macroeconomic downturns, the value of collateral
may fall, problems of adverse selection and moral hazard again become central, and lenders
become much less willing to lend. Again, these events can result in an adverse feedback loop.
The events after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy showed how nonlinear both the
financial system and the macro economy could be. In the aftermath of the Lehman Brothers
bankruptcy, the financial system seized up and both credit spreads (such as the Baa-Treasury or
junk-bond-Treasury spreads) and liquidity spreads (such as the TED or the LIBOR-OIS spead)
shot up dramatically. The subsequent economic downturn in which real GDP and world trade
collapsed from the fourth quarter of 2008 through the first half of 2009, mentioned immediately
above, also indicated that the macro economy can at times be highly nonlinear.
The role of nonlinearities in the macro economy when there is a financial disruption
implies an important flaw in the theory of optimal monetary policy that was in general use prior
to the crisis: the theory of optimal monetary policy was based on the assumption that the macro
economy can be described by linear dynamic equations. The financial crisis of 2007-2009
demonstrates that although the linear-quadratic framework may provide a reasonable
approximation to how optimal monetary policy operates under fairly normal circumstances, this
approach will not be adequate for thinking about monetary policy when financial disruptions hit
the economy. 24 Furthermore, the use of a quadratic objective function does not reflect the
extent to which most individuals have strong preferences for minimizing the incidence of worstcase scenarios, such as the one we have just experienced. Therefore, given that the central
24

Even before the crisis there was some research which recognized that the dynamic behavior of the economy could
exhibit nonlinearities, at least in response to some shocks (Hamilton, 1989; Kim and Nelson, 1999; and Kim,
Morley, and Piger, 2005).
- 23 -

bank’s ultimate goal is the maximization of public welfare, the design of monetary policy would
reflect the public’s preferences, especially with respect to avoiding particularly adverse
economic outcomes.
Most of the quantitative studies of optimal monetary policy have also assumed that the
shocks hitting the economy have a time-invariant Gaussian distribution, that is, a classical bell
curve with symmetric and well-behaved tails. In reality, however, the distribution of shocks
hitting the economy is more complex. In some instances, the uncertainty facing the economy is
clearly skewed in one direction or another; again, this is likely when there are significant
financial disruptions. In addition, as we have seen in the recent crisis, the shocks hitting the
economy may exhibit excess kurtosis, that is, tail risk, because the probability of relatively large
negative disturbances is higher than would be implied by a Gaussian distribution.

3. The zero lower bound is more problematic than we realized.
As discussed earlier, before the crisis, central bankers recognized that the zero lower
bound for nominal interest rates would require the use of nonconventional monetary policy when
a contractionary shock caused interest rates to fall toward zero. One view is that the zero lower
bound problem is more serious than originally contemplated because nonconventional monetary
policy was not that effective during the crisis. I disagree strongly with this view.
The shock to the financial system resulting from the global financial crisis was in many
ways more complicated than the shock that produced the Great Depression of the 1930s, and yet
the economic contraction turned out to be far less severe. One key factor that appreciably
lessened the severity of the recent economic downturn was that monetary policy was very
aggressive and that it was effective.25
Nonconventional monetary policy took four forms: 1) liquidity provision in which
central banks expanded lending to both banks and other financial institutions, 2) asset purchases
of both government securities and private assets to lower borrowing costs for households, 3)
quantitative easing, in which central banks greatly expanded their balance sheets, and 4)
management of expectations in which central banks committed to keep their policy rate at very
low levels for a long period of time.

25

Not all economists would agree with this view, notably John Taylor (2009).
- 24 -

In evaluating liquidity provision, some research argues that there was little effect from
these types of programs. Taylor and Williams (2009), for example, do not find that the actual
lending from the Term Auction Facility (TAF) had any impact on easing credit markets. Other
research has challenged this conclusion by arguing that financial markets would react to the
announcements of programs, rather than the actual lending and that the dependent variable in the
analysis should use changes in spreads and not levels. McAndrews, Sarkar and Wang (2008) find
that announcements about TAF did significantly lower credit spreads, and other research
supports the conclusion that the TAF and other credit facilities helped lower interest rates (Wu,
2008, Christensen, Lopez and Rudebusch, 2009, and Sarkar and Shrader, 2010). Baba and
Packer (2009) and McAndrews (2009), Goldberg, Kennedy and Miu (2010) find that the U.S.
dollar swap facilities did help improve the performance of the dollar swap markets. Using a
similar event-study methodology, Ait-Sahalia et al.(2010) find that liquidity provision in not only
the United States, but also in the United Kingdom and Japan, did help lower interbank risk
premiums. This research suggests that liquidity provision did help stabilize financial markets
during this crisis.
Research on the impact of the Fed’s large-scale asset purchases during the global
financial crisis by Gagnon, Raskin, Remache and Sack (2010), finds that these programs lowered
long-term bond rates relative to short rates on the order of 50 basis points, and lowered MBS
interest rates even further by improving liquidity in this market, thereby having a substantial
impact on residential mortgage rates.
I am more skeptical that quantitative easing, by itself, made much difference to
stimulating the economy. Why should an expansion of the monetary base lead to higher
aggregate demand when it was unable to further lower interest rates or stimulate bank lending?
(For example, see Curdia and Woodford, 2009.) In addition, evidence from the Japanese
episode does not provide much support that a pure expansion of a central bank’s balance sheet is
particularly effective in stimulating aggregate demand (Kuttner, 2004).
There is strong theoretical support for the management of expectations to stimulate
spending when the policy rate hits the zero lower bound because a commitment to keep shortterm interest rates low for a substantial period of time helps lower long-term interest rates and
also raises inflation expectations, thereby reducing the real interest rate (Eggertsson and

- 25 -

Woodford, 2003 and 2004) and Woodford, 2003). Yet, the empirical evidence for how effective
management of expectations was during this episode is not yet available.
What I take from all this evidence is that nonconventional monetary policy was effective
during the recent financial crisis. I would also argue that conventional monetary policy was as
well and was even more effective during this financial crisis than is normally the case (Mishkin,
2009b). To see this, we can think about the counterfactual: What would have happened to the
interest rates relevant to spending decisions by households and businesses if the Federal Reserve
had not lowered the federal funds rate by over 500 basis points starting in September of 2007?
Clearly interest rates on default-free Treasury securities would have been higher, but also credit
spreads would have widened by even more than they did during this crisis because the weaker
economy would have made conditions in financial markets even more stressed. Another way of
saying this is that macroeconomic risk would have been higher and so credit spreads would have
been higher along with higher default-free interest rates. The outcome would then surely have
been that households and firms would have faced much higher interest rates, with the result that
household and firm spending would have declined even more precipitously than we saw,
resulting in a far deeper recession and possibly even a depression. The problem during the
financial crisis episode with conventional monetary policy is not that it was ineffective, but that
the contractionary shock from the financial crisis was so severe that it overwhelmed the ability of
conventional monetary policy to counteract it.
My view that monetary policy, both conventional and nonconventional, during the crisis
was effective does not imply that the zero lower bound problem is less serious. Indeed, the
lesson that I take from the crisis is that it is a more serious problem than central bankers
anticipated. Research before the crisis took the view that as long as the inflation objective was
around 2%, then the zero-lower-bound-problem would not be a very serious problem because it
would be infrequent and short lived (Reifschneider and Williams, 2000 and Coenen, Orphanides
and Wieland, 2004). The fact that the Federal Reserve has had to resort to nonconventional
monetary policy twice in the decade of the 2000s, once in 2003-2004 when it made a
commitment to keep interest rates low for a considerable period, and then during the 2009-2010
period, suggests that the zero-bound-problem may far more prevalent than the earlier research
suggested and is not short-lived at all. The flaw with this research is that it was conducted with

- 26 -

models that were essentially linear, and as pointed out above, we now recognize that the macro
economy is likely to be very nonlinear.
The second reason why it is now clear that the zero-lower-bound problem is more serious
than previously thought is that we now see that contractionary shocks to the economy can be far
greater than was previously anticipated. Again this results from the presence of nonlinearities
and large tail risks. Sufficiently large contractionary shocks can make the magnitude of the costs
of the zero-lower-bound constraint very large. Large contractionary shocks can thus overwhelm
the ability of conventional policy to counteract them, and may require massive interventions in
credit markets and central bank expansion of their balance sheets. As I will discuss below, these
massive interventions may have a very high cost for central banks down the road.

4. The cost of cleaning up after financial crises is very high.
Besides the obvious cost of a huge loss of aggregate output as a result of the worldwide
recession, the global financial crisis suggests that there are likely to be three additional costs that
will raise the costs far higher. 1) financial crises are typically followed by very slow growth, 2)
the budgetary position of governments’ sharply deteriorates, and 3) the exit strategy for central
banks from nonconventional monetary policy may be both complicated and hinder the ability of
the central bank to successfully manage the economy in the future.
When economies experience deep recessions, the typical experience is that they
subsequently have very strong recoveries, often referred to as V-shaped recoveries. However, as
Reinhart and Reinhart (2010) document, this V-shaped pattern is not characteristic of recessions
that follow financial crises because the deleveraging process takes a long time, resulting in
strong headwinds for the economy. When analyzing fifteen severe post-World War II financial
crises, the Great Depression the 1973 oil shock period and the recent crisis, they find that real
GDP growth rates are significantly lower during the decade following this episodes, with the
median decline in GDP growth being about 1%. Furthermore, unemployment rates stay
persistently higher for the decade after crisis episodes, with the median unemployment rate five
percentage points higher in advanced economies. Although we have many years to go before a
decade goes by after the most recent crisis, it actually looks like it might have worse outcomes
than the average crisis episode studied by Reinhart and Reinhart. They find that 82% of the
observations of per capita GDP during 2008 to 2010 remain below or equal to the 2007 level,
- 27 -

while the comparable number for the fifteen earlier crisis episodes is 60%. We now recognize
that the cumulative output losses from financial crises is massive, and this current crisis looks
like it will be no exception.
As pointed out by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), the aftermath of financial crises is almost
always a sharp increase in government indebtedness. We have seen exactly this situation in the
aftermath of the current crisis. The massive bailouts of financial institutions, fiscal stimulus
packages, and the sharp economic contractions that reduced tax revenue that occurred throughout
the world have adversely affected the fiscal situation for many countries. Budget deficits over
10% of GDP in advanced countries like the United States have become common. Furthermore,
this rise in indebtedness has the potential to lead to sovereign debt defaults, which has come
become a serious concern in Europe after the Greek sovereign debt crisis and the problems that
the Irish government is facing because of the spiraling cost of bailing out their banking system.
The fiscal retrenchments required to put fiscal balances on a sustainable path are likely to not
only be contractionary, but also will increase societal stress. Indeed, there is even a possibility
that the fiscal problems brought on by the crisis could lead countries to exit the Euro.
Actions by central banks to contain the global financial crisis resulted in huge expansions
of their balance sheets. The expansion of balance sheets arising from liquidity provision is
typically easy to reverse because most of the liquidity facilities have provided loans at interest
rates that are higher than market rates during normal times. Hence these liquidity facilities are
self-liquidating because as financial markets return to normal, market participants are no longer
willing to borrow at above-market ranks, so the use of these facilities shrinks. Hence this source
of balance sheet expansion naturally reverses itself as the financial system recovers, and this is
exactly what has happened.
A far more serious concern is the expansion of the balance sheet that stem from asset
market purchases. This expansion of the balance sheet is not self-liquidating and there are
concerns that the resulting expansion of the monetary base will lead to high inflation in the
future. This concern would be more worrisome if an expansion in the monetary base is closely
linked to inflation, but this is unlikely to be the case in the current environment. The huge
increase in the monetary base from August 2007 to the end of 2009 of 144.6% has resulted in
only a 16.0% increase in M2 because banks are perfectly happy to hold onto to huge amounts of
excess reserves as long as they are paid interest on them, as is the case currently. Indeed, as
- 28 -

argued earlier, because quantitative easing was unlikely to have had a large expansionary effect
during the financial crisis, the large increase in the monetary base is unlikely to be inflationary.
More problematic is that asset market purchases were often for long term securities
which exposes the central bank to interest risk (and credit risk if it buys private securities like
mortgage-backed securities) because these securities can have substantial price fluctuations.
Possible losses on these securities thus mean that there could be an erosion of capital in the
central bank’s balance sheet and this could subject it to congressional or parliamentary criticism
and actions that could weaken its ability to conduct an independent monetary policy. In
addition, if the central bank has bought private securities, their presence on the balance sheet
means that the central bank has encroached on the politicians’ turf because the central bank has
engaged in a form of fiscal policy, which makes its political position more precarious, again
possibly leading to a loss of independence. 26
Even the purchase of long-term government securities poses a danger for central banks
because it may create the perception that the central bank is willing to accommodate
irresponsible fiscal policy by monetizing the debt. This is a particular concern right now in the
Eurozone, where the ECB has purchased securities issued by governments that not only have
large fiscal imbalances, but in the case of Greece, even lied about its fiscal position. This
problem is also a serious concern in the United States, where both political parties have been
unwilling to address long-run trends in entitlements that could cause U.S. government debt to
explode. Not only can the purchase of long-term government assets encourage fiscal profligacy,
but it can also lead to an unhinging of inflation expectations, that could make it difficult for the
central bank to control inflation in the future.27

5. Price and output stability do not ensure financial stability.
Before the recent financial crisis, the common view, both in academia and in central
banks was that achieving price and output stability would promote financial stability. This was

26

A particular problem for the Federal Reserve is that its holdings of MBSs on its balance sheet directly involve the
Federal Reserve in the most politicized financial market in the United States. As discussed in Mishkin (2011), this
could lead to politicians viewing the Fed as as personally responsible for developments in the housing markets,
which could expose the Fed to increased political criticism and pressure on its policy decisions, thereby further
weakening its independence.

27

See Cochrane (2010) for a discussion of how recent fiscal events could lead to a rise in inflation expectations.
- 29 -

supported by research (Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1999, and Bernanke and Gertler, 2001)
which indicated that monetary policy which optimally stabilizes inflation and output is likely to
stabilize asset prices, making asset-price bubbles less likely. Indeed, central bank’s success in
stabilizing inflation and the decreased volatility of business cycle fluctuations, which became
known as the Great Moderation, made policymakers complacent about the risks from financial
disruptions.
The benign economic environment leading up to 2007, however, surely did not protect
the economy from financial instability. Indeed, it may have promoted it. The low volatility of
both inflation and output fluctuations may have lulled market participants into thinking there was
less risk in the economic system than was really the case. Credit risk premiums fell to very low
levels and underwriting standards for loans dropped considerably. Some recent theoretical
research even suggests that benign economic environments may promote excessive risk taking
and may actually make the financial system more fragile (Gambacota, 2009).

Although price

and output stability are surely beneficial, the recent crisis indicates that a policy focus solely on
these objectives may not be enough to produce good economic outcomes.

IV.
How Much of the Science of Monetary Policy Needs to be Altered?

Pundits, such as Paul Krugman (2009) and the Economist Magazine (2009), have argued
that the financial crisis has revealed deep flaws in the modern field of macro/monetary
economics developed over the last forty or so years and that this field needs to be completely
overhauled.28 Indeed, Krugman titled his 2009 New York Times Magazine article “How Did
Economists Get It So Wrong?” Does this mean that the science of monetary policy as we knew
it before the crisis should be abandoned, and that policymakers and monetary economists should
start all over, as Krugman seems to imply?

28

See Lucas (2009) and Cochrane (2009) for spirited replies to both the Economist (2009) and Krugman (200(9)
articles.
- 30 -

To answer this question, let’s examine which elements of the science of monetary policy
are repudiated by the lessons from the financial crisis we discussed in the previous section. First,
let’s look at the basic principles of the science of monetary policy and then the theory of optimal
monetary policy.

Basic Principles of the Science of Monetary Policy
The lessons from the crisis are that the financial sector can have a very large impact on
economic activity and can make the economy highly nonlinear; that the zero-lower-bound
problem can be very serious, which is just one of the reasons that cleaning up after financial
crises can have very high costs; and that price and output stability do not ensure financial
stability. One reason why I spent so much time earlier in the paper on the theory and empirical
work that supports the nine principles of the science of monetary policy is that we can ask
whether any of the lessons from the crisis refute the justification for those principles. When you
go through the reasoning behind each of the nine principles discussed earlier, the answer is very
clear cut: None of the lessons from the financial crisis in any way undermines or invalidates
the nine basic principles of the science of monetary policy developed before the crisis.
Each of the five lessons from the crisis are completely orthogonal to the theory or
empirical work that supports the eight principles of the new neoclassical synthesis. The lessons
in no way weaken the case for any of these principles. The above conclusion is an extremely
important one (and this is why I boldfaced and italicized it to make it stand out). It tells us that
we should not throw out all that we have learned in the field of macro/monetary economics over
the last forty years as some pundits seem to suggest. Rather, much of the edifice of the science
of monetary policy is clearly still as valid today as it was before the crisis. As we shall see, this
has important implications for how we view monetary policy strategy.
The lesson that developments in the financial sector can have a large impact on economic
activity does indicate that the ninth principle about financial frictions is of course valid, but now
is even more important than central bankers previously realized.

Theory of Optimal Monetary Policy
On the other hand, the lessons from the crisis do undermine two key elements of the precrisis theory of optimal monetary policy. The lesson that the macro economy is inherently
- 31 -

nonlinear undermines the linear-quadratic framework that is a key element of the pre-crisis
theory of optimal monetary policy. The lesson that the developments in the financial sector can
have a major impact on economic activity undermines the representative-agent framework that is
another key element of the pre-crisis theory of optimal monetary policy. Doubts about the
linear-quadratic and representative-agent frameworks that have arisen because of the financial
crisis also have important implications for the strategy of monetary policy.

V.
Implications for Monetary Policy Strategy
Armed with an understanding of where there needs to be rethinking in the science of
monetary policy, we can examine how monetary policy strategy might be modified in each of the
four areas of monetary policy strategy we discussed earlier.

Flexible Inflation Targeting
The monetary policy strategy that follows from the eight principles of the new
neoclassical synthesis is what I have referred to, for want of a better name, as flexible inflation
targeting. Since, as I have argued here, none of these principles is invalidated by the events of
the recent financial crisis, this approach to monetary policy strategy is still equally valid. The
arguments supporting central banks’ adhering to the principles of the new neoclassical synthesis
are still every bit as strong as they were before the crisis. Therefore, there is still strong
analytical support for a central bank to have a strong, credible commitment to stabilize inflation
in the long run by announcing an explicit, numerical inflation objective, but also to have the
flexibility to pursue policies to stabilize output around its natural rate level in the short run.
Although the support for the flexible inflation targeting framework is not weakened by
the lessons from the financial crisis, they do suggest, however, that the details of how flexible
inflation targeting is conducted and what flexibility means need to be rethought. We first look at
two possible basic modifications to the flexible inflation targeting framework, the choice of the
level of the inflation target and whether some form of price level targeting would produce better
economic outcomes.

- 32 -

Level of the Inflation Target. Because the financial crisis has shown that the zero-lower-bound
problem can be more serious than previously thought, there is a question of whether the optimal
level of the inflation rate for a central bank target would be higher than the typical value of
around the 2% level. With a higher inflation target, the real interest rate can be driven down to
lower levels in the face of adverse aggregate demand shocks. For example, Blanchard,
Dell”Ariccia and Mauro (2010) have suggested that the inflation target might be raised from the
2% to the 4% level. With expectations of inflation anchored to this target, by lowering the
nominal interest rate to zero, the real interest rate could be lowered as low as negative 4%, rather
than negative 2% with the 2% inflation target. Conventional monetary policy, which involves
manipulating the nominal policy rate, would then be able to ease monetary policy by more than it
otherwise could with the lower inflation target. Another way of stating this is to say that the zero
lower bound on the policy rate would be less binding with a higher inflation target.
This argument suggests that inflation targets less than 2% might be undesirable. Some
FOMC participants have expressed their desired level of the long-run inflation rate to be below
2% in the FOMC projections that come out four times a year, and the lessons of the financial
crisis provide support for the higher 2% long-run inflation goal of many of the other FOMC
participants.
But does this argument support raising the inflation target to 4%, as Blanchard,
Dell”Ariccia and Mauro (2010) seem to suggest? The logic behind the view that a higher
inflation target makes the zero lower bound on the policy rate less binding is of course correct.
But we not only have to look at the benefits of a higher inflation target but also the costs. If it
were no more difficult to stabilize the inflation rate at a 4% level than at a 2% level, then I think
the case for raising the inflation target to 4% would be much stronger. However, the history of
the inflation process suggests that this is not the case.

Inflation rates which accord with the

Greenspan definition of price stability that it “is the state in which expected changes in the price
level do not effectively alter business or household decisions,”29 seem to be below the 3% level.
Once inflation starts to rise above this level, the public is likely to believe that price stability is

29

Greenspan apparently first expressed this definition in the July 1996 FOMC meeting (page 51 of the transcript
which can be found at http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC19960703meeting.pdf). This
definition was later made public in numerous speeches.
- 33 -

no longer a credible goal of the central bank and then the question arises, “if a 4% level of
inflation is OK, then why not 6%, or 8% and so on.”
We have seen that when inflation rises above the 3% level, it tends to keep on rising.
This was the experience in the United States in the 1960s that eventually led to the Great
Inflation period from the 1970s to the early 1980s. As was discussed earlier, economists such as
Paul Samuelson and Robert Solow argued that policymakers should be willing to tolerate higher
inflation rates in the 4 to 5% range. When these levels of inflation were reached, inflation rates
continued to rise beyond that level, producing the Great Inflation period in the 1970s and early
1980s. Getting inflation back down again during the Volcker era was very costly. No central
banker wants to go through that cycle again.
A second consideration is that the benefits of a higher inflation target only accrue when
the zero lower bound becomes a binding constraint. Although this has surely been a major
problem in this recent episode, it must be remembered that episodes like this have not come very
often. Indeed, we have not experienced a negative shock to the economy of this magnitude for
over seventy years. If shocks of this magnitude are rare, then the benefits to a higher inflation
target will not be very large because the benefits will only be available infrequently. On the
other hand, the costs of higher inflation in terms from the distortions it produces in the economy
are ongoing. Thus although they may not be that large in any given year, these costs add up and
in present value terms far outweigh the intermittent benefits obtained from having the zero lower
bound not be binding in periods like the current one.

Price Level Targeting. Although for countries the commitment to a strong nominal anchor for
countries which have an independent monetary policy has taken the form of a target for inflation,
an alternative is to target a price level path instead. Theoretical research starting in the late
1990s (e.g., Svensson, 1999, Woodford, 2002, Ditmar, Gavin and Prescott, 1999, 2000, and
Vestin, 2000, 2006) demonstrated that a price-level target produces less output variance than an
inflation target. Indeed, as expressed by Woodford (2003), a price level target makes policy
history dependent and this produces improved economic outcomes. The reasoning is
straightforward. A negative demand shock that results in a lower price level will require
monetary policy to try to raise the price level back to its target path and this will mean that
- 34 -

inflation will be expected to rise in the short run above the long-run inflation target embedded in
the price-level target path. The rise in expected inflation will then lower the real interest rate,
thereby stimulating aggregate demand and economic activity. Hence, a price-level target is an
automatic stabilizer: a negative demand shock leads to stabilizing expectations that stabilize the
economy. This mechanism is even more effective when the negative demand shock is so large
that the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates becomes binding, as Eggertsson and
Woodford (2003) point out.
There are, however, some potential costs to price-level targets. A traditional objection,
forcefully articulated by Fischer (1994), is that a price-level target can produce more output
variability than an inflation target because unanticipated shocks to the price level are not treated
as bygones and must be offset.30 A price-level target requires that overshoots or undershoots of
the target must be reversed and this could impart significantly more volatility to monetary policy
and, with sticky prices, to the real economy in the short run. An additional problem with a pricelevel target is that it would be harder to communicate, particularly if it has an upward trend,
which would be required if the optimal long-run inflation rate is positive in order to make
deflations a less frequent occurrence and also the zero-lower-bound-constraint be less likely to
bind. In this case, a price-level target would be a moving target and so harder to explain than an
inflation target, which is always kept at a constant level.
The lesson from the financial crisis that the zero-lower-bound problem is more serious
than was previously contemplated argues for larger benefits of a price-level target that may
outweigh the costs. Although the communication challenges are serious, 31 the potential benfits
of price-level targeting suggest that central banks might look into how to effectively
communicate a price-level target to the public. For example, the central bank could indicate that
when it undershoots its inflation target for a period of time, as is occurring currently in many
countries, it would be willing to tolerate a higher inflation rate in the short-run so that the
average inflation rate over a longer horizon would meet the target objective. For this strategy to
work, however, it would be crucial for the central bank to make clear and convince the public

30

This view is supported by simulations of econometric macro models with backward-looking expectations which
typically find that a price-level target leads to greater variability of output and inflation than an inflation target. E.g.,
see Haldane and Salmon (1995).
31
This is why I argued in favor of inflation targeting over price level targeting in the past, Mishkin (2001b).
- 35 -

that by so doing, it would not be raising its long-run inflation objective, and so its commitment to
stabilizing inflation would remain as strong as ever.

Risk Management and Gradualism
As discussed earlier, a key element of the analysis of optimal monetary policy is the
linear-quadratic framework in which financial frictions do not play a prominent role. Although
the linear-quadratic framework might be reasonable during normal times, we have learned that
financial disruptions can produce large deviations from these assumptions, indicating that the
linear-quadratic framework may provide misleading answers for monetary policy strategy when
financial crises occur.
The important role of nonlinearities in the economy arising from financial disruption
suggests that policymakers will not only focus on the modal outcomes, as they would in a
certainty equivalent world which is a feature of the linear-quadratic framework, but will also
tailor their policies to cope with uncertainty and the possible existence of tail risks in which there
is a low probability of extremely adverse outcomes. I have argued elsewhere (Mishkin, 2010b)
that the importance of financial frictions and nonlinearities in the economy provides a rationale
for a particular form of a risk management approach to monetary policy.
What would this risk management approach look like? The first element of this approach
is that monetary policy would act preemptively when financial disruptions occur. Specifically,
monetary policy would focus on what I have referred to as macroeconomic risk (Mishkin,
2010b)--that is, an increase in the probability that a financial disruption will cause significant
deterioration in the real economy through the adverse feedback loop described earlier in which
the financial disruption causes a worsening of conditions in the credit markets, which causes the
economy to deteriorate further, causing a further worsening of conditions in the credit markets,
and so on. Monetary policy would aim at reducing macroeconomic risk by cutting interest rates
to offset the negative effects of financial turmoil on aggregate economic activity. By so doing,
monetary policy can reduce the likelihood that a financial disruption might set off an adverse
feedback loop. The resulting reduction in uncertainty can then make it easier for the markets to
- 36 -

collect the information that facilitates price discovery, thus hastening the return of normal market
functioning.
To achieve normal market functioning most effectively, monetary policy would have the
characteristics of being timely, decisive, and flexible. First, timely action, which is preemptive,
is particularly valuable when an episode of financial instability becomes sufficiently severe to
threaten the core macroeconomic objectives of the central bank. In such circumstances, waiting
too long to ease policy could result in further deterioration of the macroeconomy and might well
increase the overall amount of easing that would eventually be required to restore the economy
to health. When financial markets are working well, monetary policy can respond primarily to
the incoming flow of economic data about production, employment, and inflation. When a
financial disruption occurs, however, preemptive policy will focus on indicators of market
liquidity, credit spreads, and other financial market measures that can provide information about
sharp changes in the magnitude of tail risk to the macroeconomy. Indeed, even if economic
indicators are currently strong, monetary policy would act to offset the negative impact of the
financial disruption.
Second, policymakers would be prepared for decisive action in response to financial
disruptions. In such circumstances, the most likely outcome (the modal forecast) for the
economy may be fairly benign, but there may be a significant risk of more severe adverse
outcomes. In such circumstances, the central bank can take out insurance by easing the stance of
policy further than if the distribution of probable outcomes were perceived as fairly symmetric
around the modal forecast. Moreover, in such circumstances, the monetary policy authorities can
argue that these policy actions do not imply a deterioration in the central bank’s assessment of
the most likely outcome for the economy, but rather as an appropriate form of risk management
that reduces the risk of particularly adverse outcomes.
Third, policy flexibility is especially valuable throughout the evolution of a financial
market disruption. During the onset of the episode, this flexibility may be evident from the
decisive easing of policy that is intended to forestall the contractionary effects of the disruption
and provide insurance against the downside risks to the macroeconomy. However, it is
important to recognize that in some instances financial markets can also turn around quickly,
thereby reducing the drag on the economy as well as the degree of tail risk. Therefore, the
central bank would monitor credit spreads and other incoming data for signs of financial market
- 37 -

recovery and, if necessary, take back some of the insurance; thus, at each stage of the episode,
the appropriate monetary policy may exhibit much less smoothing than would be typical in other
circumstances.
The risk management approach outlined here is one that abandons the prescription of the
linear-quadratic framework that optimal monetary policy would involve gradual changes in
monetary policy. Instead aggressive actions by central banks to minimize macroeconomic risk
would result in preemptive, large changes in monetary policy. This was an important feature of
the conduct of conventional monetary policy by the Federal Reserve during the crisis. In
September 2007, just after the initial disruption to financial markets in August, the Federal
Reserve lowered the federal funds rate target by 50 basis points (0.5 perecentage points) even
though the economy was displaying substantial positive momentum with real GDP growth quite
strong in the third quarter. The Fed was clearly not reacting to current economic conditions, but
rather to the downside risks to the economy from the financial disruption. Subsequently, the Fed
very rapidly brought the federal funds rate target from its level of 5 ¼% before the crisis to 2%
from September 2007 to April 2008. Then after the Lehman Brothers collapse in September
2008, the Fed began another round of rapid interest rate cuts, with the federal funds rate target
lowered by 75 basis points in December 2008, bring it down to the zero lower bound. Clearly,
the Fed had abandoned gradualism.32
One danger from aggressive, preemptive actions that are taken as part of the risk
management approach is that they might create the perception that the monetary policy
authorities are too focused on stabilizing economic activity and not enough on price stability. If
this perception occurs, the preemptive actions might lead to an increase in inflation expectations.
The flexibility to act preemptively against a financial disruption presumes that inflation
expectations are well anchored and unlikely to rise during a period of temporary monetary
easing. To work effectively, the risk management approach outlined here thus would have a
32

One period before the crisis when the Fed abandoned gradualism was during the LTCM episode when the Fed
lowered the federal funds rate target by 75 basis points in a month and a half period in the fall of 1998. This action
fit into the risk management approach described here. However, once the shock dissipated, the Fed did not take
away the insurance provided by the funds rate cuts, as the risk management approach outlined here suggests would
have been appropriate. I consider this to be one of the serious monetary policy mistakes made by the Greenspan
Fed. Not only did inflation subsequently rise above the desired level, but it also indicated that the Fed would react
asymmetrically to shocks, lowering interest rates when a financial disruption occurs, but not raising them when the
adverse shock reversed itself. This helped contribute to the belief in the “Greenspan put” that will be discussed
below.
- 38 -

commitment to a strong nominal anchor. A risk management approach therefore provides an
additional rationale for flexible inflation targeting framework and as I have argued elsewhere
(Mishkin, 2008) a strong nominal anchor can be especially valuable in periods of financial
market stress when prompt and decisive policy action may be required as part of a risk
management approach to forestall an adverse feedback loop.

The Lean Versus Clean Debate
The lean versus clean debate initially focused on whether monetary policy should react to
potential asset-price bubbles. In thinking about this debate, it is worth distinguishing between
two different types of asset-price bubbles. We then see how this bears on the lean versus clean
debate and then examine the case for different policies to respond to potential bubbles.

Two Types of Asset-Price Bubbles. As pointed out in Mishkin (2010b), not all asset price
bubbles are alike. Financial history and the financial crisis of 2007-2009 indicates that one type
of bubble, which is best referred to as a credit-driven bubble, can be highly dangerous. With this
type of bubble, there is the following typical chain of events: Because of either exuberant
expectations about economic prospects or structural changes in financial markets, a credit boom
begins, increasing the demand for some assets and thereby raising their prices. The rise in asset
values, in turn, encourages further lending against these assets, increasing demand, and hence
their prices, even more. This feedback loop can generate a bubble, and the bubble can cause
credit standards to ease as lenders become less concerned about the ability of the borrowers to
repay loans and instead rely on further appreciation of the asset to shield themselves from losses.
At some point, however, the bubble bursts. The collapse in asset prices then leads to a
reversal of the feedback loop in which loans go sour, lenders cut back on credit supply, the
demand for the assets declines further, and prices drop even more. The resulting loan losses and
declines in asset prices erode the balance sheets at financial institutions, further diminishing
credit and investment across a broad range of assets. The decline in lending depresses business
and household spending, which weakens economic activity and increases macroeconomic risk in
credit markets. In the extreme, the interaction between asset prices and the health of financial

- 39 -

institutions following the collapse of an asset price bubble can endanger the operation of the
financial system as a whole.
However, there is a second type of bubble that is far less dangerous, which can be
referred to as an irrational exuberance bubble. This type of bubble is driven solely by overly
optimistic expectations and poses much less risk to the financial system than credit-driven
bubbles. For example, the bubble in technology stocks in the late 1990s was not fueled by a
feedback loop between bank lending and rising equity values and so the bursting of the techstock bubble was not accompanied by a marked deterioration in bank balance sheets. The
bursting of the tech-stock bubble thus did not have a very severe impact on the economy and the
recession that followed was quite mild.

The Case for Leaning Versus Cleaning. We have learned from the recent crisis that the bursting
of credit-driven bubbles not only can be extremely costly, but are very hard to clean up after.
Furthermore bubbles of this type can occur even if there is price and output stability in the period
leading up to them. Indeed, price and output stability might actually encourage credit-driven
bubbles because it leads market participants to underestimate the amount of risk in the economy.
The case for leaning against potential bubbles rather than cleaning up afterwards has therefore
become much stronger.
However, the distinction between the two types of bubbles, one which (credit-driven) is
much more costly than the other, suggests that the lean versus clean debate may have been
miscast, as White (2009) indicates. Rather than leaning against potential asset-price bubbles,
which would include both credit-driven and irrational exuberance type bubbles, there is a much
stronger case for leaning against credit bubbles which would involve leaning against creditdriven bubbles, but not irrational exuberance bubbles. As White (2009) and Mishkin (2010b)
have pointed out, it is much easier to identify credit bubble than it is to identify asset-price
bubbles. Financial regulators and central banks often have information that lenders have
weakened their underwriting standards, that risk premiums appear to be inordinately low or that
credit extension is rising at abnormally high rates. The argument that it is hard to identify assetprice bubbles is therefore not a valid argument against leaning against credit bubbles.

- 40 -

Macroprudential Policies. Although there is a strong case to lean against credit bubbles, what
policies will be most effective? First it is important to recognize that the key principle for
designing effective policies to lean against credit bubbles is whether they fix market failures.
Credit extension necessarily involves risk taking. It is only when this risk taking is excessive
because of market failures that credit bubbles are likely to develop. Recognizing that market
failures are the problem, it is natural to look to prudential regulatory measures to constrain credit
bubbles.
Some of these regulatory measures are simply the usual elements of a well-functioning
prudential regulatory and supervisory system. These elements include adequate disclosure and
capital requirements, liquidity requirements, prompt corrective action, careful monitoring of an
institution’s risk-management procedures, close supervision of financial institutions to enforce
compliance with regulations, and sufficient resources and accountability for supervisors.
The standard measures mentioned above focus on promoting the safety and soundness of
individual firms and fall into the category of what is referred to as microprudential supervision.
However, even if individual firms are operating prudently, there still is a danger of excessive
risk-taking because of the interactions between financial firms that promote externalities. An
alternative regulatory approach, which deals with these interactions, focuses on what is
happening in credit markets in the aggregate, referred to as macroprudential regulation and
supervision.
Macroprudential regulations can be used to dampen the interaction between asset price
bubbles and credit provision. For example, research has shown that the rise in asset values that
accompanies a boom results in higher capital buffers at financial institutions, supporting further
lending in the context of an unchanging benchmark for capital adequacy; in the bust, the value of
this capital can drop precipitously, possibly even necessitating a cut in lending.33 It is important
for research to continue to analyze the role of bank capital requirements in promoting financial
stability, including whether capital requirements should be adjusted over the business cycle.
Other macroprudential policies to constrain credit bubbles include dynamic provisioning by
banks, lower ceilings on loan-to-value ratios or higher haircut requirements for repo lending
during credit expansions, and Pigouvian-type taxes on certain liabilities of financial instititons.34
33
34

For example, see Kashyap and Stein (2004) and Adrian and Shin (2009).
For example, see Bank of England (2009), French et al. (2010).
- 41 -

Some policies to address the risks to financial stability from asset price bubbles could be
made a standard part of the regulatory system and would be operational at all times--whether a
bubble was in progress or not. However, because specific or new types of market failures might
be driving a particular credit bubble, there is a case for discretionary prudential policies to limit
the market failures in such a case. For example, during certain periods risks across institutions
might become highly correlated, and discretionary policy to respond to these higher-stress
environments could help reduce systemic risk..

Monetary Policy. The fact that the low interest rate policies of the Federal Reserve from 2002 to
2005 was followed by excessive risk taking suggests to many that overly easy monetary policy
might promote financial instability Using aggregate data, Taylor (2007) has argued that
excessively low policy rates led to the housing bubble, while Bernanke (2010), Bean, Paustian,
Penalver and Taylor (2010), Turner (2010) and Posen (2009) have argued otherwise. Although it
is far from clear that the Federal Reserve is to blame for the housing bubble, the explosion of
microeconomic research, both theoretical and empirical, suggests that there is a case for
monetary policy to play a role in creating credit bubbles. Borio and Zhu (2008) have called this
mechanism the “risk taking channel of monetary policy”.
The literature provides two basic reasons why low interest rates might promote excessive
risk taking. First, as Rajan (2005, 2006) points out, low interest rates can increase the incentives
for asset managers in financial institutions to search for yield and hence increase risk taking.
This incentives could come from contractual arrangements which compensate asset managers for
returns above a minimum level, often zero, and with low nominal interest rates only high risk
investments will lead to high compensation. They also could come from fixed rate
commitments, such as those provided by insurance companies, forcing the firm to seek out
higher yielding, riskier investments. Or they could arise from behavioral considerations such as
money illusion in which they believe that low nominal rates indicate that real returns are low,
encouraging them to purchase riskier assets to obtain a higher target return.
A second mechanism for how low interest rates could promote risk taking operates
through income and valuation effects. Low interest rate increase net interest margins and
increase the value of financial firm, increasing their capacity to increase their leverage and take
on risk (Adrian and Shin, 2009, 2010, and Adrian, Moench and Shin, 2010). In addition, low
- 42 -

interest rates can boost collateral values, again enabling increased lending. This mechanism is
closely related to the financial accelerator of Bernanke and Gertler (1999) and Bernanke, Gertler
and Gilchrist (1999), except that it derives from financial frictions for lenders rather than
borrowers.
Monetary policy can also encourage risk taking in two other ways. Although desirable
from a viewpoint of establishing credibility and a strong nominal anchor, more predictable
monetary policy can reduce uncertainty and encourage asset managers to underestimate risk
(Gambacota, 2009). Monetary policy which cleans up after financial disruptions by lowering
interest rates, which has been named the “Greenspan put” because this was the actual and stated
policy of the Federal Reserve when Alan Greenspan headed the Fed, can lead to a form of moral
hazard in which financial institutions expect monetary policy to help them recover from bad
investments (e.g., see Tirole and Farhi, 2009, Keister, 2010, and Wilson and Wu, 2010). The
Greenspan put can also increase systemic risk because it is only exercised when many financial
firms are in trouble simultaneously and so they may be encouraged to pursue similar investment
strategies, thereby increasing the correlation of returns.
Micro empirical analysis provides a fair amount of support for the risk-taking channel of
monetary policy. Jimenez, Ongena, Peydro and Saurina (2009), using Spanish credit registry
data, finds that low nominal interest rates, although they decrease the probability of defaults in
the short term, lead to riskier lending and more defaults in the medium term. Ioannidou, Ongena
and Peydro (2009) examine a quasi-controlled experiment in Bolivia and find that lower U.S.
federal funds rates increases lending to low quality borrowers that ends up with higher rate of
defaults and yet at lower interest rate spreads. Delis and Kouretas (2010), using data from euro
area banks, finds a negative relationship between the level of interest rates and the riskiness of
bank lending.
Adrian and Shin (2010) discuss and provide evidence for the risk taking channel of
monetary policy using more aggregate data.

They find that reductions in the federal funds rate,

increase term spreads and hence the net interest margin for financial intermediaries. The higher
net interest margin, which makes financial intermediaries more profitable, is then associated with
higher asset growth, and higher asset growth, which they interpret as a shift in credit supply,
predicts higher real GDP growth.

- 43 -

Given the support for the risk-taking channel, does this mean that monetary policy should
be used to lean against credit bubbles? There are several objections to doing so. First, if
monetary policy is used to lean against credit bubbles, there is a violation of the Tinbergen
(1939) principle because one instrument is being asked to do two jobs: 1) stabilize the financial
sector and 2) stabilize the economy.35 Because there is another instrument to stabilize the
financial sector, macroprudential supervision, wouldn’t it be better to use macroprudential
supervision to deal with financial stability, leaving monetary policy to focus on price and output
stability?
This argument would be quite strong if macroprudential policies were able to do the job.
However, there are doubts on this score. Prudential supervision is subject to more political
pressure than is monetary policy because it affects the bottom line of financial institutions more
directly. Thus they will have greater incentives to lobby politicians to discourage
macroprudential policies that would rein in credit bubbles. After all, it will be during a credit
bubble that financial institutions will be making the most money and so have greater incentives
and more resources to lobby politicians to prevent restrictive macroprudential policies. A case in
point has been the recent Basel III accord. Press reports suggest that the capital standards in the
accord was substantially weakened because of complaints by the German Landesbanken.
Furthermore, implementation of the accord was put off for ten years, and the accord did not
contain measures to deal with systemic risk considerations such as having higher capital
requirements on systemically more important financial institutions. The Basel III episode
suggests that political considerations may make it extremely difficult to have effective
macroprudential supervision.
The possibility that macroprudential policies may not be implemented sufficiently well to
constrain credit bubbles, suggests that monetary policy may have to be used instead.36 But this
raises another objection to using monetary policy to lean against credit bubbles: it may not
35

Stabilizing the financial sector is not a completely separate objective from stabilizing the economy because
financial instability leads to instability in economic activity and inflation. However because the dynamics of
financial instability is so different than the dynamics of inflation and economic activity, for purposes of the
Tinbergen principle, promoting financial instability can be viewed as a separate policy objective from stabilizing the
economy.
36
However, as pointed out in Boivin, Lane, and Meh (2010), whether monetary policy will be effective in
countering financial imbalances depends on the nature of shocks. They conduct simulations that show that were
financial imbalances reflect specific market failures and regulatory policies can be directed to such failures,
monetary policy is less likely to be effective. Monetary policy is likely to be more effective when financial
imbalances arise from economy-wide factors.
- 44 -

work. I am sympathetic to the view discussed earlier that tightening monetary policy may be
ineffective in restraining a particular asset-bubble because market participants expect such high
rates of return from purchasing bubble-driven assets. On the other hand, the evidence on the
risk-taking channel of monetary policy suggests that there is a stronger case that raising interest
rates would help restrain lending growth and excessive risk taking. Furthermore, the theoretical
analysis discussed immediately above suggests that if a central bank credibly commits to raise
interest rates when a credit bubble looks like it is forming, then expectations in credit markets
will work to make this policy more effective. The expectation that rates will go up with
increased risk taking will make this kind of activity less profitable and thus make it less likely
that it will occur. Furthermore, expectations that rates will rise with increased risk-taking means
that interest rates will not have to be raised as much to have their intended effect.37
Nonetheless, using monetary policy to lean against credit bubbles is not a monetary
policy strategy that can be taken lightly. Doing so could at times result in a weaker economy
than the monetary authorities would desire or inflation that is too low. This suggests that there is
a monetary policy tradeoff between the pursuit of financial stability and the pursuit of price and
output stability. Also as mentioned earlier, giving monetary policy another objective might lead
to confusion about the central bank’s commitment to price stability, thereby weakening the
nominal anchor, with potentially adverse effects on economic outcomes.
Another danger from having monetary policy as a tool to promote financial stability is
that it might lead to decisions to tighten monetary policy when it is not needed to constrain credit
bubbles. A situation of low interest rates does not necessarily indicate that monetary policy is
promoting excessive risk taking. One lesson from the analysis here is that policymakers, and
especially monetary policymakers, will want tools to assess whether credit bubbles are
developing. Research is currently underway (e.g, as described in Adrian and Shin, 2010) to find
measures will signal if credit bubbles are likely to be forming. High credit growth, increasing
leverage, low risk spreads, and surveys to assess if credit underwriting standard are being eased
are pieces of data that can help central banks decide if there is imminent danger of credit
bubbles. Monitoring of credit market conditions will become an essential activity of central
37

Monetary policy to lean against credit bubbles can also be thought of as a form of risk management because it
preemptively takes measures to restrain credit bubbles. As in the risk management approach discussed earlier, the
justification for leaning against credit bubbles is the presence of nonlinearities in the economy, so that monetary
policy is used to take out insurance against the high cost of the bubble when it bursts.
- 45 -

banks in the future and research on the best ways of doing so will have a high priority in the
future.
This danger of thinking of using monetary policy to promote financial stability is highly
relevant today. Some economists, for example Hoenig (2010), and Rajan (2010) have called for
the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates because they argue that the current low rates are
encouraging excessive risk taking. However, the U.S. economy is currently not in a situation of
rapid credit growth, low risk premiums and increasing leverage. Indeed, it still seems to be
mired in a deleveraging cycle that is producing serious headwinds for the economy. This doesn’t
mean that the situation couldn’t change. However, at the current juncture, low interest rates do
not appear to be creating the next credit bubble in the United States and justification for raising
them to curb risk taking is very weak.
On the other hand, many emerging market economies and some advanced economies like
Israel are currently in a very different environment because they did not go through a
deleveraging cycle as occurred in the United States and Europe. They thus have the potential for
a credit bubble to develop, and low U.S. interest rates are a potential danger because they could
promote excessive risk taking.38 In these countries, however, the option of tightening monetary
policy to restrict risk taking may not be available because raising interest rates would just
encourage capital inflows that could also promote a credit boom. For these countries the only
option may be to pursue macroprudential policies to limit credit growth.39

Dichotomy Between Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Policy
Another lesson learned from the financial crisis and the discussion above is that monetary
policy and financial stability policy are intrinsically linked to each other and so the dichotomy
between monetary and financial stability policy is a false one. As we have seen, monetary
policy can affect financial stability, while macroprudential policies to promote financial stability
will have an impact on monetary policy. If macroprudential policies are implemented to restrain
a credit bubble, they will slow credit growth and will slow the growth of aggregate demand. In
38

The empirical research in Ioannidou et al (2009) which indicated that loans became risker in Bolivia when U.S.
interest rates were low is particularly relevant on this point.
39
These might take the form of policies to restrict capital inflows, but with a focus on restricting credit growth rather
than blocking financial globalization.
- 46 -

this case, monetary policy may need to be easier in order to offset weaker aggregate demand.
Alternatively, if policy rates are kept low to stimulate the economy, as is true currently, there is a
greater risk that a credit bubble might occur. This may require tighter macroprudential policies
to ensure that a credit bubble does not get started. Coordination of monetary and
macroprudential policies becomes of greater value when all three objectives of price stability,
output stability and financial stability are to be pursued.
I have discusssed elsewhere (Mishkin, 2009c and in French et. al, 2010) why the recent
financial crisis provides a rationale for central banks to act as a systemic regulator. The benefits
of coordination between monetary policy and macroprudential policy provide another reason for
having central banks take on the systemic regulator role. Coordination of monetary policy and
macropudential policy can only be effective if one government agency is in charge of both. As
anyone who has had the pleasure of experiencing the turf battles of different government
agencies knows, coordination of policies is extremely difficult when control of these policies is
housed in different entities.

VI.
Concluding Remarks
The bad news is that we have just been through a once-in--hundred-year credit tsunami
that has had a devastating impact on the economy that will last for years to come. The good
news is that macro/monetary economists and central bankers do not have to go back to the
drawing board and throw out all that they have learned over the last forty years. Much of the
science of monetary policy remains intact. The case for the basic monetary policy strategy,
which for want of a better name, I have called flexible inflation targeting, is still as strong as
ever, and in some ways, moreso.
The recent financial crisis, however, does require some major rethinking about the details
of this basic framework for monetary policy strategy. We now recognize that the financial sector
play a very prominent role in the macro economy and makes it highly nonlinear at times. This
requires that we abandon the linear-quadratic framework for thinking about how to conduct
monetary policy when there is a financial disruption. There is now a stronger case for a risk
management framework that factors in tail risks that can produce very adverse outcomes for the
- 47 -

economy. Another lesson is that there is a stonger case for monetary policy to lean against credit
bubbles (but not asset-price bubbles per se), rather than just cleaning up after the bubble has
burst. Using monetary policy to pursue financial stability goals is not an easy task, however, and
research on how to monitor credit conditions so that it decisions to use monetary policy to
restrict excessive risk are based on the correct information will be a high priority for research in
the future. Finally, the financial crisis has made it clear that the interactions between the
financial sector and the aggregate economy imply that monetary policy and financial stability
policy are closely intertwined.
There is one other piece of good news that has come out of this crisis. The field of
macro/monetary economics has become a hell of a lot more exciting. We are now faced with a
whole new agenda for research that should keep people in the field very busy for a very long
time. It has also made the work of central bankers more exciting as well. They now have to
think about a much wider range of policy issues than they had to previously. This will surely be
exhausting, but central banking will be a far more stimulating profession.

- 48 -

References
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Shin (2009) “Money, Liquidity and Monetary Policy,” American
Economic Review, Vol 99, No. 2: 600-605
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Shin (2010). “Financial Intermediation and Monetary Economics.”
FRB New York Staff Report 398. (Revised May)
Adrian, Tobias, Emanuel Moench and Hyun S. Shin, “Macro Risk Premiums and Intermediary
Balance Sheet Quantities,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 428.
Alan Ahearne; Joseph Gagnon; Jane Haltmaier; Steve Kamin (2002) “Preventing Deflation:
Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve,
International Finance Discussion Paper 2002-729 (June),
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2002/729/default.htm
Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Jochen Adnritzky, Andreas Jobst, Sylwia Nowak and Natialia Tamirisa.
(2010). “Market Response to Policy Initiatives During the Global Financial Crisis,”
NBER Working Paper 15809, March.
Akerlof, George A. (1970). “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality, Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 84 (August), pp. 488-500.
Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, George L. Perry, Robert J. Gordon, and N. Gregory
Mankiw (1996). “The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, vol. 1996 (no. 1), pp. 1-59.
Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). “Central Bank Independence and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62.
Anderson, Palle, and David Gruen (1995). “Macroeconomic Policies and Growth,” in Palle
Anderson, Jacqueline Dwyer, and David Gruen, eds., Productivity and Growth: Proceedings of a
Conference held at the H.C. Coombs Centre for Financial Studies, Kirribilli, Australia, July 1011. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp. 279-319.
Baba, Naohiko and Frank Packer (2009). “From Turmoil to Crisis: Dislocations in the FX Swap
Market Before and fter the Failure of Lehman Brothers,” Bank for International Settlements
Working Paper No. 285, July. Journal of International Money and Finance, forthcoming.
Bank of Canada (2006). Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information
(Ottawa: Bank of Canada), www.bank-banque-canada.ca/en/press.
Bank of England (various years). Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee,
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/mpc.
- 49 -

Barro, Robert J. (1977). “Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the United
States,” American Economic Review, vol. 67 (March), pp. 101-15.
Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983). “Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of
Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 12 (no. 1), pp. 101-22.
Bean, Charles, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Tim Taylor (2010). “Monetary Policy
After the Fall,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Symposium
Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford (2003). “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy:
A Linear-Quadratic Approach,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2003. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 271-332.
Bernanke, Ben S. (1983). “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
Great Depression,” American Economic Review, vol. 73 (June), pp. 257-76.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2004). “Gradualism,” speech delivered at an economics luncheon
co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (Seattle Branch) and the
University of Washington, held in Seattle, May 20.
Ben S. Bernanke (2010). “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble,” speech given at the annual
meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta Georgia, January 3, 2010,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100103a.htm.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (1999). “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility” in
New Challenges for Monetary Policy. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp.
77-128, www.kc.frb.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/1999/sym99prg.htm.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler (2001). “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in
Asset Prices?” American Economic Review, vol. 91 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 253-57.
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1, part 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1341-93.
Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999). Inflation
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia and Paolo Mauro (2010). “Rethinking Monetary
Policy,” IMF Staff Position Note (February 12), SPN/10/03
Boivin, Jean, Timothy Lane and Cesaire Meh (2010). “Should Monetary Policy Be Used to
Counteract Financial Imbalances?” Bank of Canada Review (Summer): 23-36.

- 50 -

Borio, C., W.B. English, and A.J. Filardo (2003). “A Tale of Two Perspectives: Old or New
Challenges for Monetary Policy?” BIS Working Paper No. 127 (Basel: Bank for International
Settlements, February).
Borio, Claudio, and Philip Lowe (2002). “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability:
Exploring the Nexus,” BIS Working Paper 114 (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, July).

Borio, Claudio and Habin. Zhu. 2008. “Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy:
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?” BIS Working Paper no. 268 (December).
Briault, Clive (1995). “The Costs of Inflation,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol. 35
(February), pp. 33-45.
Calomiris, Charles W. (1993). “Financial Factors in the Great Depression,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 7 (Spring), pp. 61-85.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1978). “On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary
Economy,” Econometrica, vol. 46 (no. 6), pp. 1411-28.
Cecchetti , Steven., Genberg, Hans., Lipsky, John., and Sushil. Wadhwani (2000). “Asset Prices
and Central Bank Policy,” Geneva Reports on the World Economy No. 2 (London: Centre for
Economic Policy Research, July).
Christensen, Jens. H.E., Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2009). “Do Central Bank
Liquidity Facilities Affect Interbank Interest Rates?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Working Paper 2009-13, June.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1998). “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
115 (February), pp. 147-80.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1999). “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661-707.
Cochrane, John H. (2009), “How Did Paul Krugman Get It So Wrong?” University of Chicago
manuscript (September 16)
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/krugman_response.htm

- 51 -

Cochrane, John H. (2010) “Understanding Policy in the Great Recession: Some Unpleasant
Fiscal Arithmetic,” University of Chicago manuscript (October 18)
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/understanding_policy.pdf
Coenen, Gunter, Athanasios Orphanides and Volker Wieland (2004). “Price Stability and
Monetary Policy Effectiveness When Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero,” Advances in
Macroeconomics, Vol 4, no. 1.

Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford (2009). “Credit Spreads and Optimal Monetary Policy,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports No. 385.
Curdia, Vasco and Michael Woodford (2010). “Conventional and Unconventional Monetary
Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review (July/August): 229-264.
Cukierman, Alex (1993). “Central Bank Independence, Political Influence and Macroeconomic
Performance: A Survey of Recent Developments” Cuadernos de Economía (Santiago), vol. 30
(no. 91), pp. 271-91.
Cukierman, Alex (2006). “Central Bank Independence and Monetary Policy Making Institutions:
Past, Present, and Future,” Journal Economía Chilena, vol. 9 (April), pp. 5-23.
Debelle, Guy and Stanly Fischer (1994). “How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?” in
Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers, Proceedings from the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No. 38. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, pp. 195-221.
Delis, Manthos D. and Georgios Kouretas, (2010). “Interest Rates and Bank Risk-Taking,”
Munich Personal RePEc Archive, MRPA Paper No. 20132 (January).
Ditmar, Robert, Gavin, William T. and Finn E. Kydland (1999). "The Inflation-Output
Variability Tradeoff and Price Level Targets," Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis:
23-31.
Ditmar, Robert, Gavin, William T. and Finn E. Kydland (2000). "What Do New-Keynesian
Phillips Curves Imply for Price-Level Targeting," Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis:
21-30.

Dupor, Bill (2005). “Stabilizing Non-fundamental Asset Price Movements under Discretion and
Limited Information,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52 (May), pp. 727-47.
Economist Magazine (2009). “The Other-Worldly Philosophers” (July 16)
http://www.economist.com/node/14030288

- 52 -

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2003 (no. 1), pp. 139211.
Eggertsson, Gauti, B. And Michael Woodford (2004). “Policy Options in a Liquidity Trap,”
American Economic Review 94(2): 76-79.
English, William B. (1996). “Inflation and Financial Sector Size,” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series 1996-16. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds.
English, William B., William R. Nelson, and Brian P. Sack (2003). “Interpreting the
Significance of the Lagged Interest Rate in Estimated Monetary Policy Rules,” Contributions to
Macroeconomics, vol. 3 (no. 1), article 5.
Erceg, Christopher, Luca Guerrieri, and Christopher Gust (2006). “SIGMA: A New Open
Economy Model for Policy Analysis,” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (March),
pp. 1-50.
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000). “Optimal Monetary
Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 46
(October), pp. 281-313.
Fatás, Antonio, Ilian Mihov, and Andrew K. Rose (2007). “Quantitative Goals for Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (August), pp. 1163-76.
Feldstein, Martin (1997). “The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price
Stability,” in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and
Strategy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 123-66.
Fischer, Stanley (1993). “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, vol. 32 (December), pp. 485-512.
Fischer, Stanley (1994). “Modern Central Banking,” in Forrest Capie, Stanley Fischer, Charles
Goodhart, and Norbert Schnadt, eds., The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary
Symposium of the Bank of England. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Fisher, Irving (1933). “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica, vol. 1
(October), pp. 337-57.
Forder, James (2000). “Traps in the Measurement of Independence and Accountability of Central
Banks,” University of Oxford Economics Series Working Papers 023. Oxford: University of
Oxford, www.economics.ox.ac.uk/Research/WorkPapers.asp.
Friedman, Milton (1963). Inflation: Causes and Consequences. New York: Asia Publishing
House.
- 53 -

French, Kenneth R., et al (2010). The Squam Lake Report: Fixing the Financial System
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010).
Friedman, Milton and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Friedman, Milton (1968). “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, vol. 58
(March), pp. 1-17.
Friedman, Milton, and David Meiselman (1963). “The Relative Stability of Monetary Velocity
and the Investment Multiplier in the United States, 1897-1958” in Stabilization Policies, a Series
of Research Studies Prepared for the Commission on Money and Credit. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, pp. 165-268.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (1963a). Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960, National Bureau of Economic Research Publications. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1963b). “Money and Business Cycles,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, vol. 45 (February, Part 2), pp. 32-64.
Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler (forthcoming). “Macroeconomic Modeling for Monetary Policy
Evaluation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010)). “Large Scale Asset
Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Report No. 441, March.
Gambacorta, Leonardo. (2009). “Monetary Policy and the Risk-Taking Channel,” BIS
Quarterly Review, December, pg. 43-53.
Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi (2009). “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,”
working paper, NYU.
Giannoni, Marc P. , and Michael Woodford (2005). “Optimal Inflation-Targeting Rules,” in Ben
S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds., Inflation Targeting. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 93-172.
Giavazzi, Francesco, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2006). An Evaluation of Swedish Monetary Policy
Between 1995 and 2005 (Stockholm: Sveriges Riksdag).
Goldberg, Linda, Craig Kennedy and Jason Miu (2010).. “Central Bank Dollar Swap Lines and
Overseas Dollar Funding Costs,” National Burea of Economic Research Working Paper 15763,
February.

- 54 -

Goodfriend, Marvin (1993). “Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem: 1979-1992,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly, vol. 79 (Winter), pp. 1-24.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King (1997). “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role
of Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 231-83.
Greenspan, Alan (2002). “Opening Remarks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic
Symposium Rethinking Stabilization Policy: 1-10.
Greenspan, Alan (2003). “Opening Remarks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic
Symposium, Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy: 1-7
Greenwald, Bruce, Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss (1984). “Informational Imperfections
in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, vol. 74
(May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 194-9.
Gruen, D., M. Plumb, and A. Stone (2005). “How Should Monetary Policy Respond to Asset
Price Bubbles?” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 1 (December), pp. 1-31.
Haldane, Andrew G. and Salmon, Christopher K. 1995. "Three Issues in Inflation Targets," in
Andrew G. Haldane, ed., Targeting Inflation, Bank of England, London: 170-201.
Hamilton, James D. (1987). “Monetary Factors in the Great Depression,” Journal of Monetary
Economics vol. 19 (March): 145-169.
Hamilton, James D. (1989). “A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary
Time Series and the Business Cycle,” Econometrica, vol. 57 (March), pp. 357-84.
Hoenig, Thomas (2010). “The High Cost of Exceptionally Low Rates,” speech given at
Bartlesville Federal Reserve Forum, Bartlesville, Oklahoma (June 3)
http://www.kansascityfed.org/SpeechBio/HoenigPDF/Bartlesville.06.03.10.pdf
Issing, Otmar (2003a). “Monetary and Financial Stability: Is There a Trade-off?” comments at
the Bank for International Settlements, March.
Issing, Otmar (2003b). Introductory statement delivered at the European Central Bank Workshop
on “Asset Prices and Monetary Policy,” December 11.
Ioannidou, Vasso, Stevem Ongena, and Jose Luis Peydro (2009). “Monetary Policy, RiskTaking and Pricing: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment.” European Banking Centre
Discussion Paper no. 2009-04S.
Jimenez, Gabriel, Seven Ongena, Jose Luis Peydro and Jesus. Saurina (2008). “Hazardous
Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects
of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?” Bank of Spain, Working Paper no. 0833.
- 55 -

Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein (1994). “Monetary Policy and Bank Lending,” in N.
Gregory Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in
Business Cycles, vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 221-56.
Keister, Todd. 2010. “Bailouts and Financial Fragility.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
unpublished manuscript.
Kim, Chang-Jin, James Morley, and Jeremy Piger (2005). “Nonlinearity and the Permanent
Effects of Recessions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, vol. 20 (no. 2), pp. 291-309.
Kim, Chang-Jin, and Charles Nelson (1999). “Has the U.S. Economy Become More Stable?
A Bayesian Approach Based on a Markov-Switching Model of the Business Cycle,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, vol. 81 (November), pp. 608-16.
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1978) Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises
(New York: Basic Books).
King, Mervyn (2004a). Remarks made in a panel discussion on Alan Greenspan's speech on Risk
and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy delivered at the American Economic Association Annual
Meeting in San Diego, January 3,
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2004/speech209.pdf.
King, Mervyn (2004b). Speech delivered to the CBI Scotland Diner at the Glasgow Hilton Hotel,
June 14, www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2004/speech221.pdf.
King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman (1999). “What Should the Monetary Authority Do
When Prices Are Sticky?” in John Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 349-98.
Kohn, Donald (2006). “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices,” speech delivered at “Monetary
Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice,” a European Central Bank Colloquium held in honor
of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, March 16.
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), pp. 473-92.
Krugman, Paul (2009). “How Did Economists Get it So Wrong?” New York Times Magazine
(September 2) at http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/06/magazine/06Economic-t.html.
Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2004). “Comment on ‘Price Stability and Japanese Monetary Policy’ by
Robert Hetzel,” Bank of Japan Instittute for Monetary and Economic Studies Monetary and
Economic Studies 22: 37-46.
Levin, Andrew T., Alexei Onatski, John C. Williams, and Noah Williams (2005). “Monetary
Policy Under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” in Mark Gertler and
- 56 -

Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp.
229-87.
Lucas, Robert E. (1972). “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic
Theory, vol. 4 (April), pp. 103-24.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1973). “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,”
American Economic Review, vol. 63 (June), pp. 326-34.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1976). “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 1, pp. 19-46.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (2009) “In Defense of the Dismal Science,” Economist Magazine (August
6) http://www.economist.com/node/14165405
McAndrews, James (2009).. “Segmentation in the U.S. Dollar Money Markets During the
Financial Crisis,” Paper presented at the International Conference of the Bank of Japan’s
Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Tokyo, May.
McAndrews, James, Asani Sarkar, and Zhenyu Wang (2008). “The Effect of the Long-Term
Auction Facility o the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Staff Report No. 335, July.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1978). "The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression," Journal
of Economic History, vol. 38 (December), pp. 918-37.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1981). "The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical Investigation," CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 15 (Autumn), pp. 151-200.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1982a). “Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter? An Econometric
Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90 (February), pp. 22-51.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1982b). “Does Anticipated Aggregate Demand Policy Matter? Further
Econometric Results,” American Economic Review, vol. 72 (September), pp. 788-802.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1983). A Rational Expectations Approach to Macroeconometrics: Testing
Policy Ineffectiveness and Efficient Markets Models. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1991). “Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A Historical
Perspective,” in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-108.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (1996). “Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country
Perspective,” in Michael Bruno and Boris Pleskovic, eds., Annual World Bank Conference on
Development Economics 1996. Washington: World Bank, pp. 29-62.
- 57 -

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1997). “The Causes and Propagation of Financial Instability: Lessons for
Policymakers,” in Maintaining Financial Stability in a Global Economy. Kansas City: Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 55-96.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2001a). "The Transmission Mechanism and the Role of Asset Prices in
Monetary Policy," in Aspects of the Transmission Mechanism of Monetary Policy, Focus on
Austria 3-4/2001. (Osterreichische Nationalbank: Vienna): 58-71.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2001b). "Issues in Inflation Targeting," in Price Stability and the LongRun Target for Monetary Policy, (Bank of Canada: Ottawa, Canada): 203-222.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007). “Housing and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism,” Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 2007-40. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, September, www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2008). AWhither Federal Reserve Communication,@ speech delivered at the
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, (July 28)
(www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20080728a.htm)
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2009a), “Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?” in Deutsche
Bundesbank, ed., Monetary Policy Over Fifty Years: Experiences and Lessons (Routledge:
London), pp. 81-107.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2009b). ”Is Monetary Policy Effective During Financial Crises,” American
Economic Review, 99 (2): 573-577.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2009c)“The Financial Crisis and the Federal Reserve,” NBER Macro
Annual, 2009, pp. 495-508.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2010a). The Economics of Money, Banking, and Financial Markets, 9th ed.
Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2010b). “Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial
Disruptions,@ Journal of Asian Economics 23 (June), pp. 242-246.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2011). “Over the Cliff: From the Subprime to the Global Financial
Crisis,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Adam S. Posen (1997). “Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four
Countries,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, vol. 3 (August), pp.
9-110.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (2002). “One Decade of Inflation Targeting in
the World: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?" in Norman Loayza and
- 58 -

Raimundo Soto, eds., Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges. Santiago: Central
Bank of Chile, pp. 171-219.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, eds. (2007). “Does Inflation Targeting
Matter?” in Monetary Policy Under Inflation Targeting. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, pp.
291-372.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Niklas Westelius (2008). “Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal
Inflation Contracts,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Volume 40, No. 4 (June), pp. 557582.
Muth, John F. (1961). “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,”
Econometrica, vol. 29 (July), pp. 315-35.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf (1984). “Corporate Financing and Investment
Decisions When Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial
Economics, vol. 13 (June), pp. 187-221.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “The Quest for Prosperity Without Inflation,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63.
Phelps, Edmund S. (1968). “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium,” Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 76 (July/August, Part 2), pp. 687-711.
Phillips, A.W. (1958). “The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money
Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957,” Economica, vol. 25 (November), pp. 283-99.
Posen, Adam S. (2003) “It Takes More Than a Bubble to Become Japan,” in Anthony Richards
and Tim Robinson, ed. Asset Prices and Monetary Policy (Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia):
203-249.
Posen, Adam S. (2009) “Finding the Right Tool for Dealing with Asset Price Booms,” speech to
the MPR Monetary Policy and the Markets Conference, London, (December 1)
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech415.pdf
Rajan, Rhaguram G. (2005) “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” The
Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future. (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City):
313-369.

Rajan, Raghuram (2006). "Has Finance Made the World Riskier?" European Financial
Management 12(4), pg. 499-533.
Rajan, Raghuram (2010). “Bernanke Must End Era of Ultra-Low Rates,” Financial Times (July
28), http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2a19a706-9a7a-11df-87fd-00144feab49a.html
- 59 -

Reifschneider, David, Robert Tetlow, and John Williams (1999). “Aggregate Disturbances,
Monetary Policy, and the Macroeconomy: The FRB/US Perspective,” Federal Reserve Bulletin,
vol. 85 (January), pp. 1-19.
Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a
Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November, Part 2), pp. 93666.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Vincent R. Reinhart (2010) “After the Fall,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City Economic Symposium, Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead,
manuscript, http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2010/reinhart-paper.pdf
Reinhart, Carmen M and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009).. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press)
Rosenberg, Irma (2006). “Monetary Policy in Sweden,” speech delivered at the Swedibank,
September 18.
Rotemberg, Julio, and Michael Woodford (1997). “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg,
eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 297-346.

Sack, Brian (2000). “Does the Fed Act Gradually? A VAR Analysis,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, vol. 46 (August), pp. 229-56.

Samuelson, Paul A., and Robert M. Solow (1960). “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy,”
American Economic Review, vol. 50 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 177-94.
Sarkar, Asani and Jeffrey Shrader (2010). “Financial Amplification Mechanisms and the Federal
Reserve’s Supply of Liquidity During the Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Report No. 431. March.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe (2005). “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in a
Medium-Scale Macroeconomic Model,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 383-425.
Selody, Jack, and Carolyn Wilkins (2004). “Asset Prices and Monetary Policy: A Canadian
Perspective on the Issues,” Bank of Canada Review (Autumn), pp. 3-14.
Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2003). “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1 (September),
pp. 1123-75.

- 60 -

Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2003). “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 1 (September),
pp. 1123-75.
Stevens, G.R. (2004). “Recent Issues in the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” Reserve Bank of
Australia Bulletin, vol. 2004 (March).
Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997). “Optimal Inflation Targets, ‘Conservative’ Central Banks, and
Linear Inflation Contracts,” American Economic Review, vol. 87 (March), pp. 98-114.
Svensson, Lars, E.O, 1999. "Price-Level Targeting Versus Inflation Targeting: A Free Lunch,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31: 277-95.
Svensson, Lars E. O. (2001). “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of
Escaping from a Liquidity Trap,” Monetary and Economic Studies, Vol 19, no. S1: 277-312
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2002), “Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization”, in Rethinking
Stabilization Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium,
261-312.
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214.
Taylor, John B., ed. (1999) Monetary Policy Rules, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Studies in Business Cycles, vol. 31. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
John Taylor (2007). “Housing and Monetary Policy,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary Policy (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City:. 463-476.
Taylor, John, B. (2009). Getting Off Track: How Government Actions and Interventions,
Caused, Prolonged and Worsened the Financial Crisis (Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press).
Taylor, John, B. and John Williams (2009). “A Black Swan in the Money Market,” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 58-83.
Tinbergen, Jan (1939). Business Cycles in the United States of America: 1919-1932, Statistical
Testing of Business Cycle Theories, vol. 2. Geneva: League of Nations.
Tirole, Jean and Emmanuel Farhi (2009). “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch and
Systemic Bailouts.” NBER Working Paper Series 15138.
Turner, Phillip (2010). “Central Banks and the Financial Crisis,” BIS Papers No. 51 (Basel:
Bank for International Settlements): 21-25.

- 61 -

Vestin, David, 2000. "Price Level Targeting Versus Inflation Targeting in a Forward Looking
Model." mimeo., IIES, Stockholm University, May.
Vestin, David (2006). “Price-Level Versus Inflation Targeting,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 53. No. 7: 1361-1376.
Wessel, David (2009). In Fed We Trust: Ben Bernanke’s War on the Great Panic, (New York:
Crown Business).
White, William (2004). “Making Macroprudential Concerns Operational,” speech delivered at a
Financial Stability Symposium organized by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, October 26,
www.bis.org/speeches/sp041026.htm.
White, William R. (2009). “Should Monetary Policy ‘Lean or Clean’?” Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas Working Paper No. 34. (August)
Wilson, L. and Y.W. Wu (2010). “Common (Stock) Sense About Risk-Shifting and Bank
Bailouts,” Financial Markets and Portfolio Management, Vol. 24, no.1: 3-29.
Woodford, Michael (2002). "Inflation Stabilization and Welfare," Contributions to
Macroeconomics. Vol. 2, No. 1.
Woodford, Michael (2001). “The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy,” American
Economic Review, vol. 91 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 232-7.
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Wu, Tao (2008). “On the Effectiveness of the Federal Reserve’s New Liquidity Facilities,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, mimeo., May.

- 62 -

