                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        CONSUMPTION AND INCOME POVERTY OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                           Bruce D. Meyer
                                          James X. Sullivan

                                        Working Paper 16751
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16751


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2011




We have benefited from the comments of participants at the IZA/OECD Workshop “Economic Crisis,
Rising Unemployment and Policy Responses: What Does It Mean for the Income Distribution?” The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Consumption and Income Poverty over the Business Cycle
Bruce D. Meyer and James X. Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 16751
January 2011
JEL No. D6,E3,I3

                                            ABSTRACT

We examine the relationship between the business cycle and poverty for the period from 1960 to 2008
using income data from the Current Population Survey and consumption data from the Consumer Expenditure
Survey. This new evidence on the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and poverty is
of particular interest given recent changes in anti-poverty policies that have placed greater emphasis
on participation in the labor market and in-kind transfers. We look beyond official poverty, examining
alternative income poverty and consumption poverty, which have conceptual and empirical advantages
as measures of the well-being of the poor. We find that both income and consumption poverty are
sensitive to macroeconomic conditions. A one percentage point increase in unemployment is associated
with an increase in the after-tax income poverty rate of 0.9 to 1.1 percentage points in the long-run,
and an increase in the consumption poverty rate of 0.3 to 1.2 percentage points in the long-run. The
evidence on whether income is more responsive to the business cycle than consumption is mixed.
Income poverty does appear to be more responsive using national level variation, but consumption
poverty is often more responsive to unemployment when using regional variation. Low percentiles
of both income and consumption are sensitive to macroeconomic conditions, and in most cases low
percentiles of income appear to be more responsive than low percentiles of consumption.


Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu

James X. Sullivan
Department of Economics
447 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
James.X.Sullivan.197@nd.edu
1. Introduction


           There are two standard sets of tools that have been used to reduce poverty: programs
that directly target poor populations, and policies that alleviate poverty indirectly through
economic growth that benefits the worst off. There is a consensus that the latter set of policies
has greater potential impact.1 In her essay on fighting poverty Blank (2000) concludes that “a
strong macroeconomy matters more than anything else.” However, in some periods the
relationship between growth and poverty appears weak. There is also disagreement on the
link between specific policies and the macroeconomy. We reexamine the relationship
between the macroeconomy and poverty. We do this in part because past work has found a
changing relationship between poverty and measures of the macroeconomy. Past work has
emphasized that the relationship between official poverty and unemployment is very strong in
some decades, but weak in others. There is even greater concern that the relationship may be
different in recent years than in the past because our safety net has undergone a dramatic
transformation. Policies such as welfare reform, EITC expansions, expanded childcare, and
restrictions on use of food stamps by the able bodied have pushed many low income families
to be more reliant on employment. We expect that the effects of macroeconomic conditions
on poverty will be greater when the poor are more closely attached to the labor market. On
the other hand, the argument that economic growth helps those at the bottom may also be less
evident during times, such as recent decades, when growth is accompanied by a rise in income
inequality. In addition there are a number of groups that are less likely to be affected by
macroeconomic fluctuations including those on disability or retirement benefits, both of
which have grown recently.
           Our analyses will consider several indicators of the well-being of those at the bottom
of the distribution. Looking beyond official income poverty measures to improved, broader
measures of well-being is important for several reasons. Official pre-tax income poverty has
been widely criticized as poorly measuring the well-being of the worst off. The official
measure fails to capture all the resources available to the family including in-kind transfers
and tax credits that have been key tools in the anti-poverty efforts of the last decades. Other


1
    For example, see Blank and Blinder (1986), Blank (2000), Haveman and Schwabish, (2000).
                                                        1
flaws include an unattractive adjustment for family size and changes in the real value of the
poverty thresholds over time due to biases in the CPI (Citro and Michael, 1995; Meyer and
Sullivan, 2009).
       More importantly, changes in consumption may provide a better measure of the effect
of the economy on the well-being of the worst off than changes in income. Even when
income changes, consumption may vary little if transfers from extended family members, in-
kind government transfers, or access to savings or credit shield a families’ living standards
from transitory changes in income (Cutler and Katz, 1991; Slesnick, 1993, 2001; Meyer and
Sullivan, 2008, 2009). If the importance of factors such as extended families and access to
credit changes over time, the effect of the economy on well-being will likely change. Because
consumption reflects home and car ownership, which provide a flow of consumption services
to their owners even though not captured by income, consumption may provide a better
picture of well-being if ownership rates differ across groups or over time.
       The consumption and income data available in the U.S. are both subject to error, but
there is evidence that consumption is reported better than income for those near the bottom of
the distribution. For example, income is often far below consumption for those with few
resources, even for those with little or no assets or debts (Meyer and Sullivan 2003, 2007).
Income measurement issues may be particularly important for this study because many of the
types of income that may be more important in recessions seem to be poorly measured in
household surveys. For example, in bad economic times, off-the-books income, inter-family
transfers, and government transfers are likely to be more prevalent. Each of these sources is
not well reported in household surveys (Edin and Lein, 1997; Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan,
2009). Our analyses will shed light on whether consumption poverty is less sensitive to
macroeconomic conditions because of the wide variety of ways in which households can
smooth their consumption and because mis-reporting of income is likely to be more cyclically
sensitive than mis-reporting of consumption.
       In addition to alternative poverty rates, we consider how the macroeconomy affects
low percentiles of the income and consumption distributions. These analyses provide a better
picture of the sensitivity of the bottom of the distribution to economic conditions than
focusing exclusively on a poverty rate, which is the cumulative distribution function of
resources evaluated at a single point.
                                                2
       We find that both income and consumption poverty are sensitive to macroeconomic
conditions. The evidence on whether income is more responsive to the business cycle than
consumption is mixed. Income poverty does appear to be more responsive using national
level variation, but consumption poverty is often more responsive to unemployment when
using regional variation. Our results suggest that, for the period from 1981 to 2008, a 1
percentage point increase in unemployment is associated with an increase in the after-tax
income poverty rate of 0.9 to 1.1 percentage points, and an increase in the consumption
poverty rate of 0.3 to 1.2 percentage points. Results for the 2000s indicate that after-tax
income poverty is responsive to changes in the national unemployment rate, although the
point estimates are smaller than for the 1990s.
       The evidence for low percentiles is consistent with that for poverty. Low percentiles
of both income and consumption are sensitive to macroeconomic conditions, and in most
cases low percentiles of income appear to be more responsive than low percentiles of
consumption. Across several low income percentiles, we find that a 1 percentage point
increase in unemployment is associated with a decline in these percentiles ranging from 4 to
10 percent. For low percentiles of consumption this range is from 0 to 7 percent.
       This paper advances knowledge in a number of respects. First, we look beyond
official poverty, examining alternative income poverty and consumption poverty. Second, we
update the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and poverty through 2008. Given
the sensitivity to time period found in past work, and recent policy changes, recent years are
of special interest. Third, we examine low percentiles of income and consumption to provide
a more complete picture of how macroeconomic conditions affect the worst off. Finally, we
exploit both regional and national variation in economic conditions.
       There are a number of limitations to any analysis of this kind. The relationship
between economic conditions and poverty will depend on how government policy responds to
a recession. We necessarily estimate the combined effect of macroeconomic conditions and
any policy adjustments engendered by those conditions. Also, business cycles vary
considerably in the extent to which they affect different industries, demographic groups, or
regions. Thus, the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and poverty will differ
across cycles. The unique nature of each business cycle makes it difficult to draw general
conclusions about the impact of changes in macroeconomic conditions. Moreover, it is
                                                  3
difficult to estimate precisely how the response of poverty to the business cycle changes over
time given the short time series for these subperiods. Our own robustness analyses, as well as
comparisons of our results to others in the literature, demonstrate variation in estimates across
equally plausible specifications for narrow time periods, such as a single decade.
        In the following section we briefly summarize the key findings from previous studies
of the effect of macroeconomic conditions on poverty. In Section 3 we describe the data used
to construct alternative income and consumption measures of poverty and the methods used to
examine how the macroeconomy is related to these outcomes. We present our results in
Section 4. In Section 5 we briefly simulate poverty rates for the current recession and we
offer conclusions in Section 6.


2.      Previous Research on Poverty and Macroeconomic Conditions


        A long series of papers have examined the relationship between macroeconomic
conditions and poverty.2 The consensus from this literature is that the relationship between
national unemployment and official poverty is strong, but the magnitude of the effect is
sensitive to the years examined.3 For example, using data from 1959-1983, Blank and Blinder
(1986) find that a one percentage point rise in unemployment results in a 1.1 percentage point
increase in poverty. Comparable estimates from Cutler and Katz (1991), whose sample period
covers 1959-1989, indicate that a one point rise in the unemployment rate raises poverty by
0.43 to 0.69 points. These and other papers conclude that the effect of inflation on poverty is
much more modest than that of unemployment.4
        The literature has also emphasized that the relationship between macroeconomic
conditions and poverty has changed over time. Early studies documented a strong
relationship for the 1960s. However, there is evidence that this relationship weakened in the
1970s and particularly the 1980s (Blank, 1993). During the economic expansion from 1983 to

2
  See Haveman and Schwabish (2000) for a brief review of this literature.
3
  Studies using regional or state variation in poverty and macroeconomic conditions have found similar evidence
(Blank and Card, 1993; Tobin, 1994; Freeman, 2001; Gundersen and Ziliak, 2004; Hoynes, Page, and Stevens,
2006).
4
  Several papers have considered the effect that government transfer spending has on poverty (Gottschalk and
Danziger, 1984; Blank and Blinder, 1986; Haveman and Schwabish, 2000; Blank 2009). These studies typically
find that greater transfer spending is associated with reduced poverty, but the estimates are imprecise.
                                                          4
1989, real GDP grew by 27 percent, unemployment fell by 45 percent, but poverty fell a
modest 16 percent. More recent studies have shown the relationship between unemployment
and poverty to be stronger in the 1990s than in the 1980s but still weaker than earlier years
(Blank, 2000; Haveman and Schwabish, 2000).
           A number of studies have documented how the relationship between macroeconomic
conditions and poverty differs across demographic groups. Recent examples include Blank
(2000, 2009) and Gundersen and Ziliak (2004). Blank (2000, 2009) finds that poverty is
particularly responsive to unemployment for groups that have high exposure to public
assistance: single mother families and black families. In the earlier paper, she finds for both
of these groups that the relationship is stronger in the 1990s than in any earlier decade.
           Our paper contributes to the existing literature in several important ways. First, this
literature has focused, almost exclusively, on officially measured poverty.5 We consider
alternative poverty measures that address known criticisms in the official measure. In
addition to broader measures of income poverty, we examine consumption poverty, which is
arguably a better measure of the well-being of the poor. As far as we know, we are the first to
look at the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and consumption poverty.
Second, we update past work by examining the relationship between macroeconomic
conditions and poverty through 2008. This recent evidence is particularly interesting given
the flurry of anti-poverty policies over the past two decades that have placed greater emphasis
on participation in the labor market and in-kind transfers. Third, in addition to poverty
measures, we will look at low percentiles of the distributions of income and consumption to
provide a more complete picture of how the bottom of the distribution responds to the
business cycle. Finally, we exploit both regional and national variation in economic
conditions. This additional source of variation allows us to estimate more precisely how
economic conditions are related to the well-being of the worst-off. In addition, we can
estimate models with year fixed effects, which control for aggregate changes that have similar
effects on poverty or low percentiles in all regions, such as changes in federal tax and transfer
policies.



5
    One exception is Gundersen and Ziliak (2004), who look at an after-tax income poverty measure.
                                                        5
3.     Data and Methods


       Our analyses of the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and the well-
being of the worst off relies on official statistics on unemployment and poverty, as well as
alternative poverty measures and percentiles of the income and consumption distribution that
we calculate using nationally representative survey data. The income data come from the
ASEC/ADF Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the consumption data
come from the Interview component of the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey.
       The CPS is the source for many official income statistics including poverty rates.
Respondents to the CPS report information on a number of different sources of money
income. In addition, the survey collects information on some noncash benefits such as food
stamps, housing subsidies, and public health insurance. To calculate alternative income
poverty measures and percentiles of the income distribution, we use the 1964-2009 CPS
surveys, which provide data on income for the previous calendar year. In the analyses that
follow, we consider three different measures of income: pre-tax money income, after-tax
money income, and after-tax money income plus noncash benefits. Pre-tax money income is
the measure used in official poverty statistics. To calculate after-tax money income we add
the value of tax credits such as the EITC, and subtract state and federal income taxes and
payroll taxes, as explained in the Data Appendix. Our measure of after-tax money income
plus noncash benefits adds to after-tax money income the cash value of food stamps, and
imputed values for housing and school lunch subsidies, and the imputed value of Medicaid
and Medicare coverage. For more details, see the Data Appendix.
       The CE Survey is the most comprehensive source of spending data for the U.S. To
calculate the consumption poverty rate and percentiles of the consumption distribution, we use
data from the CE Survey for the years 1960-1961, 1972-1973, 1980-1981 and 1984-2008.
The 1960-1961 surveys provide data on annual expenditures collected in a single interview,
while the 1972-1973 surveys provide data on annualized expenditures collected from
quarterly interviews. Since 1980, quarterly expenditures have been provided. To obtain
annual measures we multiply these quarterly measures by four. We do not use the data from
the fourth quarter of 1981 through the fourth quarter of 1983 because the surveys for these
quarters only include respondents from urban areas. We group the data for the 1960-1961
                                               6
period because the data are only representative of the full population when the samples from
these two years are combined.
         Our measure of consumption includes both durable and nondurable goods. To convert
reported expenditures into a measure of consumption, we make a number of adjustments.
First, we convert vehicle spending to a service flow equivalent. Instead of including the full
purchase price of a vehicle, we calculate a flow that reflects the value that a consumer
receives from owning a car during the period that is a function of a depreciation rate and the
current market value of the vehicle (see the Data Appendix). Second, to convert housing
expenditures to housing consumption for homeowners, we exclude mortgage interest
payments, property tax payments, and spending on insurance, maintenance and repairs, and
add the reported rental equivalent of the home. Third, for respondents living in government or
subsidized housing, we impute a rental value using detailed housing characteristics available
in the survey. Finally, we exclude spending that is better interpreted as an investment such as
spending on education and health care, and outlays for retirement including pensions and
social security.6 For more details, see the Data Appendix.
         Our measure reflects family consumption of goods and services, but does not capture
other important components of consumption such as home production of food, food
preparation, and home repair and maintenance. It is important to note, however, that these
components are also missed in an income measure.
         Our poverty rates measure the fraction of all individuals who live in families with
resources that are below a poverty threshold. Resources are measured at the family level. To
adjust for differences in family size and composition we scale all measures using an NAS
recommended equivalence scale (Citro and Michael, 1995): (A + 0.7K)0.7, where A is the
number of adults in the family and K is the number of children. See Meyer and Sullivan
(2009) for a discussion of the importance of equivalence scales for poverty measurement. For
each scale-adjusted measure, the poverty threshold in 1980 is specified as the point in the
distribution in 1980 such that the poverty rate for that measure is equal to that of the official
poverty rate in 1980 (13.0 percent). To obtain thresholds for other years, these thresholds are



6
 We also exclude spending on individuals or entities outside the family, such as charitable contributions and
spending on gifts to non-family members. This category is very small relative to total consumption.
                                                       7
adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U-RS.7 Anchoring our alternative poverty measures to
the official poverty rate in 1980 facilitates comparisons across measures, allowing us to
examine the same point of the distribution initially so that different measures do not diverge
simply because of differential changes at different points in the distribution. In addition to
calculating a national level poverty rate for each year, we also calculate separate poverty rates
for four geographic regions: the Northeast, Midwest, South and West. These are the
narrowest geographic regions identifiable in CE Survey data for all years.
        In addition to poverty rates, we also examine the relationship between macroeconomic
conditions and low percentiles of the distribution of consumption or after-tax income. The
percentiles of the distribution are determined in each year after adjusting for differences in
family size using the NAS-recommended equivalence scale.
        We focus on two annual measures of macroeconomic conditions. The first is the
national unemployment rate for the U.S. civilian population age 16 and older. We also
examine regional unemployment data, for each of the four regions that are identifiable in both
the CPS and the CE Survey.8 Data on the national unemployment rate are available for our
entire sample period, but data on the regional unemployment rate are only available for the
years from 1976 through 2008.9
        The national unemployment rate and our main outcome variables are shown for
various years in Table 1. Over most periods, the unemployment rate and the poverty rate
move in the same direction regardless of how poverty is measured. However, in some cases,
the reverse is true. For example, the unemployment rate rises by 1.5 percentage points
between 1972 and 1980, while the after-tax income and consumption poverty rates both fall
by 1.2 percentage points. Changes in the 10th percentiles of income and consumption are
similar, although the 10th percentile of income is a bit more volatile, and the two measures
diverge between 2000 and 2008.




7
  The official poverty thresholds are adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U. The CPI-U-RS corrects for many,
but not all, of the biases in the CPI-U. See Meyer and Sullivan (2009) for more details.
8
  We also estimate specifications using GDP and median family income as a measure of macroeconomic
conditions. We discuss these results briefly in Section 5.
9
  The unemployment data are available at the Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.bls.gov/data/#unemployment).
                                                           8
           To determine how the poverty rate and percentiles are related to either national or
regional variation in macroeconomic conditions we estimate several different models. At the
national level, we estimate
                                                            D −1
yt = α1 + β1U t + λ1 yt −1 + π 1 Inflationt + τ 1t + ∑ [δ 1,d decaded ,t + κ 1,d decaded ,t * t ] + ε 1,t   (1)
                                                            d =1

where yt represents a national poverty rate or a percentile of income or consumption in year t
and Ut is the national unemployment rate for year t. We include a lagged value of the
dependent variable since poverty rates and percentiles are slow to change. Inflationt, which is
the change in the CPI-U-RS between years t and t-1, is included because past work has
hypothesized that it might reduce the real incomes of the poor, such as those with unindexed
pensions. Finally, we include a linear time trend, indicator variables for the D decades in the
sample period, and the interaction of the time trend and the decade indicators. Because much
of the previous literature has focused on how the relationship between macroeconomic
conditions and poverty has changed over time we also estimate models that allow the
relationship to differ by decade:
               D
yt = α 2 + ∑ [ β 2,d decaded ,t * U t ] + λ2 yt −1 + π 2 Inflationt + τ 2t
              d =1
                                                                                                            (2)
       D −1
    + ∑ [δ 2,d decaded ,t + κ 2,d decaded ,t * t ] + ε 2,t
       d =1


           For any given year, both the unemployment rate and the poverty rate will differ
considerably across regions in the U.S. This additional source of variation allows us to
estimate more precisely how economic conditions are related to the well-being of the worst-
off. Another important advantage of examining this relationship regionally is that it allows us
to include year fixed effects, which control for any aggregate changes that have similar effects
on poverty or low percentiles in all regions, such as changes in federal tax and transfer
policies. Specifically, we estimate a model that includes region (Rj) and year (γt) fixed
effects:
y jt = α 3 + β 3U jt + λ3 y jt −1 + R j + γ t + ε 3, jt .                                                   (3)

Alternatively, to consider whether the relationship between regional economic conditions and
poverty has changed over time we estimate models that allow the relationship to differ by
decade:
                                                                   9
              D                                                       D −1
y jt = α 4 + ∑ [ β 4,d decaded ,t * U jt ] + λ4 y jt −1 + R j + γ t + ∑ [δ 4,d decaded ,t ] + ε 4, jt .   (4)
             d =1                                                     d =1




4.       Results

         To examine the bivariate relationship between the macroeconomy and the well-being
of the worst off, we construct scatter plots of annual unemployment and the official poverty
rate for the years 1960 through 2008. These plots are shown for four separate time periods in
Figure 1. The results for the 1960s show the strong relationship between unemployment and
official poverty for this decade that has been emphasized in many previous studies. Both
unemployment and poverty fell sharply during this decade. This positive relationship is much
less evident in the 1970s and 1980s, but is more noticeable again in the 1990s and 2000s.
         Figure 2 provides similar plots for after-tax income and consumption poverty. The
patterns for after-tax income poverty are fairly similar to those for official income poverty.
For the 1960s, we again see a strong positive relationship between poverty and
unemployment. The pattern is somewhat different for the 1970s, however, when
unemployment and after-tax income poverty are inversely related for part of the decade. For
the period from 1980 to 2008, we also show the relationship between consumption poverty
and unemployment.10 These scatter plots indicate a positive relationship between
consumption poverty and unemployment that is fairly similar to that for after-tax income
poverty.
         Table 2 presents estimates of equations 1 and 2 for three different measures of income
poverty: official poverty, after-tax income poverty, and after-tax income plus noncash benefits
poverty. We provide estimates for different sample periods so that we can compare estimates
across outcomes for the same periods. Because all specifications include a lag of the
dependent variable on the right hand side, we also report in brackets the long run derivatives,
which are calculated as β/(1-λ), where β is the point estimate for unemployment and λ is the
point estimate for lagged poverty. We emphasize these long run derivatives when
summarizing the results. The results in columns 1 and 2 indicate a strong relationship

10
  We do not show consumption poverty for the 1960s and 1970s because data for consumption are only
available for a few years (1960-1961, 1972 and 1973). During the 1980s, data for consumption poverty is
reported for 1980, 1981, and 1984-1989.
                                                      10
between official income poverty and national unemployment. For the period from 1964 to
2008, a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is associated with a 0.6
percentage point rise in official poverty in the long run (column 1). These results are
comparable to estimates from the literature for earlier time periods, such at those from Cutler
and Katz (1991) or Blinder and Blank (1986) discussed in Section 2. Consistent with
previous research, we find a very strong relationship between poverty and unemployment in
the 1960s, and a weaker relationship during the 1970s and 1980s (column 2). The point
estimate for the 1990s is slightly larger than that for the 1970s and 1980s.11 For the 2000s, we
find a statistically significant relationship between unemployment and poverty, but one that is
slightly smaller than that for the 1990s.
        Although our estimates are sensitive to which years are included in the sample period,
the results are quite similar for different measures of income poverty.12 For example, the
results for after-tax income poverty (columns 3 and 4) are similar to those for official income
poverty (columns 1 and 2), and the results for after-tax income poverty (columns 7 and 8) are
similar to those for after-tax income plus noncash benefits poverty (columns 9 and 10). We
should emphasize that the decade specific estimates of the effect of unemployment on poverty
in the even columns of Table 2 are sensitive to which covariates are included in the
specification and to which years are included in the sample period.13 Each of the
specifications in Table 2 includes inflation as a control. As has been emphasized in past
research (for example, Blank and Blinder, 1986), we find the relationship between inflation
and poverty to be weak. The point estimates for inflation (not reported) are considerably
smaller than those for unemployment, and in all but one of the specifications reported in Table
2, this coefficient is not significantly different from zero.




11
   Looking at the period from 1959 to 1998, Haveman finds the largest effect for the 1959-1972 period, and then
for the 1993-1998 period.
12
   As explained in Section 3, our measures of alternative poverty differ from official poverty not just in how
resources are measured, but also in how differences in family size are accounted for and in how thresholds are
adjusted for inflation.
13
   For example, the results in column 4 suggest a weak relationship between unemployment and after-tax income
poverty for the 1964-1969 period. However, when the interaction terms between the linear time trend and the
decade dummies are excluded, this point estimate is much closer to the one for official poverty in column 2.
                                                        11
        Estimates for equations 3 and 4, which consider the effect of regional unemployment
on regional poverty, are presented in Table 3.14 Focusing on the long run derivatives, we
again see that income poverty is sensitive to changing macroeconomic conditions, and the
magnitudes of these estimates are similar to those using national variation in Table 2. For
example, a 1 percentage point increase in regional unemployment is associated with a 1.1
percentage point increase in after-tax income poverty (column 3), which is comparable to the
analogous estimate using national variation (column 5 of Table 2). The results in Table 3 also
indicate that the sensitivity of poverty to unemployment is similar for different measures of
income poverty. As in Table 2, the estimates vary somewhat across decades (even columns).
The point estimates for the 1990s are larger than those for the late 1970s and 1980s. The
estimates for the 2000s are slightly lower than those for the 1990s, and these estimates are not
significantly different from zero. The estimates for the region dummies (not reported)
indicate the sharp differences in poverty across regions, with the south experiencing sharply
higher rates than other regions regardless of how poverty is measured.
        We also estimate equations 1 to 4 for consumption poverty to determine how the
response of consumption poverty to macroeconomic conditions compares to that of income
poverty. We report estimates for both after-tax income poverty and consumption poverty for
comparable years in Table 4. Estimates using national variation in unemployment and
poverty are presented in columns 1 to 6, while those using regional variation are presented in
columns 7 to 10. For each specification in Table 4, we allow the error term in the income
poverty equation to be correlated the error term in the corresponding consumption poverty
equation, estimating these equations simultaneously using the Seemingly Unrelated
Regressions approach proposed by Zellner (1962).15
        The results in Table 4 indicate that both income and consumption poverty are sensitive
to macroeconomic conditions. For the full time period (columns 1 and 4) there is evidence
that after-tax income poverty is more sensitive to the national unemployment rate than




14
   These results do not include data from the 1960s and early 1970s because the regional unemployment rate
series provided by the BLS only goes back to 1976.
15
   For example, the specifications in columns 1 and 4 are estimated simultaneously, as are those in columns 2 and
5, etc.
                                                        12
consumption poverty.16 The former rises by 0.8 percentage points and the latter by 0.5
percentage points in response to a one point rise in unemployment. These responses are
significantly different from each other. For the period from 1981 to 2008 (columns 2 and 5), a
1 percentage point increase in unemployment is associated with an increase in the after-tax
income poverty rate of 0.9 percentage points, and an increase in the consumption poverty rate
of 0.3 points in the long run, but these responses are not significantly different from each
other. For after-tax income poverty, the effect of the national unemployment rate (column 3)
is significant in each decade, and the effect is smaller in the 2000s than in previous decades.
For consumption poverty, the effect of the national unemployment rate (column 6) is not
significant in any of the decades. The response to national unemployment for income poverty
is greater than that for consumption in each decade, but these responses are only significantly
different from each other for the 1990s.
         Using regional variation we also find that both income and consumption poverty are
sensitive to macroeconomic conditions. For these specifications, however, there is little
evidence that income poverty is more responsive than consumption poverty. None of the
long-run estimates for consumption poverty are significantly different from those for income,
and in most cases the point estimates are larger when looking at consumption poverty. The
point estimates indicate that a 1 percentage point increase in regional unemployment is
associated with an increase in the after-tax income poverty rate of 1.1 percentage points, and
an increase in the consumption poverty rate of 1.2 points in the long run. The decade specific
estimates indicate that the regional unemployment rate (column 8) has a significant effect on
after-tax income poverty in both the 1980s and 1990s, and the effect is smaller in the 2000s
than in previous decades. For consumption poverty, the effect of the regional unemployment
rate (column 10) is greater than that of the national unemployment rate. Regional
unemployment has a large and significant effect on consumption poverty in the 1990s and
2000s.
         To examine in more detail how the bottom of the distribution responds to the
macroeconomy, we consider how low percentiles of income and consumption respond to the
business cycle. In Table 5A, we report these results for the 10th percentile using both national

16
  For the full time period, we do not include a lagged dependent variable because we only observe one
observation for consumption poverty in the 1960s and only two observations in the 1970s.
                                                        13
variation (columns 1 to 6) and regional variation (columns 7 to 10). We again find that both
income and consumption are sensitive to macroeconomic conditions. In general, the effect of
unemployment on the 10th percentile of income is larger than that on the 10th percentile of
consumption. For example a 1 percentage point rise in the national unemployment rate is
associated with a 4.5 percent decline in the 10th percentile of income, and a 1 percent decline
in the 10th percentile of consumption, and these responses are significantly different from each
other. The decade specific estimates (columns 2 and 4) indicate that in each decade the 10th
percentile of income is more sensitive to the national unemployment rate than the 10th
percentile of consumption, but these responses are only significantly different from each other
in the 1990s and 2000s. For the 10th percentile of after-tax income, the effect of the national
unemployment rate is significant in each decade, and the effect is larger in the 1980s and
1990s than in the 2000s. The decade specific effects of the national unemployment rate are
smaller and insignificant for the 10th percentile of consumption. There is also evidence that
the effect of unemployment on the 10th percentile of income is greater than that on the 10th
percentile of consumption using regional variation (columns 7 to 10). However, these
responses are only significantly different from each other for the 1980s. The effect of the
regional unemployment rate on the 10th percentile of consumption is large and significant for
both the 1990s and 2000s.
       Tables 5B and 5C report analogous results for the 5th and 15th percentiles respectively.
These results are quite similar to those reported in Table 5A. Again, we see that low
percentiles of both income and consumption are responsive to macroeconomic conditions.
And, using national variation, there is evidence that low percentiles of income are more
responsive than low percentiles of consumption. The response of the 5th percentile of the
income distribution to unemployment is somewhat greater than that for the 10th percentile.
For example, 1 percentage point rise in the national unemployment rate is associated with an
8.6 percent decline in the 5th percentile of income, as compared to a 4.5 percent decline in the
10th percentile. The point estimates for the effect of unemployment on the 15th percentile of
both income and consumption (Table 5C) are very similar to those on the 10th percentile.
       We also examine higher percentiles of the distributions of income and consumption.
As with the 10th percentile, estimates for the 50th percentile indicate that both median after-tax
income and median consumption are responsive to unemployment (results available from the
                                                14
authors). The point estimates for the effect of unemployment on median income are slightly
smaller than those on the 10th percentile, and in all cases, the long-run effect of unemployment
is greater on median after-tax income than on median consumption. However, we cannot
reject the hypotheses that these responses are the same.
       All of the poverty results presented thus far are for absolute measures of poverty using
a poverty line that does not change over time in real terms. We focus on absolute measures
because the official poverty measure in the U.S. is designed to capture absolute poverty and
the previous work looking at changes in income poverty over the business cycle in the U.S.
has focused on absolute poverty. The European Union and other areas rely on relative
poverty measures that are based on a poverty line that can rise (or fall) over time. The
expected effects of macroeconomic conditions on relative poverty are unclear. On the one
hand, if improved economic conditions benefit the middle of the distribution more than the
bottom, then low unemployment could lead to a rise in relative poverty. On the other hand, if
the bottom of the distribution benefits the most from low unemployment, then we would
expect relative poverty to fall as macroeconomic conditions improve.
       In Table 6, we examine the relationship between the unemployment rate and both
income and consumption relative poverty, where relative poverty is defined as the fraction of
individuals with resources below 50 percent of median resources. In general, the results show
that there is a weaker relationship between unemployment and relative poverty than between
unemployment and absolute poverty. In most cases, the estimates in Table 6 are smaller than
those in Table 4. At the national level, the relationship between unemployment and relative
poverty is weak regardless of whether poverty is measured using income or consumption.
The relationship between unemployment and relative poverty is significant at the regional
level, and there is some evidence that consumption relative poverty is more responsive than
income relative poverty, but the difference is only significant for the 1990s.
       The unemployment rate is only one indicator of macroeconomic conditions. To assess
whether our main findings are sensitive to how we specify the business cycle, we consider
other measures of macroeconomic conditions. In Appendix Table 1 we present the results for
GDP per capita. At the national level, a rise in GDP per capita is associated with a decline in
both income and consumption poverty. Income poverty appears more responsive than
consumption poverty and the differences are significant in some cases. As was the case for
                                               15
the results using unemployment, consumption poverty appears more responsive to GDP per
capita when using regional variation. For the relationship between regional GDP per capita
and regional income poverty (column 8), the test for a unit root is marginally significant. So,
we have added an additional specification with the first difference of income poverty as the
dependent variable (column 9). In both of these specifications the relationship between
regional income poverty and regional GDP per capita is weak.
         We also consider other measures of macroeconomic conditions including lagged
unemployment, GDP, lagged GDP, and median income (these results are available from the
authors). The results from the other alternative specifications are also qualitatively similar to
those focusing on unemployment.


5. Predicted Effects of the Current Recession


         If we were to extrapolate the estimated effects over the 1981-2008 period to the next
few years, the predicted changes in poverty are very large. Unemployment rose 4.7
percentage points between 2007 and 2009 and averaged an additional 0.3 percentage points
higher over the first ten months of 2010. The predicted change over three years can be
obtained by inserting coefficient estimates in the expression
β [ΔU t −2 (1 + λ2 ) + ΔU t −1 (1 + λ ) + ΔU t ] .                                           (5)
Based on the estimates in Table 4, the increase in unemployment would be predicted to raise
after-tax income poverty by 2.4 to 3.4 percentage points and consumption poverty by 1.3 to
3.9 percentage points in 2010 over the 2007 level. This is a very large and troubling possible
increase in poverty. These forecasts should be interpreted cautiously, though, given that such
forecasts do not reflect changes in government policy in response to the recent recession and
given the instability of the effect of economic conditions on poverty over the past 50 years.
Monea and Sawhill (2009) provide another set of estimates. They suggest that the recession
will have much smaller effects on income poverty than we estimate, raising poverty about 1.7
percentage points between 2007 and 2010. The smaller estimated effect is due to their
reliance on a smaller coefficient on unemployment than ours, based on Blank (2009).



                                                     16
6. Conclusions


       This paper examines the relationship between poverty and macroeconomic conditions
in the United States from 1960 through 2008. Overall, we find that consumption and income
poverty rates respond strongly to economic conditions, whether they are measured by
unemployment rates, per capita GDP, or median incomes. The response of poverty to
macroeconomic conditions is similar across several different measures of income poverty,
although the magnitude of the response is somewhat sensitive to the years included in the
sample period. The results indicate that, for the period since 1981, a 1 percentage point
increase in unemployment is associated with an increase in the after-tax income poverty rate
of 0.9 to 1.1 percentage points in the long run.
       While we expect consumption poverty to be less sensitive to unemployment than
income poverty given the ability of some households to smooth their consumption, the poor
measurement of some cyclically large components of income may reverse this relationship.
The empirical evidence on whether income poverty is more responsive to macroeconomic
conditions than consumption poverty is mixed. Income poverty does appear to be more
responsive using national level variation, but consumption poverty is often more responsive to
unemployment when using regional variation. We find that a 1 percentage point increase in
unemployment is associated with an increase in the consumption poverty rate of 0.3 to 1.2
percentage points in the long run.
       The effects of unemployment on low percentiles of income and consumption have a
similar pattern to that for the poverty rate. Low percentiles of both income and consumption
are sensitive to macroeconomic conditions, and in most cases low percentiles of income
appear to be more responsive than low percentiles of consumption. Our results for the 5th,
10th, and 15th percentiles indicate that a 1 percentage point increase in unemployment is
associated with a decline in these percentiles ranging from 4 to 10 percent. For low
percentiles of consumption this range is from 0 to 7 percent. Consistent with the permanent
income hypothesis, median consumption is in all cases less sensitive to unemployment than
median income.



                                                   17
References

Bakija, Jon. 2008. “Documentation for a Comprehensive Historical U.S. Federal and State
        Income Tax Calculator Program.” Williams College working paper, January.

Blank, Rebecca. 2009. “Economic change and the structure of opportunity for low skill
       Workers.” In Changing Poverty, Changing Policy, edited by Maria Cancian and
       Sheldon Danziger. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 71-87.

_____. 2000. “Fighting Poverty: Lessons from Recent U.S. History,” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, vol. 14(2), 3-19.

_____. 1993. “Why Were Poverty Rates So High in the 1980s?” in Poverty and Prosperity in
       the Late Twentieth Century. Dimitri B. Papadimitriou and Edward N. Wolff, eds.
       London: Macmillan Press, pp. 21-55.

Blank, Rebecca M. and Alan S. Blinder. 1986. “Macroeconomics, Income Distribution, and
       Poverty,” Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Does Not, Sheldon Danziger (ed.)
       Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986.

Blank, Rebecca M. and David Card. 1993. “Poverty, Income Distribution, and Growth: Are
       They Still Connected?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1993, pp. 285-339.

Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach, eds.
        Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
        Disadvantaged.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 1-74.

Edin, Kathryn and Laura Lein. 1997. Making Ends Meet: How Single Mothers Survive
       Welfare and Low-Wage Work, (New York: Russell Sage Foundation).

Feenberg, Daniel and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. "An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model",
      Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1): 189-94.
      http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/.

Freeman, Richard. 2001. “The Rising Tide Lifts…?” In Sheldon Danziger and Robert
      Haveman, eds., Understanding Poverty, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
      97-126.

Gottschalk, Peter and Sheldon Danziger. 1984. “Macroeconomic Conditions, Income
       Transfers, and the Trend in Poverty,” in D. Lee Bawden, ed., The Social Contract
       Revisited. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute. pp. 185-215.



                                             18
Gundersen, Craig and James Ziliak. 2004. “Poverty and Macroeconomic Performance across
      Space, Race, and Family Structure,” Demography, 41:1, 61-86.

Haveman, Robert and Jonathan Schwabish. 2000. “Has Macroeconomic Performance
     Regained Its Antipoverty Bite?” Contemporary Economic Policy 18:4, 415-427.

Hoynes, Hilary W., Marianne E. Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2006. “Poverty in America:
      Trends and Explanations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20: 47-68.

Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K. C. Mok and James X. Sullivan. 2009. “The Under-Reporting of
       Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences” NBER Working
       Papers 15181, July.

Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2009. “Five Decades of Consumption and Income
       Poverty,” NBER Working Paper No. 14827.

_____. 2008. “Changes in the Consumption, Income, and Well-Being of Single Mother
      Headed Families,” American Economic Review, 98(5), December, 2221-2241.

_____. 2007. “Further Results on Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and
      Consumption,” NBER Working Paper 13413.

      . 2003. “Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption.”
       Journal of Human Resources, 38:S, 1180-1220.

Monea, Emily, and Isabel Sawhill. 2009. Simulating the Effect of the “Great Recession” on
      Poverty. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, Center on Children and Families.
      September 10. At
      http://www.brookings.edu/papers/2009/0910_poverty_monea_sawhill.aspx

Slesnick, Daniel T. 1993. “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States.” Journal
       of Political Economy 101(1): 1-38.

Slesnick, Daniel T. 2001. Consumption and Social Welfare. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press.

Tobin, James. 1994. “Poverty in Relation to Macroeconomic Trends, Cycles, and Policies.”
       in Sheldon H. Danziger, Gary D. Sandefur, and Daniel H. Weinberg, eds., Confronting
       Poverty, Prescription for Change, pp. 148-167.

Zellner, A. (1962), “An Efficient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated Regressions and
       Test for Aggregation Bias”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 57, 348–
       368.



                                             19
Data Appendix

Measuring Consumption in the CE Survey

Consumption includes all spending in the CE Survey measure of total expenditures less
spending on out of pocket health care expenses, education, and payments to retirement
accounts, pension plans, and social security. In addition, housing and vehicle expenditures are
converted to service flows. For homeowners we subtract spending on mortgage interest,
property taxes, maintenance, repairs, insurance, and other expenses, and add the reported
rental equivalent of the home.

Because a rental equivalent is not reported in the 1960-1961 and 1980-1981 surveys, we
impute a rental equivalent for these years. Using data from the 1984 survey, we regress log
reported rental equivalent on the log market value of the home, log total non-housing
expenditures, family size, and the sex and marital status of the family head. Estimates from
these regressions are used to impute a value of the rental equivalent for respondents in the
1980-1981 surveys. A similar approach is used to impute a rental equivalent value for the
1960-1961 surveys using data from the 1972-1973 surveys.

For those in public or subsidized housing, we impute a rental value using reported information
on their living unit including the number of rooms, bedrooms and bathrooms, and the
presence of appliances such as a microwave, disposal, refrigerator, washer, and dryer.
Specifically, for renters who are not in public or subsidized housing we estimate quantile
regressions for log rent using the CE Survey housing characteristics mentioned above as well
as a number of geographic identifiers including state, region, urbanicity, and SMSA status, as
well as interactions of a nonlinear time trend with appliances (to account for changes over
time in their price and quality). We then use the estimated coefficients to predict the 40th
percentile of rent for the sample of families that do not report full rent because they reside in
public or subsidized housing. We use the 40th percentile because public housing tends to be
of lower quality than private housing in dimensions we do not directly observe. Evidence
from the PSID indicates that the average reported rental equivalent of public or subsidized
housing is just under the predicted 40th percentile for these units using parameters estimated
from those outside public or subsidized housing.

For vehicle owners we subtract spending on recent purchases of new and used vehicles as well
vehicle finance charges. We then add the service flow value of all vehicles owned by the
family. The service flow for each vehicle is a function of the market price of the vehicle and a
depreciation rate. We determine a current market price for each vehicle in the CE survey in
one of three ways. First, for vehicles that were purchased within twelve months of the
interview and that have a reported purchase price (the estimation sample), we take the current
market price to be the reported purchase price. Second, for vehicles that were purchased more
than twelve months prior to the interview and that have a reported purchase price, we specify
the current market price as a function of the reported purchase price and an estimated
depreciation rate as explained below.


                                               20
Finally, for the remaining vehicles, we impute a current market price because the purchase
price is not reported. Using the estimation sample, we regress the log real purchase price on a
cubic in vehicle age, vehicle characteristics, family characteristics, and make-model-year
fixed effects. The vehicle characteristics include indicators for whether the vehicle has
automatic transmission, power brakes, power steering, air conditioning, a diesel engine, a
sunroof, four-wheel drive, or is turbo charged. Family characteristics include log real
expenditures (excluding vehicles and health), family size, region, and the age and education of
the family head. Coefficient estimates from this regression are then used to calculate a
predicted log real purchase price for the ith vehicle ( xi β̂ ). The predicted current market value
for each vehicle without a reported purchase price is then equal to αˆ * exp( x βˆ ) , where α̂ is
                                                                                         i

the coefficient on exp( xi βˆ ) in a regression of yi on exp( xi βˆ ) without a constant term.17

To estimate a depreciation rate for vehicles, we compare prices across vehicles of different
age, but with the same make, model, and year. In particular, from the estimation sample we
construct a subsample of vehicles that are in a make-model-year cell with at least two vehicles
that are not the same age. Using this sample, we regress the log real purchase price of the
vehicle on vehicle age and make-model-year fixed effects. From the coefficient on vehicle
age (β), we calculate the depreciation rate (δ): δ = 1 – EXP(β). The service flow is then the
product of this depreciation rate and the current market price. If the vehicle has a reported
purchase price but was not purchased within 12 months of the interview we calculate the
service flow as: (real reported purchase price)*δ(1- δ)t, where t is the number of years since
the car was purchased.

Measures of Income in the CPS ASEC/ADF

Money Income: This measure follows the Census definition of money income that is used to
measure poverty and inequality. Money income sources, as reported in the ASEC codebook,
include: earnings; net income from self employment; Social Security, pension, and retirement
income; public transfer income including Supplemental Security Income, welfare payments,
veterans' payment or unemployment and workmen's compensation; interest and investment
income; rental income; and alimony or child support, regular contributions from persons
outside the household, and other periodic income.

After-Tax Money Income: adds to money income the value of tax credits such as the EITC,
and subtracts state and federal income taxes and payroll taxes, and includes capital gains and
losses. Federal income tax liabilities and credits and FICA taxes are calculated for all years
using TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts 1993).18 State taxes and credits are also calculated
using TAXSIM for the years 1977-2008. Prior to 1977 we calculate state taxes using
IncTaxCalc (Bakija, 2008). We confirm that in 1977 net state tax liabilities generated using
IncTaxCalc match very closely those generated using TAXSIM.

17
     This adjustment is made because exp( xi βˆ ) will tend to underestimate yi.
18
   The ASEC/ADF also includes an imputed value for taxes and credits, but this information is only available
starting with the 1980 survey.
                                                    21
After-tax Money Income Plus Noncash Benefits: this adds to After-Tax Money Income the
cash value of food stamps, and imputed values for housing subsidies, school lunch programs,
Medicaid and Medicare.




                                            22
Figure 1: Unemployment and Official Income Poverty, 1960-2008

                                      Poverty and Unemployment, 1960-1969                                                   Poverty and Unemployment, 1970-1979
                           23%                                                                                   17%
                           22%                                                                                   16%
                           21%
 Official Poverty Rate




                                                                                       Official Poverty Rate
                                                                                                                 15%
                           20%                                                                                   14%
                           19%
                                                                                                                 13%
                           18%
                                                                                                                 12%
                           17%
                           16%                                                                                   11%
                           15%                                                                                   10%
                           14%                                                                                    9%
                           13%                                                                                    8%
                           12%                                                                                    7%
                                 3%     4%         5%        6%             7%   8%                                    4%     5%         6%        7%             8%   9%
                                                 Unemployment Rate                                                                     Unemployment Rate


                                      Poverty and Unemployment, 1980-1989                                                   Poverty and Unemployment, 1990-2008
                           17%                                                                                   17%
                           16%                                                                                   16%
   Official Poverty Rate




                                                                                         Official Poverty Rate
                           15%                                                                                   15%
                           14%                                                                                   14%
                           13%                                                                                   13%
                           12%                                                                                   12%
                           11%                                                                                   11%
                           10%                                                                                   10%
                            9%                                                                                    9%
                            8%                                                                                    8%
                            7%                                                                                    7%
                                 5%     6%         7%        8%             9%   10%                                   4%     5%         6%        7%             8%   9%
                                                 Unemployment Rate                                                                     Unemployment Rate

Notes: Each data point represents a poverty rate and unemployment rate pair for a given year. The poverty rate is the official measure
reported by the Census Bureau. The unemployment rate is measured at the national level and is reported by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.
Figure 2: Unemployment and After-Tax Income or Consumption Poverty, 1963-2008

                            Poverty and Unemployment, 1963-1969                                             Poverty and Unemployment, 1970-1979
                 25%                                                                             17%
                 24%                                                                             16%
                 23%                                                                             15%
                 22%                                                                             14%
 Poverty Rate




                                                                                 Poverty Rate
                 21%                                                                             13%
                 20%                            After-Tax Income Poverty                         12%
                 19%                                                                             11%
                 18%                                                                             10%                          After-Tax Income Poverty
                 17%                                                                              9%
                 16%                                                                              8%
                 15%                                                                              7%
                       3%     4%         5%        6%              7%      8%                          4%     5%         6%        7%             8%            9%
                                       Unemployment Rate                                                               Unemployment Rate


                            Poverty and Unemployment, 1980-1989                                             Poverty and Unemployment, 1990-2008
                 17%                                                                             17%
                 16%                                                                             16%
                 15%                                                                             15%
                 14%                                                                             14%
  Poverty Rate




                                                                                  Poverty Rate
                 13%                                                                             13%
                 12%                                                                             12%
                 11%                                                                             11%
                 10%                         After-Tax Income Poverty                            10%
                                                                                                                                     After-Tax Income Poverty
                  9%                         Consumption Poverty                                  9%
                  8%                                                                              8%                                 Consumption Poverty
                  7%                                                                              7%
                       5%     6%         7%        8%              9%      10%                         4%     5%         6%        7%             8%            9%
                                       Unemployment Rate                                                               Unemployment Rate

Notes: Each data point represents a poverty rate and unemployment rate pair for a given year. After-tax income poverty is calculated
using data from the CPS, while consumption poverty is calculated using data from the CE Survey. Data for consumption poverty is
reported for 1980, 1981, and 1984-2008.
Table 1: Unemployment, Poverty, and the 10th Percentile, 1960-2008
                   National                                                         10th Percentile     10th
                Unemployment Official Income       After-Tax     Consumption         of After-Tax   Percentile of
                    Rate            Poverty     Income Poverty     Poverty              Income      Consumption
                      (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)                  (5)            (6)
Year
 1960                5.5              22.2
 1961                6.7              21.9                          20.6                                 10,799
 1963                5.7              19.5            25.0                              8,016
 1972                5.6              11.9            14.2          14.2                11,832           12,860
 1975                8.5              12.3            13.9                              12,201
 1980                7.1              13.0            13.0          13.0                12,466           13,247
 1985                7.2              14.0            14.5          14.0                11,548           12,668
 1990                5.6              13.5            12.6          13.1                12,402           13,204
 1995                5.6              13.8            11.3          12.5                13,349           13,522
 2000                4.0              11.3             8.8          10.3                15,462           14,391
 2005                5.1              12.6             9.7           9.1                14,731           15,034
 2008                5.8              13.2            10.2           7.7                14,306           15,592
Percent Change
or Difference
  1961-1972              -1.1             -10.0                           -6.4                            19.1%
  1963-1972              -0.1              -7.6           -10.7                          47.6%
  1972-1980               1.5               1.1            -1.2           -1.2             5.4%            3.0%
  1980-1990              -1.5               0.5            -0.4            0.1            -0.5%           -0.3%
  1990-2000              -1.6              -2.2            -3.9           -2.8           24.7%             9.0%
  2000-2008               1.8               1.9             1.4           -2.5            -7.5%            8.3%
Notes: The statistics in columns 3-6 are based on the authors' calculations using CPS data for income or CE
Survey data for consumption. The poverty rates in columns 3 and 4 are anchored at the official rate in 1980, as
explained in the text. The 10th percentiles in columns 5 and 6 are expressed in constant 2005 dollars using the CPI-
U-RS, adjusted for family size, and normalized to a three person family with one adult and two children.
Table 2: The Relationship between National Unemployment and Income Poverty, 1964-2008
                                       Official Income                                                                                   After-Tax Income Plus
Dependent Variable                                                                  After-Tax Income Poverty
                                           Poverty                                                                                      Noncash Benefit Poverty
Period                                    1964-2008                  1964-2008               1976-2008                1980-2008                 1980-2008
                                        (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)           (10)
  Unemployment Rate                   0.377*                     0.333*                 0.507*                   0.488*                   0.482*
                                      (0.074)                    (0.076)                (0.068)                  (0.078)                  (0.097)
                                     [0.624]*                   [0.729]*               [1.018]*                 [0.937]*                 [1.004]*
  Unemployment Rate X 1960s                        2.202*                    0.415
                                                   (0.465)                  (0.517)
                                                  [3.518]*                  [0.800]
  Unemployment Rate X 1970s                         0.210                    0.092                     1.095
                                                   (0.087)                  (0.096)                   (1.100)
                                                  [0.335]*                  [0.177]                   [1.991]
  Unemployment Rate X 1980s                        0.423*                   0.599*                    0.531*                  0.526*                    0.578*
                                                   (0.111)                  (0.120)                   (0.105)                 (0.109)                   (0.134)
                                                  [0.676]*                 [1.154]*                  [0.965]*                [0.948]*                  [1.120]*
  Unemployment Rate X 1990s                        0.609*                   0.590*                    0.563*                  0.562*                    0.501*
                                                   (0.159)                  (0.170)                   (0.130)                 (0.133)                   (0.159)
                                                  [0.973]*                 [1.137]*                  [1.024]*                [1.013]*                  [0.971]*
  Unemployment Rate X 2000s                        0.435*                   0.420*                    0.385*                  0.382*                    0.352*
                                                   (0.148)                  (0.159)                   (0.126)                 (0.129)                   (0.159)
                                                  [0.695]*                 [0.809]*                  [0.700]*                [0.688]*                   [0.682]
  Lagged Poverty                      0.396*       0.374*        0.543*     0.481*      0.502*        0.450*     0.479*       0.445*      0.520*        0.484*
                                      (0.110)      (0.100)       (0.101)    (0.102)     (0.072)       (0.090)    (0.084)      (0.093)     (0.107)       (0.116)
N                                        45           45            45         45          33            33         29           29          29            29
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. The numbers in brackets are long run derivatives calculated as β/(1-λ), where β is the point estimate for
unemployment and λ is the point estimate for lagged poverty. * denotes significance at the 5% level. Poverty and unemployment are measured at the
national level. In addition to the covariates listed, all regressions include controls for inflation and a linear time trend, decade dummies, and interactions of
the time trend with the decade dummies.
Table 3: The Relationship between Regional Unemployment and Income Poverty, 1976-2008
                                        Official Income                                                     After-Tax Income Plus
Dependent Variable                                                   After-Tax Income Poverty
                                            Poverty                                                        Noncash Benefit Poverty
Period                                    1976-2008              1976-2008              1980-2008                   1980-2008
                                         (1)           (2)     (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)            (7)           (8)
  Unemployment Rate                    0.231*                0.178*                 0.264*                    0.272*
                                      (0.070)               (0.062)                (0.077)                   (0.090)
                                      [1.095]*              [1.113]*               [1.222]*                  [1.277]*
  Unemployment Rate X 1976-79                        -0.028               -0.048
                                                    (0.135)              (0.127)
                                                   [-0.104]             [-0.241]
  Unemployment Rate X 1980s                         0.272*               0.243*                0.227*                       0.248*
                                                    (0.113)              (0.104)               (0.107)                     (0.126)
                                                   [1.015]*             [1.221]*              [1.032]*                      [1.148]
  Unemployment Rate X 1990s                         0.465*               0.318*                0.329*                       0.321*
                                                    (0.145)              (0.131)               (0.138)                     (0.163)
                                                   [1.735]*             [1.598]*              [1.495]*                     [1.486]*
  Unemployment Rate X 2000s                           0.434                0.259                0.205                        0.183
                                                    (0.250)              (0.230)               (0.237)                     (0.279)
                                                    [1.619]              [1.302]               [0.932]                      [0.847]
  Lagged Poverty                       0.789*       0.732*   0.840*      0.801*     0.784*     0.780*         0.787*        0.784*
                                      (0.052)       (0.055) (0.042)      (0.046)   (0.052)     (0.054)       (0.056)       (0.058)
N                                       132            132    132           132      116         116           116            116
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. The numbers in brackets are long run derivatives calculated as β/(1-λ), where β is the
point estimate for unemployment and λ is the point estimate for lagged poverty. * denotes significance at the 5% level. Poverty and
unemployment are measured at the regional level. In addition to the covariates listed, all regressions include region and year fixed
effects, and the specifications in even columns include decade dummies.
Table 4: The Relationship between Unemployment and Income and Consumption Poverty
                                                        National Level Poverty                               Regional Level Poverty
                                                                                                     After-Tax Income       Consumption
Dependent Variable                  After-Tax Income Poverty           Consumption Poverty
                                                                                                          Poverty             Poverty
                                   1963-      1981-       1981-      1961-       1981-     1981-
                                   2008       2008        2008       2008        2008      2008         1981-2008            1981-2008
                                    (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)         (9)     (10)
 Unemployment Rate                0.821*      0.512*                0.476*¹       0.242              0.288*                0.540*
                                  (0.256)    (0.078)                (0.142)      (0.144)            (0.078)               (0.185)
                                             [0.874]*                            [0.281]            [1.103]*              [1.208]*
 Unemployment Rate X 1980s                                1.062*                           1.002               0.290*                  -0.033
                                                         (0.358)                         (0.672)              (0.115)                 (0.273)
                                                         [1.569]*                         [1.133]             [1.090]*                [-0.069]
  Unemployment Rate X 1990s                               0.734*                           0.334               0.310*                 1.079*¹
                                                         (0.109)                         (0.234)              (0.111)                 (0.278)
                                                         [1.084]*                        [0.378]¹             [1.165]*                [2.257]*
  Unemployment Rate X 2000s                               0.413*                           0.284                0.195                  0.974
                                                         (0.090)                         (0.167)              (0.189)                 (0.492)
                                                         [0.610]*                         [0.321]              [0.733]                [2.038]*
  Lagged Poverty                              0.414*      0.323*               0.138       0.116     0.739*    0.734*     0.553*       0.522*
                                              (0.073)    (0.074)              (0.154)    (0.176)    (0.052)   (0.052)     (0.082)     (0.080)
N                                    30          25         25        30         25          25       100        100        100         100
Notes: Corresponding income and consumption equations were estimated simultaneously using SUR. Standard errors are in parentheses.
The numbers in brackets are long run derivatives calculated as β/(1-λ), where β is the point estimate for unemployment and λ is the point
estimate for lagged poverty. * denotes significance at the 5% level. 1 denotes that the effect for consumption is significantly different from
that for income. In columns 1-6, poverty and unemployment are determined at the national level, and specifications include inflation, a linear
time trend, decade dummies, and interactions of the time trend with the decade dummies. In columns 7-10, poverty and unemployment are
determined at the regional level, and specifications include region and year fixed effects. Columns 8 and 10 also include decade dummies.
For comparability across measures, we use data from years when both income and consumption data are available. For the full time period
these years are 1961 or 1963, 1972, 1973, 1980, 1981, and 1984-2008.
Table 5A: The Relationship between Unemployment and the 10th Percentile of Log Income and Consumption
                                                          National Level                                            Regional Level
                                                                                                        10th Percentile of
                                       10th Percentile of                  10th Percentile of                               10th Percentile of
Dependent Variable                                                                                        Log After-Tax
                                     Log After-Tax Income                  Log Consumption                                  Log Consumption
                                                                                                             Income
                                  1963-      1981-       1981-       1961-       1981-       1981-
                                  2008       2008        2008        2008        2008        2008           1981-2008               1981-2008
                                   (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)      (8)            (9)     (10)
    Unemployment Rate             -0.040*    -0.026*                -0.015*¹     -0.008¹                 -0.029*                 -0.020*
                                  (0.009)    (0.005)                 (0.004)     (0.005)                 (0.005)                 (0.006)
                                            [-0.045]*                          [-0.009]*¹               [-0.063]*               [-0.043]*
    Unemployment Rate X 1980s                            -0.051*                              -0.036                 -0.032*                 -0.002¹
                                                         (0.024)                             (0.022)                 (0.007)                 (0.008)
                                                        [-0.079]*                            [-0.037]               [-0.068]*               [-0.004]¹
    Unemployment Rate X 1990s                            -0.036*                             -0.011¹                 -0.028*                 -0.038*
                                                         (0.008)                             (0.007)                 (0.007)                 (0.008)
                                                        [-0.056]*                           [-0.011]¹               [-0.059]*               [-0.075]*
    Unemployment Rate X 2000s                            -0.023*                             -0.011*                 -0.023*                 -0.038*
                                                         (0.006)                             (0.005)                 (0.011)                 (0.015)
                                                        [-0.036]*                           [-0.011]¹               [-0.049]*               [-0.075]*
    Lagged 10th Percentile                  0.418*        0.353*                 0.070         0.037    0.543*        0.527*    0.539*        0.492*
                                            (0.079)      (0.087)                (0.167)      (0.184)    (0.057)      (0.057)    (0.078)      (0.075)
N                                   30         25           25        30           25            25       100          100        100          100
Notes: Corresponding income and consumption equations were estimated simultaneously using SUR. Standard errors are in parentheses.
The numbers in brackets are long run derivatives calculated as β/(1-λ), where β is the point estimate for unemployment and λ is the point
estimate for the lagged 10th percentile. * denotes significance at the 5% level. 1 denotes that the effect for consumption is significantly
different from that for income. In columns 1-6, the 10th percentile and unemployment are determined at the national level, and
specifications include inflation, a linear time trend, decade dummies, and interactions of the time trend with the decade dummies. In
columns 7-10, the 10th percentile and unemployment are determined at the regional level, and specifications include region and year fixed
effects. Columns 8 and 10 also include decade dummies. For comparability across measures, we use data from years when both income
and consumption data are available. For the full time period these years are 1961 or 1963, 1972, 1973, 1980, 1981, and 1984-2008.
Table 5B: The Relationship between Unemployment and the 5th Percentile of Log Income and Consumption
                                                        National Level                                           Regional Level
                                                                                                      5th Percentile of
                                    5th Percentile of                     5th Percentile of                               5th Percentile of
Dependent Variable                                                                                     Log After-Tax
                                  Log After-Tax Income                   Log Consumption                                 Log Consumption
                                                                                                          Income
                                1963-      1981-       1981-       1961-       1981-      1981-
                                2008       2008        2008        2008        2008       2008           1981-2008               1981-2008
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)      (8)            (9)     (10)
 Unemployment Rate              -0.058*    -0.061*                -0.013*¹     0.000¹                 -0.042*                 -0.023*
                                (0.015)    (0.010)                 (0.005)    (0.005)                 (0.009)                 (0.007)
                                          [-0.086]*                           [0.000]¹               [-0.102]*               [-0.065]*
 Unemployment Rate X 1980s                              -0.021                             -0.066                 -0.041*                  0.004¹
                                                       (0.048)                            (0.022)                 (0.014)                 (0.010)
                                                       [-0.027]                          [-0.044]*               [-0.097]*                [0.009]¹
 Unemployment Rate X 1990s                             -0.059*                            -0.007¹                 -0.044*                 -0.048*
                                                       (0.014)                            (0.006)                 (0.013)                 (0.010)
                                                      [-0.077]*                          [-0.005]¹               [-0.105]*               [-0.110]*
 Unemployment Rate X 2000s                             -0.059*                            -0.003¹                  -0.043                 -0.062*
                                                       (0.012)                            (0.006)                 (0.023)                 (0.018)
                                                      [-0.077]*                          [-0.002]¹                [-0.102]               [-0.143]*
 Lagged 5th Percentile                    0.292*        0.234*                -0.431*     -0.514*    0.590*        0.579*    0.644*        0.565*
                                          (0.088)      (0.088)                (0.207)     (0.173)    (0.065)      (0.066)    (0.078)      (0.075)
N                                 30        25            25        30           25          25        100          100        100          100
Notes: See notes to Table 5A.
Table 5C: The Relationship between Unemployment and the 15th Percentile of Log Income and Consumption
                                                        National Level                                           Regional Level
                                                                                                     15th Percentile of
                                    15th Percentile of                   15th Percentile of                              15th Percentile of
Dependent Variable                                                                                     Log After-Tax
                                  Log After-Tax Income                   Log Consumption                                 Log Consumption
                                                                                                          Income
                                1963-      1981-       1981-       1961-       1981-      1981-
                                2008       2008        2008        2008        2008       2008           1981-2008               1981-2008
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)      (8)            (9)     (10)
 Unemployment Rate              -0.036*    -0.023*                -0.014*¹    -0.006¹                 -0.019*                 -0.015*
                                (0.008)    (0.004)                 (0.004)    (0.004)                 (0.003)                 (0.005)
                                          [-0.043]*                          [-0.007]¹               [-0.058]*               [-0.033]*
 Unemployment Rate X 1980s                             -0.052*                             -0.016                 -0.021*                  0.002¹
                                                       (0.018)                            (0.020)                 (0.005)                 (0.008)
                                                      [-0.081]*                           [-0.019]               [-0.062]*                [0.004]¹
 Unemployment Rate X 1990s                             -0.034*                            -0.006¹                 -0.017*                 -0.030*
                                                       (0.006)                            (0.007)                 (0.005)                 (0.008)
                                                      [-0.053]*                          [-0.007]¹               [-0.050]*               [-0.061]*
 Unemployment Rate X 2000s                             -0.018*                             -0.008                 -0.016*                  -0.027
                                                       (0.004)                            (0.005)                 (0.008)                 (0.014)
                                                      [-0.028]*                           [-0.010]               [-0.047]*                [-0.055]
 Lagged 15th Percentile                   0.460*        0.356*                 0.154        0.177    0.671*        0.659*    0.550*        0.505*
                                          (0.079)      (0.081)                (0.147)     (0.171)    (0.050)      (0.050)    (0.079)      (0.078)
N                                 30        25            25        30          25           25        100          100        100          100
Notes: See notes to Table 5A.
Table 6: The Relationship between Unemployment and Income and Consumption Relative Poverty
                                                    National Level Poverty                                Regional Level Poverty
                                       After-Tax Income                 Consumption               After-Tax Income       Consumption
Dependent Variable
                                       Relative Poverty                Relative Poverty           Relative Poverty     Relative Poverty
                                  1963-      1981-    1981-      1961-      1981-     1981-
                                  2008       2008      2008      2008        2008      2008          1981-2008            1981-2008
                                   (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)      (8)         (9)     (10)
 Unemployment Rate                0.156      0.173                0.107      -0.214                0.240*              0.371*
                                 (0.082)    (0.095)              (0.096)    (0.161)               (0.088)             (0.174)
                                            [0.210]                        [-0.186]¹              [0.654]*            [0.890]*
 Unemployment Rate X 1980s                              0.369                             1.203                0.279*              -0.168
                                                      (0.472)                           (0.665)               (0.137)             (0.248)
                                                       [0.418]                           [0.872]              [0.723]*            [-0.381]
  Unemployment Rate X 1990s                            0.293*                           -0.237¹                0.258*             0.899*¹
                                                      (0.136)                           (0.209)               (0.124)             (0.251)
                                                      [0.332]*                         [-0.172]¹              [0.668]*            [2.039]*
  Unemployment Rate X 2000s                             0.095                            -0.060                 0.048               0.682
                                                      (0.121)                           (0.173)               (0.216)             (0.445)
                                                       [0.108]                          [-0.043]               [0.124]             [1.546]
  Lagged Poverty                            0.178       0.118                -0.151      -0.380      0.633*    0.614*   0.583*     0.559*
                                           (0.155)    (0.155)               (0.382)     (0.355)      (0.070)  (0.071)   (0.086)   (0.083)
N                                 30          25          25       30          25           25         100       100      100        100
Notes: The consumption (income) relative poverty rate is defined as the fraction of individuals with consumption (income) below 50 percent
of median consumption (income). See Table 4 for additional notes.
Appendix Table 1: The Relationship between GDP per Capita and Income and Consumption Poverty
                                                    National Level Poverty                                                 Regional Level Poverty (1981-2008)
Dependent Variable                  After-Tax Income Poverty         Consumption Poverty                       After-Tax Income Poverty                Consumption Poverty
                                                                                                                               First
                                  Level       Level        Level       Level     Level       Level       Level     Level    Difference   Level      Level    Level     Level
                                  1963-                    1981-       1961-     1981-       1981-
                                  2008      1981-2008      2008        2008      2008        2008                      1981-2008                             1981-2008
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)        (10)        (11)      (12)        (13)
 Log GDP per Capita              -54.436*    -14.996*                 -27.903*¹ -5.002                  -10.117*    0.899     3.022                -30.582* -18.127*
                                  (5.453)     (4.378)                  (3.361) (6.049)                   (3.209)   (1.716)   (1.640)                (4.301)   (4.929)
                                            [-25.417]*                          [-5.927]¹                          [5.549]                                  [-30.466]*
 Log GDP per Capita X 1980s                                 7.124                             39.199                                     -1.640                           -21.712*
                                                          (45.755)                          (59.557)                                     (1.883)                           (5.039)
                                                          [12.368]                           [43.554]                                   [-6.721]                         [-33.925]*¹
 Log GDP per Capita X 1990s                               -15.051*                           -10.587                                      3.439                           -16.345*
                                                           (6.948)                          (11.769)                                     (1.771)                           (5.321)
                                                         [-26.130]*                         [-11.763]                                   [14.094]                         [-25.539]*¹
 Log GDP per Capita X 2000s                               -15.245*                             -2.158                                     1.399                           -15.014*
                                                           (6.264)                            (8.158)                                    (1.732)                           (5.088)
                                                         [-26.467]*                          [-2.398]                                    [5.734]                         [-23.459]*¹
 Lagged Poverty                              0.410*        0.424*                 0.156        0.100               0.838*                0.756*               0.405*       0.360*
                                             (0.101)       (0.122)               (0.159)      (0.231)              (0.049)               (0.060)              (0.095)      (0.095)
N                                 30          25           25          30        25        25           100       100          100         100       100        100          100
Notes: The dependent variable is either the poverty rate (level) or the change in the poverty rate from the previous year (first difference). See Table 4 for additional notes.
