                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                         BUBBLY LIQUIDITY

                                             Emmanuel Farhi
                                               Jean Tirole

                                          Working Paper 16750
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w16750


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2011




This paper is a much revised version of an earlier draft titled “Competing Liquidities: Corporate Securities,
Real Bonds and Bubbles”. We thank Fernando Alvarez, Marios Angeletos, Pol Antras, Gadi Barlevy,
Ricardo Caballero, V.V. Chari, Gita Gopinath, Robert King, Anton Korinek, John Leahy, Guido Lorenzoni,
Kiminori Matsuyama, Adriano Rampini, Guillaume Rocheteau, Kjetil Storesletten, Ivan Werning,
Wei Xiong, four anonymous referees, and participants at various seminars and conferences for useful
comments. The financial support of the FdR IDEI-SCOR research project ”Market Risk and Value
Creation” is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Emmanuel Farhi and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Bubbly Liquidity
Emmanuel Farhi and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 16750
January 2011
JEL No. E2,E44

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the possibility and the consequences of rational bubbles in a dy- namic economy
where financially constrained firms demand and supply liquidity. Bub- bles are more likely to emerge,
the scarcer the supply of outside liquidity and the more limited the pledgeability of corporate income;
they crowd investment in (out) when liquidity is abundant (scarce). We analyze extensions with firm
heterogeneity and sto- chastic bubbles.


Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efarhi@harvard.edu

Jean Tirole
Institut d'Economie Industrielle
Bureau MF529 - Bat. F
21 allees de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
FRANCE
tirole@cict.fr
                                     Bubbly Liquidity∗
                                                                                †
                            Emmanuel Farhi                     Jean Tirole

                                        December 25, 2010


                                                Abstract

        This paper analyzes the possibility and the consequences of rational bubbles in a dy-
        namic economy where financially constrained firms demand and supply liquidity. Bub-
        bles are more likely to emerge, the scarcer the supply of outside liquidity and the more
        limited the pledgeability of corporate income; they crowd investment in (out) when
        liquidity is abundant (scarce). We analyze extensions with firm heterogeneity and sto-
        chastic bubbles.
        Keywords: liquidity, bubbles.
        JEL numbers: E2, E44.



I       Introduction

Despite some progress in our understanding of asset price bubbles, many challenging ques-
tions are left unanswered. What role do macroeconomic conditions and financial institutions
play in the emergence of bubbles? Is the classic theory of rational bubbles correct in predict-
ing that bubbles raise interest rates and crowd out productive investment?1 Symmetrically,
    ∗
      This paper is a much revised version of an earlier draft titled “Competing Liquidities: Corporate Secu-
rities, Real Bonds and Bubbles”. We thank Fernando Alvarez, Marios Angeletos, Pol Antras, Gadi Barlevy,
Ricardo Caballero, V.V. Chari, Gita Gopinath, Robert King, Anton Korinek, John Leahy, Guido Loren-
zoni, Kiminori Matsuyama, Adriano Rampini, Guillaume Rocheteau, Kjetil Storesletten, Ivan Werning, Wei
Xiong, four anonymous referees, and participants at various seminars and conferences for useful comments.
The financial support of the FdR IDEI-SCOR research project ”Market Risk and Value Creation” is grate-
fully acknowledged.
    †
      Farhi: Harvard University and NBER; efarhi@fas.harvard.edu. Tirole: Toulouse School of Economics,
jean.tirole@tse-fr.eu.
    1
      While the interest rate response is rather undisputed, some famous episodes seem consistent with a
crowding in hypothesis. For example, Japan’s bubble came with not only high interest rates but also

                                                     1
what are the consequences of bubble crashes? Do bubbles benefit/hurt some sectors more
than others? What is the appropriate test for the existence of bubbles? Is there a link
between dynamic ineﬃciency and the possibility of bubbles?
    This paper investigates these questions by adding to the standard growth model an asyn-
chronicity between firms’ access to and need for cash. While this asynchronicity is perfectly
resolved by capital markets in classic growth theory, capital markets are here imperfect:
Factors such as agency costs prevent firms from pledging the entirety of the benefits from
investment to outside investors, resulting in credit rationing. The anticipation of credit ra-
tioning in turn gives rise to a familiar demand for liquidity (or stores of value; we will use
the two terms interchangeably). Firms also supply liquidity by issuing securities, i.e. claims
to their future revenues. Each firm is at times a net demander of liquidity or a net supplier
of liquidity.
    At the heart of this paper is the interplay between diﬀerent forms of liquidity. Specifically,
we investigate the interaction of inside liquidity (securities issued by financially constrained
firms), outside liquidity (assets that originate in a diﬀerent sector in the economy), and
bubbles. Literally speaking, bubbles are a form of outside liquidity, but because they are the
focus of this paper, we choose to single them out.
    The impact of outside liquidity on investment and economic activity accordingly hinges
on the relative potency of two eﬀects: a liquidity eﬀect and a leverage eﬀect. On the demand
side, the firms’ hoarding of liquidity makes them benefit from an increase in the supply, and
a reduction in the price of liquidity. On the supply side, their issuing securities to finance
investment makes them vulnerable to high interest rate conditions: An increase in outside
liquidity raises interest rates and competes with the securities issued by the firms, reducing
their leverage.
   This paper makes several contributions. First, as we just discussed, it studies the interplay
between inside and outside liquidity. Outside liquidity helps firms address the asynchronicity
between their access to and need for cash–the liquidity eﬀect–but also competes for savings
with productive investment–the leverage eﬀect. We show that the liquidity eﬀect dominates
when outside liquidity is abundant.
   Second, the paper shows that bubbles are more likely to exist and can be larger when
agency problems are severe (firms can only pledge a small fraction of their future revenues),
vigorous investment and growth; when it burst, the country went through a prolonged deflation and recession.
Similarly, in the US, the Internet and housing bubbles were accompanied with economic booms; interest rates
and investment fell when these bubbles burst.


                                                     2
outside liquidity is scarce, and when the demand for liquidity is high (the net worth of firms
is high).2
    Third, bubbles are a form of outside liquidity. They are more likely to crowd the
financially-constrained corporate sector’s investment in (out), the more (less) abundant the
outside liquidity.
    Fourth, the crash of a bubble is accompanied by low interest rates and high leverage.
It has a negative eﬀect on firms’ financial net worth, and further reduces liquidity. Conse-
quently, even in a risk neutral environment, a stochastic bubble carries a liquidity premium
(it features positive excess returns relative to the risk-free rate) since it pays little or zero
in states where internal funds can be levered the most. Furthermore, bubble bursts can
be endogenously triggered by adverse shocks to corporate net worth, resulting in a liqudity
dy-up: financial disruptions amplify real disturbances.
   Fifth, bubbles, and more generally outside liquidity, impact firms diﬀerently. Firms with
limited ability to pledge future cash-flows are little hit by competing claims as they issue
no or few securities. Accordingly, they benefit more from a bubble and are hurt more by a
bubble crash.
    Finally, in standard models of rational bubbles (e.g. Tirole 1985), bubbles can occur only
if the economy is dynamically ineﬃcient so that tests aimed at detecting dynamic ineﬃciency
(Abel et al 1989) can be used to determine if bubbles are possible. In our environment, Abel
et al. (1989)’s finding that the productive sector disgorges at least as much as it invests does
indicate that the economy is dynamically eﬃcient. The possibility of bubbles is determined
by the condition that the interest rate be higher than the growth rate of the economy, in
conformity with Santos and Woodford (1997).3 But with imperfect capital markets, the
economy can be dynamically eﬃcient, and at the same time the interest rate can be lower
than the growth rate of the economy. This is because the social rate of return on internal
funds exceeds that on borrowed funds; therefore the social rate of return on investments is
higher than the market interest rate when returns can be only imperfectly collateralized. As
a result, bubbles are possible even when the economy is dyanmically eﬃcient.4
   2
      Accordingly, the much discussed ”global savings glut” may have contributed to the recent housing bubble
in the U.S. by creating a shortage of liquidity (stores of value). The low real interest rates that accompanied
this episode are consistent with this narrative. To be certain, there are also other causes (failure of prudential
regulation, etc.).
    3
      Moreover, our agency-based approach argues in favor of the use of (relatively low) interest rates received
by outside investors such as the interest rate on riskless bonds.
    4
      Typically, bubbles do not lead to Pareto improvements. For example, the holders of outside liquidity in
general lose from the emergence of a bubble, since it increases interest rates and lowers the price at which


                                                        3
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section II sets up the model and describes the solution
when there are no bubbles. It characterizes its unique steady state and derives some key
comparative statics results. Section III introduces the possibility of rational asset price
bubbles. It derives the dynamics with bubbles and describes the properties of the unique
bubbly steady state. Section IV first analyzes how bubbles aﬀect the cross section of firms
when there is heterogeneity in pledgeability; it then introduces stochastic bubbles and derives
the mechanics of a bubbly boom-bust episode. Section V checks the robustness of the results
in several variants of the model. Finally, Section VI summarizes the main insights and
discusses alleys for research.

    Relation to the literature. The paper builds on a number of contributions. Most obvi-
ously, it brings together the literature on (rational) bubbles and that on aggregate liquidity.
The leverage eﬀect, however, diﬀers from the related competition eﬀect featured in Diamond
(1965)’s celebrated analysis of national debt, and prominent in the theory of rational bub-
bles (Tirole 1985). The standard competition eﬀect captures the idea that unconstrained
firms want to invest less when interest rates are high. Our leverage eﬀect has it that high
interest rates aggravate credit rationing and so firms cannot invest as much. In particular,
Diamond’s competition eﬀect is inconsistent with the existence of a liquidity eﬀect.
    The role of stores of values in supporting investment when income is not fully pledge-
able has been stressed for example by Woodford (1990), Holmström-Tirole (1998) and a large
recent literature, including independent contributions by Kiyotaki-Moore (2008) and Kocher-
lakota (2009). In Woodford’s and Kocherlakota’s contributions, which are most closely re-
lated to ours, firms are net demanders of liquidity and there is always a potential shortage
of stores of value. These two papers assume that firms cannot supply liquidity (they have
zero leverage) by positing that none of the future cash flow is pledgeable to investors and so
firms do not issue securities. The possibility of leverage is central to many of our insights
(existence of liquidity and leverage eﬀects, conditions for the existence of bubbles, impact of
bubbles on the cross section of firms).5
   Saint-Paul (2005) shows that government debt (a store of value), while deterring capital
accumulation, can increase the eﬃciency of the financial sector. Entrepreneurs can buy
they can sell them. Similarly, equilibria with bubble crashes are usually not Pareto dominated by equilibria
with no bubble crash.
   5
     As we show in Appendix A3, the mechanism through which bubbles may crowd investment in is very
diﬀerent in our model and in Woodford (1990) or Kocherlakota (2009). Moreover, we show that investment
at the bubble-free steady state features a discontinuity at the point of zero pledgeability.



                                                     4
public debt and use it as collateral. The existence of collateral reduces agency costs (Saint-
Paul uses the costly-state-verification model as an illustration). Accordingly, public debt
boosts growth over a range of parameters.
    The paper shares with Kiyotaki-Moore (1997) the idea that investment decisions are
intertemporal complements. In Kiyotaki-Moore, tomorrow’s investment will raise the price
of the store of value, which is used as an input in the production process; this future increase
in the price of the store of value raises the firms’ wealth and thereby today’s investment.
In our paper, it is yesterday’s investment that supports today’s investment, by creating
securities that firms can hoard to meet their liquidity needs. Thus, Kiyotaki and Moore’s
dynamics are forward looking while ours are essentially backward looking (in the absence of
bubbles). Also, Kiyotaki-Moore’s focus is rather diﬀerent as it has no bubbles.
    The rational bubble literature has addressed the crowding-out critique in alternative
ways.6 Bubbles are attached to investment in Olivier (2000) and to entrepreneurship in Ven-
tura (2003), generating an incentive and a wealth eﬀect respectively; in both papers, bubbles
can crowd investment in. Saint-Paul (1992), Grossman-Yanagawa (1993), and King-Ferguson
(1993) address the dynamic-eﬃciency critique by studying endogenous growth models with
bubbles, in which the social return on investment exceeds the private return due to spillovers.
The long-term rate of interest can then be smaller than the rate of growth of the economy,
and yet the economy be dynamically eﬃcient. However, the condition for the existence of
bubbles is still determined by the condition that the growth rate of the economy be higher
than the interest rate. Our results are reminiscent of their findings. However, in our paper,
the reason that the social rate of return on investment is higher than the interest rate is
fundamentally diﬀerent: it does not stem from an externality in production but rather from
an agency problem such as moral hazard or limited commitment. As a result only a fraction
of the return to investment can be pledged to outside investors, and the rest is appropriated
by entrepreneurs (and more generally by insiders of the firm in a broader interpretation
of the model). The interest rate reflects the fraction of the return to investment which is
pledgeable to outside investors, whereas the social rate of return on investment accounts for
the total return on investment—both the pledgeable part and the unpledgeable part which is
   6
     Other theories based on agency problems and asymmetric information as well as behavioral models have
proliferated in recent years. A partial list includes Abreu-Brunnermeier (2003), Allen-Gale (2000), Allen-
Gorton (1993), Allen-Morris-Postlewaite (1992), Barlevy (2009), Conlon (2004), Dobles-Madrid (2009), and
Scheinkman-Xiong (2004). See LeRoy (2004) for a good survey. These theories typically reach more precise
predictions than rational bubbles models regarding which assets are more likely to feature bubbles, and have
a rich array of implications for volume, turnover etc. However, these contributions have for the most part
retained a more microeconomic focus, and have not analyzed the liquidity-provision function of bubbles.


                                                     5
appropriated by entrepreneurs.
    Caballero-Krishnamurthy (2006) develops a theory of bubbles in emerging markets. They
introduce, as we do, an investment driven demand for liquidity and show that in the presence
of fragile (stochastic) bubbles, the economy overinvests in the bubbly asset and is overexposed
to bubble crashes due to a pecuniary externality.
    Our paper also sheds some light on the debate as to whether monetary authorities should
try to lean against bubbles (or, in a more extreme form, try to make them pop) by raising
interest rates or denying access to the discount window to banks that extend too many
loans. Some scholars (e.g., Bernanke 2002, Bernanke-Gertler 2000, 2001, Gilchrist-Leahy
2002) argue that the central bank should not pay attention to asset prices unless these signal
future inflation; others (e.g., Bordo-Jeanne 2002) are in favor of a moderate reaction.7 All
concur that a restrictive policy leads to a lower output and a significant risk of collateral-
induced credit crunch. Our model is consistent with this premise, as the pricking of the
bubble leads to a collateral shortage and reduced investment and production.
    Our paper is related to several strands of the monetary litterature. It has been well
known since Allais (1947)’s and Samuelson (1958)’s seminal contributions that there exists
economies in which money has a positive value in spite of the fact that it is intrisically use-
less. Overlapping generations models with money have been later thoroughly developped by
Gale (1973), Cass-Okuno-Zilcha (1979), Wallace (1980), Hahn (1982), Balasko-Shell (1981),
Grandmont (1985), among others. A textbook treatment can be found in Azariadis (1993).
In those models, money can be readily reinterpreted as a rational bubble, a fact long recog-
nized in the rational bubbles literature. Our paper is also related to a more recent strand
of the monetary theory literature often referred to as New Monetarist Economics. This
literature emphasizes the role of money and other assets in overcoming trading frictions in
economies with decentralized trade. Because of problems related to the double coincidence
of wants, imperfect commitment, enforcement, and record keeping, unsecured credit is not
viable and some trades must quid pro quo, involving either the sale of an asset or a col-
lateralized loan. Such setups give rise to endogenous liquidity premia. Williamson-Wright
(2010) and Nosal-Rocheteau (2010) provide excellent surveys. Most closely related to us
is Rocheteau-Wright (2010). They build on the extension by Rocheteau-Wright (2005) of
the model of Lagos-Wright (2005), and include endogenous participation decisions. Some
of their results resemble ours. Indeed, in their model, liquid assets can trade above their
fundamental value if the aggregate supply of liquid assets is low. They also generate multiple
  7
      This is only a partial list of references on the topic. See Adrian-Shin (2008) for a more complete list.


                                                        6
stationary equilibria where asset prices and output are positively related. Moreover, they
also construct non-stationary equilibria, even when fundamentals are deterministic and non-
stochastic. These include equilibria with price trajectories that resemble bubbles growing
and bursting. An important diﬀerence with us, is that, using the language of our model,
they focus on liquidity eﬀects and assume away leverage eﬀects.8



II      The model

II.1     Description

Demographics, preferences and technology. Our model has overlapping generations of
risk-neutral entrepreneurs. The population is constant (all our results generalize to the case
of positive population growth). Entrepreneurs live for three periods: young, middle-aged
and old. For simplicity, we assume that entrepreneurs consume only when old. They are
risk-neutral and seek to maximize expected consumption. Each generation is indexed by the
period in which it is born. Time runs from  = 0 to  = ∞. At each date  = 0 1  ∞, the
economy is inhabited by the old (generation  − 2), the middle-aged (generation  − 1), and
the young (generation ).
     There is a single good in the economy. When young, entrepreneurs of generation  are
endowed with  units of good (wealth). When middle-aged, they invest +1 to produce
1 +1 when old. However, only a fraction 0 +1  1 +1 of the return on investment is
pledgeable, where 1  0  0.
    Market for liquidity. In every period, a market for liquidity allows entrepreneurs to
lend and borrow, subject to the borrowing constraints imposed by the limited pledgeability
of their future income. The interest rate prevailing between date  and date  + 1 is 1 + +1 .
In equilibrium, it will always be the case that the pledgeability parameter 0 is strictly
less than 1 + +1 , otherwise middle-aged entrepreneurs could achieve an infinite investment
scale. Because pledgeability is limited, firms can only partially rely on outside financing
at the investment stage. We will only analyze equilibria where 1  1 + +1 so that the
investment opportunities of entrepreneurs are strictly positive net-present-value projects.
     The ingredients that determine supply and demand in the market for liquidity are as
   8
     More precisely, the absence of leverage eﬀects is tied to their assumption that shares in firms provide no
liquidity service.


                                                      7
follows. The asynchronicity between the availability of cash and investment opportunities,
together with the imperfect pledgeability of cash flows from investment, lead to a demand
for liquidity (stores of value) from young entrepreneurs: they purchase assets in their youth
when they have wealth,9 and sell them in their middle age when they have an attractive
investment opportunity that can only be partially financed by the market. In turn, middle-
aged entrepreneurs are also suppliers of liquidity: they supply assets which capitalize the
pledgeable cash flows from their investment project.
    At the heart of this paper is the interplay between diﬀerent forms of liquidity. Specifically,
we investigate the interaction of inside liquidity (assets produced by middle-aged entrepre-
neurs of generation  when they pledge a fraction of the return on their investment project),
outside liquidity (assets that originate in a diﬀerent sector in the economy), and bubbles.
Literally speaking, bubbles are a form of outside liquidity, but because they are the focus of
this paper, we choose to single them out.
    We model outside liquidity as follows. At each point of time , there is a net supply of 
units of Lucas trees or “rents”: date- trees each pay one unit of good at date  + 1. These
assets will be purchased in equilibrium by young entrepreneurs so as to be able to invest
when middle-aged. We will focus on the case where  ≥ 0. In extensions in Sections V.1 and
V.3, we explain how in some cases, it can make sense to examine the case   0. Section V.1
explains how our analysis diﬀers in this case. At this stage, we only oﬀer a simple model of the
owners of these assets: they are completely passive and supply them inelastically:  is just an
exogenous supply and the focus is entirely on entrepreneurs. One possible microfoundation
is that at each date , one-period-lived date- consumers are endowed with trees paying a
dividend equal to  at date  + 1. These consumers live only in period , and need to consume
at that date. We will encounter in Section V.3 other microfoundations for outside liquidity in
which  may respond to the interest rate; as we will see, the theory extends to such situations.
   Liquidity can also come in the form of a rational bubble. The bubble is an asset in unit
supply that pays no dividend. We denote by  ≥ 0 the value of the bubble at date .
   In the basic model, all these forms of liquidity–securities issues by middle-aged entre-
preneurs, trees, and the bubble–are riskless assets. No arbitrage requires all these assets to
have the same rate of return 1 + +1 between dates  and  + 1.
      The problem of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs invest all their wealth in their youth
  9
    That the entrepreneurs are net savers when young follows Woodford (1990). The results however only
hinge on their having a demand for liquidity available in their middle age.



                                                  8
in assets–trees, the bubble, and investment projects of the previous generation–and use
these savings when middle-aged as internal funds for their investment project. In their youth,
entrepreneurs of generation  must decide how much to spend ˆ , on trees, how much ̂ of
the bubble to acquire and how much    b to invest in securities issued by entrepreneurs of
generation  − 1:
                                       = ˆ + ̂ + ̂ 

At date  + 1 the date- entrepreneurs’ investment capacity is the sum of the value of claims
on the future cash flows from their investment 0 +1  (1 + +2 ), and the date  + 1 value
of its portfolio of trees ˆ , bubbles ̂ , and securities ̂ issued by the previous generation of
entrepreneurs.10 All these assets to have the same return 1 + +1 . Hence

                 0 +1                                                      (1 + +1 )[ˆ + ̂ + ̂ ]
       +1 =            + (1 + +1 )[ˆ + ̂ + ̂ ]       or    +1 =                                 
                1 + +2                                                            1 − 1+0+2

As is standard from the corporate finance literature, investment +1 increases with the
entrepreneurs’ net worth (1 + +1 )[ˆ + ̂ + ̂ ] at the time when the investment is made.
The investment multiplier 1[1 − 0 (1 + +2 )] is a measure of leverage. It increases with
the fraction of income that is pledgeable to investors 0 , and decreases with the interest rate
1 + +2 through the decrease in the value of the collateral generated by the project.
   Discussion. We have adopted a framework with overlapping generations of entrepre-
neurs. The concept of generation should not be interpreted too literally–a period in our
model need not last for 25 years. Rather, overlapping generations are the simplest modelling
device that allows us to capture two features that are essential to our analysis. First, at
any point in time, some entrepreneurs are net suppliers of liquidity while others are net
demanders of liquidity. Second, interest rates can be lower than the rate of growth of the
economy (here, zero), which makes room for rational bubbles.
   Other modelling options would have delivered these same features. For example we
could have analyzed a model à la Woodford (1990) where entrepreneurs are segmented into
groups with alternating investment opportunities and borrowing constraints. Or we could
have opted for a model à la Aiyagari (1994), Bewley (1986) and Hirano-Yanagawa (2010)
where the investment opportunities of entrepreneurs are stochastic, with idiosyncratic risk
  10
    Total resources available for investment at date  + 1 to a date- entrepreneur come from two sources.
First, he collects resources 0 +1  (1 + +2 ) by selling securities that grant a right to a payoﬀ 0 +1 in
period  + 2. This transactionh is equivalent    i to a fully collateralized loan. In addition, he liquidates its
portfolio for a value (1 + +1 ) ˆ + ̂ + ̂ .


                                                           9
(and possibly aggregate risk as well). Under both types of models, occasionally binding
borrowing constraints segment the horizons of agents with essentially the same eﬀects as
overlapping generations.
    The potential benefit of Aiyagari-Bewley models over ours is that they are in principle
more suitable for realistic quantitative explorations. However, the parameters for a realistic
calibration in the context of our model (i.e. a precautionary savings model for firms instead
of the more customary income fluctuation problem for consumers) are currently largely
unknown. Moreover, this benefit has to be weighted against the cost in terms of loss of
tractability. Indeed, the dynamics of such models can be hard to characterize theoretically
because of the need to keep track of the evolving cross-sectional distribution of wealth. By
contrast, we are able to derive the solution of our model in closed form. Since our objective
is mostly theoretical, we view our model as preferable.


II.2    Competitive equilibrium

A competitive equilibrium imposes market clearing: ˆ = (1 + +1 ) ̂ =  and ̂ =
0  (1 + +1 ) We will use a version of recursive equilibrium as our running definition. The
economy is amenable to a recursive representation with two state variables: past investment
−1 and the bubble  . The laws of motion for these variables can be derived from three
simple equations: a bubble dynamics equation, an asset supply equation and an asset demand
equation.
   Bubble dynamics. The absence of arbitrage implies that the bubble must grow at the
rate of interest:
                              +1 = (1 + +1 )                                (1)

   Asset supply. The supply equation describes how generation ( − 1)’s investment at
date  is constrained by the available liquidity,  +  + 0 −1 , and by the investment-related
pledgeable income, 0  (1 + +1 ) :

                                         0 
                                 =            + [ +  + 0 −1 ]
                                       1 + +1

and can be expressed as




                                                 10
                                                +  + 0 −1
                                         =                                                  (2)
                                                 1 − 1+0+1
Asset demand. The demand equation says that generation ’s wealth goes into buying
outside liquidity (), the bubble, and the assets generated by the previous generation’s in-
vestment (0  ):
                                                      0 
                                =            +  +          
                                     1 + +1        1 + +1
It can be expressed as

                                      (1 + +1 ) −  −  (1 + +1 )
                               =                                                            (3)
                                                    0

    We define a competitive equilibrium as a sequence of investment levels, bubble and in-
terest rates {     } such that at every date  the asset market clears. We need to specify
the following initial conditions: the investment level −1 of generation −1 maturing at date
0; and the value 0 of the bubble at date 0.

Definition 1 A competitive equilibrium is a sequence {     }≥0 together with an initial
investment level −1  0 and an initial bubble 0 such that: (i) the bubble condition (1), the
asset supply and asset demand equations (2) and (3) hold; and (ii) for all  ≥ 0,  ≥ 0,
 ≥ 0, and 1  1 +  ≥ 0 .

    Note that in a competitive equilibrium, we necessarily have 1 +  0 for all , otherwise
midddle-aged entrepreneurs would invest at an infinite scale, which is impossible because the
resources available for investment are bounded.


II.3    The bubble-free case

Let us first assume that 0 = 0. This implies that  = 0 for all . The economy is a one-
dimensional dynamic system with state variable −1 . Given −1 , we now explain how  can
be computed using equations (2) and (3) with  = 0. Detailed derivations can be found in
Appendix A1.
    Dynamics. The asset supply equation (2) determines  as a decreasing function of
+1 . and the asset demand equation (3) determines  as an increasing function of +1 .
As 1 + +1 increases from 0 to +∞, the supply curve decreases from +∞ to ( + 0 −1 )

                                                   11
Figure 1: asset supply and asset demand curves. The dotted curves represent the eﬀects of
an increase in  (Section 2) or  (Section 3).

and the demand curve increases from ( − 0 ) to +∞. The unique intersection of these
supply and demand curves with (1 + +1 ) ∈ (0  +∞) determines the values of   0 and
1 + +1  0 .11 We denote by  = Φ (−1  0), +1 = Φ (−1  0) the corresponding policy
functions. The argument ”0” in Φ (−1  0) and Φ (−1  0) indicates that we have imposed
 = 0. In Appendix A1, we derive closed-form expressions for Φ (−1  0) and Φ (−1  0) 


    Inside and outside liquidity. The productive sector provides its own liquidity in a
dynamic fashion: an increase in −1 leads to an increase in  . Indeed, an increase in −1
leads to an upward shift in the asset supply curve (2) and does not aﬀect the asset demand
curve (3). The result is an increase in investment  and an increase in the interest rate
1 + +1 .
     The asset supply and asset demand equations (2) and (3) can also be used to determine
the impact of outside liquidity () on investment  for a given −1 . Given −1 , increasing
outside liquidity  available at date  shifts the asset supply curve (2) upwards and the
asset demand curve (3) downwards. The interest rate +1 unambiguously increases. The
eﬀect on investment  is ambiguous. Indeed, using the asset supply equation  = ( +
0 −1 ) [1 − 0  (1 + +1 )], the impact of the increase in outside liquidity on investment can
be decomposed into two eﬀects. On the one hand, increasing outside liquidity  available
  11
    This derivation assumes that 1 is large enough so that 1  1 + +1 . As stated above, we focus on
equilibria which verify this property.

                                                  12
at date  increases the net worth  +  + 0 −1 of middle-aged entrepreneurs at date –a
liquidity eﬀect. On the other hand, and as noted above, increasing outside liquidity increases
the interest rate +1 . As a result leverage 1[1−0 (1++1 )] decreases, which just expresses
the fact that financing is harder when interest rates are high. This we call the leverage eﬀect.
The resulting eﬀect on investment  at date  is ambiguous.
    Intuitively, firms demand liquidity which is akin to an input in production. This tends to
make investment and outside liquidity complements. But investments made by the private
sector also play the role of inside liquidity. Inside liquidity is in direct competition with
outside liquidity. This tends to make investment and outside liquidity substitutes. This
distinction between the liquidity eﬀect and the leverage eﬀect also has a temporal dimen-
sion. Existing liquidity–inside liquidity −1 or outside liquidity –and contemporaneous
investment  are complements. Future outside liquidity and contemporaneous investment 
are substitutes.
    Steady state. To solve for a steady state (∗  ∗ ) of the bubble-free economy, we look
for a solution to the system of equations obtained by imposing  = −1 = ∗ and +1 = ∗
in the asset supply and asset demand equations (2) and (3):

                                  + 0 ∗                      (1 + ∗ ) − 
                          ∗ =        0         and    ∗ =                                        (4)
                                 1 − 1+ ∗                           0

There is a unique solution with ∗ ≥ 0 and 1 + ∗ ≥ 0  In appendix A1, we provide a
closed-form solution for ∗ and ∗ . The following proposition establishes that this steady
state is stable and summarizes the dynamics of the bubble-free economy.12

Proposition 1 Let {   }≥0 be a competitive equilibrum of the bubble-free economy. The
economy converges to the bubble-free steady state. Moreover this convergence is monotonic:
investment  converges monotonically to ∗ .

   We can clarify the circumstances under which outside liquidity and investment are com-
plements or substitutes. The equations in (4) can be rearranged to yield

                                             ∗   (1 + ∗ )
                                              =      0                                            (5)
                                                 1 − 1+ ∗


  12
    When   0 (this is also true of the case   0 analyzed in Section V.1), this is the unique solution
of the system of equations in (4) with positive investment ∗ ≥ 0. When  = 0, there is another solution
of the system of equations in (4) with positive investment: ∗ = 0 and 1 + ∗ = 0. However, this is not a
competitive equilibrium, since a necessary condition is 1 + ∗  0 .

                                                   13
Figure 2: asset supply and asset demand curves in steady state. The dotted curves represent
the eﬀects of an increase in  (Section 2) or a shift from ∗ = 0 to ∗∗  0 (Section 3).

   It can be verified that ∗ increases with ∗ if and only if the following condition holds:

                                           1     0
                                             ≥                                                (6)
                                           2   1 + ∗

In Appendix A1, we verify that ∗ increases with . Hence ∗ increases with  if and only if ∗
increases with ∗ in (5), i.e. if and only if condition (6) holds. Given that ∗ is an increasing
function of outside liquidity , this condition will hold if  is large enough. Let 0 be the
corresponding threshold. Clearly 0  0 if and only if condition (6) is violated when  = 0
(in which case 1 + ∗ = 0  (1 − 0 )), i.e. if and only if 12  0 .

Proposition 2 In the bubble-free economy, steady state interest rate ∗ increases with out-
side liquidity. Steady state investment ∗ increases with outside liquidity  when the interest
rate is high enough so that (6) is verified. More precisely, there exists 0 ≥ 0 such that for
              ∗
all  ≥ 0,  is positive if and only if  is greater (smaller) than 0 . Moreover we have 0  0
if and only if 0  12.

    This proposition characterizes the situations where inside liquidity (investment) and out-
side liquidity (trees) are complements or substitutes. When liquidity is abundant ( high),
the price of liquidity is low (the interest rate ∗ is high) and the liquidity eﬀect outweighs
the leverage eﬀect so that investment ∗ increases with  An intuition for this result is
that an increase in the interest rate ∗ has a constant positive marginal eﬀect on net worth

                                                14
at the time of investment (1 + ∗ ) but a decreasing negative marginal eﬀect on leverage
1[1 − 0 (1 + ∗ )]
    The case  = 0. The case  = 0 proves to be an important benchmark to understand
the eﬀects of bubbles. For this reason, we find it useful to highlight its properties even in
the bubble-free case. The bubble-free steady state is then ∗ =  (1 − 0 ) and 1 + ∗ =
0  (1 − 0 ). In Appendix A1, we show that whenever   0, the steady state interest rate is
higher so that 1 + ∗  0  (1 − 0 ).



III     Bubbles

In this section, we consider the possibility of rational bubbles. We first start by eliciting
the dynamics of the economy and the conditions for the existence of a bubbly steady state
in Section III.1. We show that there exists either zero or one bubbly steady state. This
steady state features higher investment than the bubble-free steady state. There are multiple
competitive equilibria corresponding to the same initial investment level −1 . For any initial
investment level −1 , we show that there exists a maximum feasible initial bubble ̄(−1 ).
For 0  ̄ (−1 ), the economy converges to the bubble-free steady state. For 0 = ̄ (−1 ),
the economy converges to the bubbly steady state. Detailed derivations can be found in
Appendix A2.


III.1    Bubbly dynamics and steady state

In this section we focus on the case where   0. We return to the case  = 0 at the end of
the section.
   Dynamics. The economy is a two-dimensional dynamic system with state variables −1
and  . Given −1 and  , we now explain how  and +1 can be computed.
    As can be seen from equation (3), a necessary condition for equilibrium is then that
  . The asset supply equation (2) determines  as a decreasing function of +1 . and
the asset demand equation (3) determines  as an increasing function of +1 . As 1 + +1
increases from 0 to +∞, the supply curve decreases from +∞ to ( +  + 0 −1 ) and
the demand curve increases from ( −  − 0 ) to +∞. The unique intersection of these
supply and demand curves with (1 + +1 ) ∈ (0  +∞) determines the values of  and +1 .
See Figure 1 for a graphical illustration.

                                              15
    We can then infer the value of +1 from (1).13 We denote by  = Φ (−1   ), +1 =
Φ (−1   ) and +1 = Φ (−1   ) the corresponding policy functions. In Appendix A2, we
derive closed-form expressions for Φ (−1   ), Φ (−1   ) and Φ (−1   ).
    Bubbly steady state. There exists either zero or a unique bubbly steady state. When
a bubbly steady state exists, the values of ∗∗  ∗∗ and ∗∗ can be found by imposing  =
−1 = ∗∗   = ∗∗ and +1 = ∗∗ = 0 in equations (2) and (3). See Figure 2 for a graphical
illustration. We then have:
       When it exists the bubbly steady state is given by

                                                   1 − 20
                           ∗∗ =           ∗∗ =          −  and ∗∗ = 0
                                   1 − 0           1 − 0

       The condition of existence of a bubbly steady state is

                                               1 − 20  
                                                                                                       (B)
                                               1 − 0   

Condition (B) shows that bubbles can emerge when inside (0 ) and outside () liquidity is
scarce, creating a high demand for assets. Moreover the size of the bubble ∗∗ in the bubbly
steady state decreases with the fraction 0 of income that is pledgeable and with outside
liquidity : variations in  are compensated one for one by variations in the size of the bubble.
The interest rate ∗∗ is pinned down at 0. As a result, investment ∗∗ at the bubbly steady
state does not depend on 
   In Section III.2 below, we show that condition (B) is equivalent to the standard condition
that the interest rate in the bubble-free steady state (∗ ) be less than the rate of growth of
the economy (0). There, we also analyze the connection between dynamic eﬃciency and the
condition for the existence of bubbles.
    Phase diagram analysis. It will prove convenient to describe the dynamics that we
have just derived using a phase diagram. This requires characterizing the  = −1 schedule–
the set of values (−1   ) such that Φ (−1   ) = −1 –and the +1 =  schedule–the set
of values (−1   ) such that Φ (−1   ) =  .14
  13
     This derivation assumes that 1 is large enough so that 1  1 + +1 . As stated above, we focus on
equilibria which verify this property.
  14
     Note that +1 =  = 0 whenever  = 0. Literally speaking the +1 =  schedule consists of two parts:
the one characterized by  (−1 ) which applies whenever   0, and the line  = 0; abusing terminology,
we refer to the former as the +1 =  schedule.



                                                     16
       The  = −1 schedule is given by
                                                                          ³      ´
                                                                              1
                                        0 (1 − 0 )             +−         0
                                                                                 −   
                            = 2−1                − 0 −1                           −
                                                                        

which defines a function  (−1 ). The +1 =  schedule is given by


                                    = −20 −1 + (1 − 0 ) ( − ) − 0 

which defines a function  (−1 ).


Lemma 1 Suppose that   0. The interest rate +1 = Φ (−1   ) and investment  =
Φ (−1   ) are increasing in −1 and  . Investment  = Φ (−1   ) is greater (smaller)
than −1 if and only if  is greater (smaller) than  (−1 ). The bubble  = Φ (−1   ) is
greater (smaller) than −1 if and only if  is greater (smaller) than  (−1 ).


   The intuition for this lemma is simple: the presence of the bubble lowers the price of
outside liquidity, or in other words, increases the interest rate. This increases corporate net
worth and investment, to the detriment of the suppliers of outside liquidity.
    Figure 3 is a phase diagram representing the dynamics of the economy.15 The bubbly
steady state always features more investment than the bubble-free steady state. The latter
is stable while the former features a downward-sloping saddle path. If the economy starts
on the saddle path, it will eventually converge to the bubbly steady state. If it starts below
the saddle path, it will eventually converge to the bubble-free steady state. The economy
cannot start above the saddle path without eventually violating the constraint   , which
is a necessary condition for a competitive equilibrium.


Proposition 3 Assume that (B) holds and that   0. Then ∗  0 and ∗∗  ∗ . For
any −1 , there exists a maximum feasible bubble ̄(−1 ) The path of productions/investments
{ }≥0 and interest rates { }≥0 are increasing in the size of the original bubble 0 . For
0  ̄(−1 ) the economy is asymptotically bubble-free: it converges to the bubble-free steady
state. For 0 = ̄(−1 ) the economy is asymptotically bubbly: it converges to the bubbly steady
state. Moreover, the function ̄(−1 ) is decreasing in −1 .
  15
     We have  (0) = −  0 and  (0) = (1 − 0 ) ( − ) − 0  which is strictly positive as long as (B) holds.
                                                                                    
It is easy to verify that  is increasing when it intersects  . The sign of −1 |−1 =0 on the other hand, is
unclear a priori.

                                                         17
    We are now in position to describe the dynamics when a bubble unexpectedly bursts. We
have in mind n the followingo       experiment. For   0 , the economy evolves as a competitive
equilibrium ̃  ̃  ̃      with ̃  0 for all . Then at  = 0 an unforeseen (zero-probability)
                             ≥0
event materializes which changes the conditions in the economy: for  ≥ 0 the economy
evolves according to the competitive equilbrium with initial conditions 0 −1 = ̃0 −1 and
0 = 0. In Section IV.2, we set up a sunspot model. The realization of the sunspot triggers
a bubble crash. We construct a rational expectations equilibrium which takes into account
that the bubble has a non-zero probability of crashing. The unexpected bubble burst that
we consider here can be thought of as a limit of the sunspot model when the probability
that the sunspot variable materializes goes to zero.
   Suppose for example that we are initially in the bubbly steady state ̃ = ∗∗ , ̃ = ∗∗
and ̃ = ∗∗ = 0. When the bubble crashes at  = 0 , the economy jumps downwards to
the  = 0 line. Investment collapses, the interest rate decreases and the economy gradually
converges to the bubble-free steady state.




                    Figure 3: phase diagram with positive outside liquidity.
   The case  = 0. This analysis carries through to the case where  = 0. The only
diﬀerence is that the  = −1 schedule becomes vertical at ∗ . Investment dynamics are
unaﬀected by the existence of a bubble:

                                            =  + 0 −1 

The reason is that the sum of the value of the securities issued by the middle-aged generation,
0  (1++1 ), and the bubble  in the end is equal to the savings  of the young generation.

                                                  18
Put diﬀerently, the bubble fully crowds out the value of the assets produced by previous
generations of entrepreneurs. Its only eﬀect is to increase the rate of interest, as

                                                     0 
                                             +            = 
                                                   1 + +1

Similarly the bubbly steady state (if it exists) features the same investment level as the
bubble-free steady state ∗∗ = ∗ =  (1 − 0 ). At a steady state, the bubble simply
increases the interest rate.16


III.2      Tests for bubbles and dynamic eﬃciency

In this section, we explain how dynamic eﬃciency, interest rates and the possibility of bubbles
are related. Most of the results below are not new in substance. Indeed, similar results are
discussed in Woodford (1990). Nevertheless, we find it useful to extend these insights to our
setup; this exercise further allows us to revisit the question of the measurement of dynamic
eﬃciency and the possibility of bubbles.
    In standard models of rational bubbles (e.g. Tirole 1985), bubbles can only arise if
the bubble-free economy is dynamically ineﬃcient. Abel et al (1989) use this observation
to devise a test for the existence of bubbles by testing for dynamic eﬃciency. This test
of dynamic eﬃciency involves comparing the value of resources used for investment every
period to the value of resources produced. Applying their test to the data, they conclude
that the US economy is dynamically eﬃcient and hence rule out the possibility of bubbles.
    Santos and Woodford (1997) show that the connection between bubbles and interest
rates is very general: for a large variety of economic environments, a necessary condition for
bubbles on positive net-supply assets to occur is that the net present value of the endowment
be infinite. Santos and Woodford’s condition for bubbles applies in our economy: in steady
states, bubbles can occur if and only if the interest rate is below the rate of growth of
the economy (0)–a condition equivalent to the net present value of the endowment being
infinite.
   The connection between this condition and dynamic ineﬃciency is lost: bubbles can occur
whether or not the economy is dynamically ineﬃcient, and the condition that the interest
  16
    Woodford (1990) shows that the introduction of bubbles always crowds investment in, starting in a
situation where there are neither outside stores of value ( = 0) nor inside stores of value (0 = 0). Because
0 = 0, his model assumes away leverage eﬀects. As we show here, with 0  0 bubbles have no eﬀect on
investment if  = 0. There is a discountinuity at 0 = 0. See Appendix A3 for a detailed discussion.

                                                      19
rate is below the rate of growth of the economy is consistent with dynamic eﬃciency. As
a result, interest rate tests are inadequate to gauge dynamic eﬃciency, but appropriate to
detect if bubbles are possible. Similarly, Abel et al (1989)’s test remains valid in our model
as a test of dynamic eﬃciency, but it does not directly address the possibility of bubbles:
Dynamic ineﬃciency is a suﬃcient but not necessary condition for the possibility of bubbles.
    Dynamic eﬃciency. To discuss eﬃciency, we first need a metric to index the welfare
of the original holders of trees in every period. We take the utility of the original holders
of date- trees to be (any increasing function of) the amount of resources that they receive
from selling their trees. This is the right concept in the example we gave for the supply of
outside liquidity with one-period-lived consumers in Section II.
   In our model, dynamic eﬃciency and Pareto eﬃciency are equivalent concepts and we
therefore use the two terms interchangeably in what follows. An allocation is dynamically
eﬃcient if there is no other resource-feasible allocation that increases the lifetime utility of
some agent without reducing that of another. Note that in this definition, the pledgeability
constraints are deliberately ignored.
    If an allocation is not dynamically eﬃcient, we can ask whether it satisfies a weaker notion
of eﬃciency which we refer to as constrained dynamic eﬃciency: an allocation is constrained
dynamically eﬃcient if there is no other resource-feasible allocation that increases the lifetime
utility of some agent without reducing that of another, and which satisfies the pledgeability
constraints that require that the consumption of old entrepreneurs at date  exceed (1 − 0 )
times the amount of resources that were invested at date  − 1. Actually, we will show that
competitive equilibria of our economy, when they are not dynamically eﬃcient, are also not
constrained dynamically eﬃcient.
   Determining whether an allocation is dynamically eﬃcient is a simple task: when the
pledgeability constraints are ignored, our economy is a simple overlapping generations econ-
omy with a linear investment technology with rate of return 1 . The following proposition
demonstrates that the eﬃciency of the allocations that satisfy Definition 1 of a competitive
equilibrium (and this definition does incorporate pledgeability constraints) hinges on the
value 1 .


Proposition 4 If 1  1, all competitive equilibria of our economy are dynamically eﬃcient.
If 1  1, no competitive equilibrium is dynamically eﬃcient, and furthermore, no competitive
equilibrium is constrained dynamically eﬃcient.


                                               20
    In our model, when the (social) rate of return on investment 1 is greater than the gross
rate of growth of the economy (1), competitive equilibria are always dynamically eﬃcient.
Note that this holds whether or not a bubble is present in the economy. In particular, this
means that both the bubbly and the bubble-free steady state are dynamically eﬃcient when
1  1. When 1  1, the bubbly and the bubble-free steady states are not only dynamically
eﬃcient but also constrained dynamically ineﬃcient.
    Note that dynamic ineﬃciency (1  1) implies that ∗  0. However, ∗  0 is compat-
ible with dynamic eﬃciency (1  1). Interest rates below the growth rate of the economy
are compatible with dynamic eﬃciency because the interest rate reflects the fraction of the
return on investment which is pledgeable to outside investors and not the total return on
investment. Indeed, the paths for investment and the interest rate do not depend on the
total return on investment 1 (as long as 1  1 +  for all ), but only on the pledgeable
part of this return 0 . In sum, ∗  0 is a necessary but not suﬃcient condition for dynamic
ineﬃciency.
   Bubbles. In contrast, the possibility of bubbles–condition (B)–is still determined by
the interest rate test ∗ ≤ 0.

Proposition 5 The possibility of bubbles is exactly determined by an (uninformed investor)
interest rate test of the form ∗ ≤ 0.

    At the bubbly steady-state, the interest rate ∗∗ is equal to 0. Therefore, at a steady
state, one can test for the possibility of bubbles by comparing the interest rate with the rate
of growth of the economy, without taking a view as to whether or not the economy is at the
bubble-free or the bubbly steady state.
    The validity of Abel et al (1989)’s test to detect dynamic eﬃciency is most easily illus-
trated by applying it to steady states. Indeed, consider a (bubbly or bubble-free) steady
state ( ) ∈ {(∗  0)  (∗∗  ∗∗ )}  The test involves three quantities: the value of resources 1 
produced in every period, the resources  used for investment, and the value of the market
portfolio 0 . It states that the economy is dynamically eﬃcient (ineﬃcient) if and only if the
diﬀerence between the resources produced and the resources used of investment normalized
by the value of the market portfolio (1  − )  (0 ) is strictly positive (negative), i.e. if and
only if 1 is greater (smaller) than one, exactly as prescribed by Proposition 4.
    The considerations brought about by our analysis go part of the way towards rehabili-
tating interest rate tests as an indication for the possibility of bubbles. They shed light on

                                                   21
which interest rate to use in these tests: this rate corresponds to an interest rate available to
outside investors–a relatively low interest rate, such as the interest rate on riskless bonds.


III.3     Summary

Figure 4 allows for a concise summary of the dependence on outside liquidity  of the bubbly
steady and the bubble-free steady states. The figure displays investment ∗ at the bubble-free
steady state as a function of outside liquidity . We denote this function by ∗ (). We also
use the notation ∗ () to denote the interest rate in the bubble-free steady state. The figure
also represents investment at the bubble-free steady state when   0. This case will be
covered later in Section V.1. For now, we focus on the part of the figure that corresponds
to  ≥ 0.
   The function ∗ () reaches a minimum on [0 +∞) at the threshold 0 ≥ 0. In Proposition
2, we showed that 0  0 if and only if 0  12. The left panel illustrates the case where
0  12 (and hence 0  0) and the right panel illustrates the case where 0  12 (and
hence 0 = 0).
   When 0  12, liquidity always crowds investment in: ∗ () is increasing in  for all
 ≥ 0. For all values  ≥ 0, condition (B) is violated, and hence bubbles cannot arise.
    In the rest of this section, we assume that 0  12, liquidity crowds investment in (out)
if and only if  ≥ 0 (  0 ): ∗ () decreases in  on [0 0 ] and increases in  on [0  ∞). There
is always a value ∗∗ ≡  (1 − 20 )  (1 − 0 )  0 such that ∗ (∗∗ ) = ∗ (0).
    Condition (B) holds, and hence bubbles can arise, if and only if 0 ≤  ≤ ∗∗ . At the
bubbly steady state, variations in  are compensated one for one by variations in the size of
the bubble since ∗∗ =  (1 − 20 )  (1 − 0 ) − . As a result, investment ∗∗ =  (1 − 0 ) at
the bubbly steady state does not depend on  Importantly, investment at the bubbly steady
state is always equal to investment at the bubble-free steady state when  = 0: ∗∗ = ∗ (0).
     When  = ∗∗ investment is at the same level in the bubble-free and bubbly steady states:
∗ (∗∗ ) = ∗∗ =  (0). Moreover, the gross interest rate is equal to zero in the bubble-free
steady state 1 + ∗ (∗∗ ) = 0, and the value of the bubble in the bubbly steady state is
∗∗ = 0. For 0    ∗∗ , investment is strictly higher in the bubbly steady state than in the
bubble-free steady state ∗∗ = ∗ (0)  ∗ (). For 0 ≤   ∗∗ , the gross interest rate at the
bubble-free steady state is strictly negative 1 + ∗ ()  0 and the size of the bubble at the
bubbly steady state is given by ∗∗ = ∗∗ −   0.

                                                  22
    All in all, bubbles, when they are possible, always restore investment to the steady state
level corresponding to both  = 0 and  = ∗∗ : ∗∗ = ∗ (0) = ∗ (∗∗ ). When bubbles
are possible, investment at the bubble-free steady state ∗ () initially decreases as outside
liquidity increases from  = 0 to  = 0 . Investment at the bubble-free steady state ∗ () then
increases as outside liquidity increases from  = 0 to ∗∗ and reaches ∗ (∗∗ ) =  (0). For all
0    ∗∗ we have ∗ ()  ∗∗ =  (0) =  (∗∗ ). For   ∗∗ , bubbles cease to be possible.




                          Figure 4: Comparing (∗∗  ∗∗ ) and (∗  ∗ ).




IV      Economic implications

IV.1     Collateral heterogeneity

We have assumed so far for simplicity that firms are homogenous (perhaps up to a scaling
factor). When firms diﬀer, say, in the pledgeability of their income, those with limited access
to unsophisticated investors, i.e., low 0 firms (family firms, private equity, startups), benefit
relatively more from the presence of a bubble. They enjoy the liquidity eﬀect without being
much impacted by the leverage eﬀect as they do not resort much to small investors’ money.
Conversely, they also suﬀer more from a bubble crash.

                                                23
   Let  be an index for firms and let 0 be an increasing function of  We can assume
without loss of generality that  is distributed uniformly on [0 1]. We denote by  the
investment of firm  in period : each firm’s investment is potentially diﬀerent since they
they diﬀer in their ability to generate pledgeable income 0  from investment.
    We then have the following aggregation result. The economy is described by two state
                                                           R
variables: the value of the bubble  and the integral 0 −1  describing the total value
of the existing stock of securities The law of motion for  is still +1 =  (1 + +1 ) while
R 
  0 −1  and +1 are jointly determined as the intersection of the aggregate supply and
the demand curves for assets:
                                  ⎛                  ⎞
                    Z              Z       
                                                       µ        Z           ¶
                                ⎝       0         ⎠               
                       0   =            
                                                       +  + 0 −1                     (7)
                                      1 − 1+0+1

and                        Z
                               0   = [ (1 + +1 ) −  − (1 + +1 ) ]              (8)

Investment by firm  can be computed as
                                                          R
                                                +  +       0 −1 
                                        =                0
                                                                                              (9)
                                                    1−    1++1


    There exists either zero or a unique bubbly steady state. When a bubbly steady state
                     R                                            R            R
exists, the values of 0 ∗∗  and ∗∗ can be found by imposing 0   = 0 −1  =
R  ∗∗
  0    = ∗∗ and +1 = ∗∗ = 0 in equations (7) and (8). Investment by firm  can
then be computed using equation (9). We then have:

                                               µZ              ¶
                   ∗∗                             1 − 20
                        =          ∗∗ =                     −  and ∗∗ = 0
                           1 − 0                  1 − 0

   The condition for a bubble to exist is now given by
                                        µZ                     ¶
                                               1 − 20                
                                                                                          (B’)
                                               1 − 0                 

The analysis of the dynamics of the economy are exactly as in Section III.1. Replacing the
representative firm’s pledgeable income by the industry-average pledgeable income, we see
that the previous analysis generalizes to heterogenous firms.


                                                     24
   The relative size of firms with low pledgeable income increases when bubbles arise and
decreases when bubbles crash:

                                     +1
                              =        +
                             +1 
                                         1                 0        +1
                              =          R         −
                                 +  + 0 −1  (1 + +1 − 0 )2 

We can also analyze the consequences of an unexpected (zero probability) bubble crash of
the form discussed in Section III.1. There are two immediate opposing eﬀects on investment:
(a) firms which used the bubble to hoard liquidity have less net worth (b) the interest rate
decreases, which allows for more leverage. The percentage decrease in investment resulting
from a lower net worth is independent of 0 . The percentage increase in investment from
a higher leverage is higher, the higher is pledgeable income 0 . As a result, in relative
terms, the size of firms with low pledgeable income compared to the size of firms with high
pledgeable income decreases when a bubble crashes.


Proposition 6 Assume that (B’) holds and that   0. Then:
                       R                                                       ¡R          ¢
(i) for any value of 0 −1 , there exists a maximum feasible bubble ̄ 0 −1   The
path of interest rates { }≥0 are increasing in the size of the initial bubble 0 ; the path
of productions/investments { }≥0 is increasing in the size of the initial bubble 0 when
outside liquidity  is positive, and decreasing when outside liquidity  is negative. For 0 
  ¡R          ¢
̄ 0 −1  , the economy is asymptotically bubble-free: it converges monotonically to the
                                         ¡R        ¢
bubble-free steady state. For 0 = ̄ 0 −1   the economy is asymptotically bubbly: it
converges monotonically to the bubbly steady state;
(ii) the equilibrium paths for { }≥0 and { }≥0 are increasing in the size 0 of the initial
bubble;
(iii) the relative size of firms with low pledgeable income (low 0 ) compared to the size of
firms with high pledgeable income (high 0 ) increases with the size of the initial bubble 0 :
                        ¡ ¢−1 
the relative variation       0 of investment  at date  + 1 with respect to the initial
bubble 0 is decreasing in .


IV.2     Stochastic bubbles (1): bubbly liquidity premium

As in Weil (1987), we can allow the bubble to burst stochastically depending on the realiza-
tion of a sunspot. Suppose that each period the bubble bursts with probability 1 − . An

                                                25
asset’s liquidity service depends on what the asset delivers when cash is particularly valuable
to firms. Building on this idea, we now argue that, even in this risk neutral environment, a
stochastic bubble trades at a liquidity discount or equivalently a risk premium relative to
riskless stores of value. We focus on the case   0.
   Let  and +1 (respectively, −      −
                                    and +1 ) denote the investment levels and interest rates
when the bubble has lasted until period  + 1 and continues (respectively, bursts). The asset
supply equations are given by

                                +  + 0 −1                     + 0 −1
                         =                      and       −
                                                              =               
                                  1 − 1+0+1                     1 − 1+0−
                                                                           +1



Similarly, the asset demand equations are given by
                                                                          ¡       −
                                                                                     ¢
                  (1 + +1 ) −  − (1 + +1 )                         1 + +1   −
             =                                        and        −
                                                                     =                   
                                0                                              0

    Since −         −
             and +1 are determined by the same set of equations as  and +1 but with
                                 −
 = 0 it is clear that +1  +1 : the burst of the bubble depresses the interest rate. The
immediate response of investment  to a bubble crash is determined by Lemmas 1 and 3:
as long as   0, the burst of the bubble depresses investment so that   −          −
                                                                                ( =  when
 = 0).
    At date , generation- entrepreneurs can hold safe assets (trees, claims on previous
investments’ income) or risky ones (stochastic bubble). Letting e denote the return on
the bubble when it does not burst:  = (1 + ̃ ) −1 if the bubble does not burst and
 = 0 otherwise. By investing one in a tree at , an entrepreneur can secure 1 +  at
 + 1, which allows him to invest (1 +  )  [1 − 0  (1 + +1 )] at  + 1 if the bubble does not
                                   £         ¡       −
                                                        ¢¤
crash at  + 1 and (1 +  )  1 − 0  1 + +1           if it crashes. This allows him to consume
(1 − 0 ) (1 +  )  [1 − 0  (1 + +1 )] at  + 2 if the bubble does not crash at  + 1 and
                       £         ¡      −
                                            ¢¤
(1 − 0 ) (1 +  )  1 − 0  1 + +1       if it crashes. Similarly, investing one in the bubble at
 delivers 1 + ̃ at  +1 if the bubble does not crash at  +1 and zero if it crashes. This allows
the entrepreneur to invest (1 + ̃ )  [1 − 0  (1 + +1 )] at +1 if the bubble does not crash at
+1 and zero if it crashes. This allows him to consume (1 − 0 ) (1 + ̃ )  [1 − 0  (1 + +1 )]
at  + 2 if the bubble does not crash at  + 1 and zero if it crashes. In equilibrium, expected
consumption at  + 2 from these two investment options at  must be equalized. This leads




                                                  26
to the following arbitrage equation between bubbles and trees:

                                   1 +                1 +                    1 + e
                                      0   + (1 − )                    =                                      (10)
                                 1 − 1++1           1 − 1+0−               1 − 1+0+1
                                                                   +1




     This in turn implies that 1 + e  (1 +  ) . Despite risk neutrality, stochastic bubbles
feature a liquidity premium: they command positive net excess returns  (1 + e ) − (1 +  ).
The intuition is straightforward. Bubbles deliver no return when internal wealth is the most
valuable: when liquidity is scarce, interest rates are low and internal funds can be levered a
lot.
   There are multiple equilibria with such stochastic bubble, exactly as in our baseline
model. There exists a unique conditional bubbly steady state: A competitive equilibrium
such that the variables (   ) are constant and equal to (∗∗  ∗∗ ) with ∗∗  0 until the
sunspot variable realizes and the bubble crashes. At such a conditional steady state, the
bubble is constant (until it crashes) and hence 1 + e∗∗ = 1. Moreover

                       Ã                     
                                                      !−1                        ∗∗
                                                                            + 1+ ∗∗
                                 1−    1 − 1+0∗∗                 + 0      1−0            (1 + ∗∗− ) − 
           1 + ∗∗ =      1+                                                            =
                                      1 − 1+0∗∗−                 1−        0
                                                                            1+∗∗−
                                                                                                    0

                                ∗∗                                  ∗∗     µ                     ¶
               ∗∗
                       +  1+ ∗∗                    ∗∗
                                                              +  1+ ∗∗                0
                   =                     and             =                  1−               − 0 − 
                        1 − 0                                 1 − 0                  1 + ∗∗

       The condition for the existence of a bubble becomes17
                                      0
                                                  "             #
                                1 − 1+ ∗∗ − 0         1         
                                                          ∗∗                                                 (B” )
                                    1 − 0          1 +  1+∗∗ 

This condition is more likely to be verified, the higher is ∗∗ . It coincides with condition
(B) when ∗∗ = 0. Note that we necessarily have (1 + ∗∗ )   1 + ̃∗∗ = 1 so that
∗∗   − 1  0. As a result, condition (B” ) is more stringent than condition (B): condition
(B” ) implies condition (B).

Proposition 7 Suppose that (B” ) holds and that   0, then:
  17
     Unfortunately, this condition determines only implicitly the parameter region that leads to the possibility
of bubbles. It features an endogenous object ∗∗ . This complication arises for the following reason. Bubbles
now present a risk premium and thus a positive net excess return: (1 + ̃∗∗ ) − (1 + ∗∗ )  0 In a conditional
bubbly steady state, zero bubble growth pins down the expected return on bubbles: 1 + ̃∗∗ = 1, but the
risk-free rate ∗∗ has to be determined jointly with ∗∗− as solutions to a non-linear system.

                                                            27
(i) in any competitive equilibrium with a strictly positive bubble, before the bubble bursts, the
bubble features a liquidity premium;
(ii) in any competitive equilibrium with a strictly positive bubble, the bursting of the bubble
decreases interest rates: firms scramble for collateral, which becomes more valuable;
(iii) in any competitive equilibrium, when the bubble bursts, investment immediately de-
creases; then, the economy gradually converges to the bubble-free steady state;
(iv) in the conditional bubbly steady state–before the bubble bursts–as the probability of
bursting (1 − ) increases, the interest rate ∗∗ and the bubble ∗∗ decrease; investment ∗∗
decreases;
(v) in the conditional bubbly steady state, interest rates and investment are high (∗∗  ∗
and ∗∗  ∗ ).



    For example, when   0, steady state investment ∗∗  bubble size ∗∗ and interest rate
∗∗ are all decreasing in the probability 1 −  that the bubble crashes A more stable bubble
provides more liquidity and is more conducive to investment. This in turn boosts the demand
for liquidity and makes for a larger bubble.
    A full characterization of the dynamics is outside the scope of this paper. Indeed, an extra
state variable is required to describe the economy. The state space is now given by the triple
(−1     ) The reason past interest rates  have to be kept track of is that the arbitrage
equation (10) involves both the interest rate at date  and at date  + 1 As a consequence,
simple two-dimensional phase diagrams cannot be used anymore. A full characterization of
the stability properties of the diﬀerent steady states and their basin of attraction is rather
involved and outside the scope of this paper.
     Remark 1. Imagine that there is a stochastic bubble in an economy with heterogeneity
in pledgeable income as in Section IV.1. Equation (10) has the implication that firms with
higher 0 will demand a higher expected return to hold the bubble. Therefore, in equilibrium,
the bubble will be held by the firms with the lowest 0 . When   0, we showed in Proposition
6 that for a given portfolio, these firms are also the firms whose investment decreases the
most in percentage terms when the bubble crashes. The result is an amplification mechanism
whereby the equilibrium allocation of the bubble across firms magnifies the impact of a crash.
In equilibrium, firms with a high 0 do not hold the bubble so that their net worth is insulated
from the bubble crash. Moreover, they can increase their leverage more than firms with a low
0 in response to the drop in interest rates that follows the crash of the bubble. Conversely,


                                                28
firms with a low 0 hold the bubble so that their net worth is impaired when the bubble
crashes. In addition, their leverage increases less than firms with a high 0 in response to
the drop in interest rates that follows the crash of the bubble.


IV.3      Stochastic bubbles (2): endogenous crashes

Following up on section (IV.2), we modify the environment in the following way. Suppose
that  follows a two-state Markov process  ∈ {   } with    . Initially  =  
With probability 1 −   0 per period,  transitions to  which is an absorbing state.
    We assume that (B” ) is verified for an exogenous bursting probability (1 − ) in an
economy with a deterministic and constant  equal to   Similarly, we assume that for
any  ∈ [0 1] (B) is violated in an economy with a deterministic and constant  equal to
  Hence if the economy is already in the state of low net worth  =   the demand for
liquidity is low, the interest rate is high and bubbles cannot exist. Bubbles however, can
exist as long as net worth is high:  =  .
    Suppose that  =  and consider the economy entering period +1 with state variables
given by (  −1   )  Then if +1 =   (+1    +1 ) are given by the same equations as
in Section IV.2 with  =  . On the other hand if +1 =   then the bubble bursts:
 = 0 and  is given by the same equations as above with  =  and  = 0 The economy
then evolves as in Section II.2.


Proposition 8 Assume that (B” ) holds with  =  but that (B) is violated with  =  .
Consider an economy where in the initial period the economy is in steady state along the
bubbly path and  =   In the first period where  =   the bubble bursts. Then, the
economy converges to the bubble-free steady state corresponding to  =  


    The mechanics of a bubble crash are similar to those of the previous section. The dif-
ference is that in Section IV.2, the burst of the bubble was triggered by the realization of a
pure sunspot variable. Here by contrast, the burst of the bubble is triggered by an adverse
fundamental shock to initial net worth  of entrepreneurs. When this shock occurs, the
demand for liquidity drops enough that bubbles are not feasible anymore.
   This environment makes clear that when   0, bad shocks to corporate balance sheets
can potentially have an amplified negative eﬀect on investment over and above that described


                                                  29
in the literature emphasizing the importance of corporate net worth–for example Bernanke-
Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki-Moore (1997)–by triggering liquidity dry-ups in the form of
bubble bursts.



V         Discussion and Robustness

V.1         Negative outside liquidity

We now assume that net outside liquidity  is negative. This can be motivated by imagining
that there is a demand for outside liquidity from an unmodelled part of the economy (another
group of consumers, or foreigners) who demand liquidity in excess of the supply of trees. We
develop some of these ideas in Section V.3.
   We focus on steady states. Detailed derivations, as well as an analysis of the dynamics,
can be found in Appendices A1, A2, and A4.
    Steady states. There is a unique bubble-free steady state which corresponds to the
intersection of the  = 0 locus with  = −1 ≥ 0; this steady state is always stable.18 If (B)
holds, there are two intersections between the  = −1 and the +1 =  schedules such that
  0. The corresponding investment levels are given by − (1 − 0 ) 0 and  (1 − 0 ) 
As long as the following condition is satisfied, the lowest solution corresponds to an unstable
bubbly steady state and the highest solution to a saddle-path-stable bubbly steady state:

                                                        0
                                                −                                                              (11)
                                                     (1 − 0 )2

Condition (11) is more likely to be verified, the lower the net demand − for outside liquidity,
the higher the level of pledgeable income 0 and the higher the net worth of entrepreneurs
. We maintain it throughout this section. When there is no risk of confusion, we refer to
the saddle-path-stable bubbly steady state, with a slight abuse of terminology, as the bubbly
steady state.


Proposition 9 Suppose that   0, then:
(i) ∗ increases with ; steady state investment ∗ increases with  when the interest rate is
                                                                                              ∗
high enough so that (6) is verified; more precisely, there exists ˜0 such that for all ,   0
  18
       We have  (0) = −  0 and  (0) = (1 − 0 ) ( − ) which is strictly positive as long as (B) holds.


                                                         30
if and only if   ˜0 ; moreover we have ˜0  0 if and only if 0  12;
(ii) suppose that (B) and (11) hold, then investment at the bubbly steady state is lower than
investment at the bubbly steady state ∗∗ =  (1 − 0 )  ∗ ;
(iii) suppose that (11) holds, then the results in Propositions 4 and 5 extend to the case   0.



    The first part of the proposition focuses on the question of whether outside liquidity
crowds investment in or out at the bubble-free steady state. This result generalizes that
of Proposition 2: outside liquidity crowds investment in when outside liquidity is abundant
enough.
    The second part of the proposition focuses on the question of whether bubbles crowd in-
vestment in or out by comparing the bubble-free and bubbly steady states. Bubbles always
increase interest rates, which reduces the value of the trees. When   0 the non-corporate
sector is a net seller of trees. The bubble then operates a transfer from the non-corporate
sector to the corporate sector, which increases investment. Bubbles and investment are com-
plements. When   0 the opposite happens and bubbles crowd investment out. Bubbles
and investment are then substitutes. Figure 4 provides a convenient summary.
   The third part of the Proposition shows that both our eﬃciency results in Proposition 5
and our results for the interest rate test to infer the possibility of bubbles in Proposition 4,
generalize to the case   0.
     Remark 2. Entrepreneurs’ preferences were chosen such that they save their entire
endowment when young, and invest all the resulting wealth when middle aged. Appendix A4
relaxes this assumption and allows more flexibility in the entrepreneurs’ savings/dissavings
choices. It turns out that the results obtained in this paper carry over, with the one following
caveat. Once we allow for flexibility in the entrepreneurs savings/dissavings choices, it is
still true that bubbles boost investment when outside liquidity  exceeds some threshold, this
threshold need not be equal to zero, and instead may either be positive or negative.


V.2     Public debt as outside liquidity

In a non-Ricardian environment, public debt can be a form of outside liquidity. Indeed,
imagine that there are consumers who live for one period, receive income . Imagine that
the government taxes a portion ˜   of their income, and issues bonds one period ahead
that are claims on the tax proceeds ˜. Let  be the number of newly-born consumers per

                                               31
newly-born entrepreneur. At date  the government receives ˜(1 + +1 ) from the bond
issuance and distributes it to consumers. Then  = ˜. By issuing debt and redeeming it
by taxing newly-born consumers, the government is able to increase the supply of oustide
liquidity.
    As long as 1 + +1  1, this policy makes consumers worse oﬀ. However, when condition
(B) holds so that bubbles are possible, the government can issue debt and constantly roll it
over without ever raising taxes: the bubble and government debt become isomorphic. Hence,
a possible reinterpretation of the model is that the bubble is government debt. Under this
interpretation, when liquidity is scarce–condition (B) holds–the government can increase
the supply of outside liquidity at no cost to the government budget (without ever having to
raise taxes).


V.3     Interest-rate sensitive outside liquidity

In this section, we provide some other microfoundations for outside liquidity. In these other
foundations  decreases with the interest rate. We show how to extend some of our most
important results to this more general case.
    Unconstrained firms. Suppose that there also exists a competitive fringe of firms
operating a concave production function  ( ) These firms are owned by consumers who only
consume when young. Consumers then sell the firms to investors for a price ( )(1+ )−
where  is the equilibrium investment level In equilibrium, it will be the case that  0 ( ) =
1 +  so that  =  ( ) where  is decreasing in   This creates a net positive supply of
trees  =  ( ) ≡  ( ( )) 
   Consumers as borrowers and securitization. Suppose that consumers have concave
preferences and hence an elastic borrowing margin. They live for two periods and have
preferences given by
                                     ( ) + ( )

where  and  denote respectively consumption when young and old. They earn income
 when young and  when old. To simplify the analysis, we focus on the case of log
preferences where () = log() In this case, consumers of generation , facing interest rate
 , consume
                              µ           ¶
                         1                           
                   =         
                                +          and  =     ((1 +  ) +  ) 
                        1+        1 +              1+

                                               32
The supply of trees from the consumers’ sector is therefore

                                                      
                                = ( ) ≡  −        ((1 +  ) +  )
                                                     1+

where ( ) is decreasing with  
    In this analysis, consumers do not face collateral constraints when they borrow. In
practice, they often do; futhermore, the institutions that determine the extent to which
claims on consumers’ future income can be transformed into stores of value have high policy
relevance.19
    Generalizing the analysis to interest-sensitive outside liquidity. Let us now
analyze a framework that encompasses all the examples mentioned above. There is a net
supply of assets owned by another sector of the economy (which we call the consumers’
sector) in the amount  = ( ), where  is decreasing in  
       The supply and demand equations for assets are now given by

                          +  + 0 −1           (1 + +1 ) − +1 − (1 + +1 )
                   =            0       and  =                                      
                            1 − 1++1                               0


    The dynamics of this economy are harder to analyze because the endogeneity of  imposes
to keep track of an additional state variable in addition to −1 and  : the past level of the
interest rate   However, the state-steady analysis remains very tractable. In the bubbly
steady state
                                            1 − 20
                      ∗∗ =         ∗∗ =          − (0) and ∗∗ = 0
                            1 − 0           1 − 0
Note that investment in the bubbly steady state is independent of the function ( ) There
is perfect crowding out between bubbles and trees: ∗∗ + (0) is independent of the function
( ) away from zero interest rates.
  19
     Suppose that consumers have some endowment of goods –labor income–in their youth. They use that
labor income to build a house, which has total value 1  at period  + 1 where  is the home investment
realized in period  However, suppose only a fraction 0   1  can be collateralized. Consumers can
invest up to  [1 − 0  (1 +  )] in housing. Consumers thus create  =  ( ) additional stores of values
for the corporate sector where  ( ) ≡ 0  [1 − 0  (1 +  )]. An increase in securitization–in the form of
mortgage backed securities for example–can be formalized as an increase in 0 towards 1 and materializes
as an increase in   In this microfoundation, the amount of trees  ( ) is endogenous as it decreases with the
interest rate.




                                                       33
   The condition for the bubbly steady state becomes

                                          1 − 20
                                                 − (0)  0                                (B”’ )
                                          1 − 0

We continue to denote investment and the interest rate that prevail at the bubble-free steady
state by ∗ and ∗ .


Proposition 10 Suppose that (B”’ ) holds. Then the interest rate at the bubble-free steady
state is negative: ∗  0.
(i) If (∗ )  0, investment in the bubbly steady state ∗∗ is higher than investment ∗ in the
bubble-free steady state.
(ii) If (∗ )  0 and − 1−
                           0
                              0           
                                (∗ )  1−   , investment in the bubbly steady state ∗∗ is lower
                                             0
than investment ∗ in the bubble-free steady state.


    Remark 3. In the model with unconstrained firms, we have (∗ ) =  ( ∗ )  0. Propo-
sition 10 then shows that ∗∗  ∗  However, note that the steady state investment level for
unconstrained firms in a bubbly steady state is lower than in the non-bubbly steady state:
∗∗  ∗  This is the standard crowding-out eﬀect of bubbles on investment emphasized in
Tirole (1985) in the context of the model of Diamond (1965). Therefore, bubbles crowd in
the investment of constrained firms (∗∗  ∗ ) but crowd out the investment of unconstrained
firms (∗∗  ∗ )



VI      Conclusion

This paper suggests a number of promising research avenues. Three themes seem to us
particularly interesting. First, we have only briefly touched in Section IV.2 on the question of
who should hold the bubble. There we saw that a stochastic bubble is held in equilibrium by
the firms with the lowest pledgeable income. To explore the ownership question further, one
could, for example, allow less levered agents such as consumers to hold the bubble. Second,
our model is too stylized to analyze the specific role of monetary policy, or the interaction
between prudential regulation and interest rate policy; developing the model along this
dimension would be interesting. Third, it would be worth introducing the possibility of
bailouts. In Farhi and Tirole (2010), we investigate this question and point out that systemic
bailouts (for example through lax interest rate policy in response to a crisis) result in strategic


                                                 34
complementarities in liquidity and portfolio choices. The financial institutions’ incentive to
correlate their positions on the overvalued assets would have implications for macro-dynamics
and public debt.
    Our analysis has been deliberately theoretical. Its implications for public policy require
further thought and extensions. Economies recurrently generate cycles of asset price over-
valuations, credit booms, and, when bubbles burst, recessions. Potential applications to
the measurement of capital adequacy abound. For example, asset price overvaluation and
crashes are closely related to the policy debates on pro-cyclical regulation, fair value ac-
counting, and deleveraging in busts. Similarly, an analysis of the link between bubbles and
the scarcity of liquidity can shed light on public policies controlling the supply of outside
liquidity, for example by adjusting the level of public debt or by tightening or relaxing secu-
ritization standards. Finally, this type of analysis can shed light on the link between bubbles
and financial development.20 Our stance that policy implications lie outside the scope of our
paper should not obscure the potential fruitfulness of such policy investigations.




  20
     Financial development in our model is captured by the quality of governance (0 ) and the existing stock
of traded securities (0 −1 ).

                                                     35
  References
Abel, A.B., Mankiw, N.G., Summers, L.H., and R.J. Zeckhauser (1989), “Asessing Dynamic
    Eﬃciency: Theory and Evidence,” Review of Economic Studies, 56(1): 1—19.

Abreu, D. and M. Brunnermeier (2003) “Bubbles and Crashes,” Econometrica, 71(1): 173—
    204.

Allais, M. (1947), Economie et Intérêt, Paris, Imprimerie Nationale et Librairie des Publi-
     cations Oﬃcielles.

Adrian, T. and H. Shin (2008), “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability and Monetary
    Policy,” paper presented at Jackson Hole.

Aiyagari, R. (1994), “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics, MIT Press, 109: 659—684.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000), “Bubbles and Crises,” Economic Journal, 110: 236-255.

Allen, F. and G. Gorton (1993), “Churning Bubbles,” Review of Economic Studies, 60:
    813-836.

Allen, F., Morris, S. and A. Postlewaite (1993), “Finite Bubbles with Short-Sale Constraints
    and Asymmetric Information,” Journal of Economic Theory, 61: 206-230.

Azariadis, C. (1993), Intertemporal Macroeconomics, Blackwell.

Balasko, Y., and K. Shell (1981), “The Overlapping Generations Model II: The Case of
    Pure Exchange with Money,” Journal of Economic Theory, 24: 112-142.

Cass, D., Okuno, M. and I. Zilcha (1979), “The Role of Money in Supporting Pareto Opti-
    mality of the Competitive Equilibrium in Consumption Loan Type Models,” Journal
    of Economic Theory, 11: 41-80.

Barlevy, G. (2009). “A Leverage-based Model of Speculative Bubbles,” working paper,
    Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Bernanke, B. (2002), “Asset Price ‘Bubbles’ and Monetary Policy,” Remarks before the
    New York chapter of the National Association for Business Economics, New York.



                                            36
Bernanke, B. (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,”
    Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, Federal
    Reserve Board.

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1989), ”Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctua-
    tions,” American Economic Review, 79, 14—31.

Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler (2000), “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility,” NBER
    Working Paper No. 7559.

Bernanke, B. , and M. Gertler (2001), “Should Central Banks Respond To Movements in
    Asset Prices?” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 91(2): 253—257.

Bewley, T. (1986), “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium With a Continuum of Independently
   Fluctuating Consumers,” in Contributions to Mathematical Economics in Honor of
   Gérard Debreu, ed. By W. Hildenbrand, and A. Mas-Colell. North Holland, Amster-
   dam.

Bordo, M. and O. Jeanne (2002), “Boom-Busts in Asset Prices, Economic Instability, and
    Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper 8966.

Caballero, R., and A. Krishnamurthy (2006), “Bubbles and Capital Flow Volatility: Causes
   and Risk Management,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(1): 35—53.

Caballero, R.J., Farhi, E. and P.O. Gourinchas (2008a), “An Equilibrium Model of Global
   Imbalances and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 98(1): 358-93.

Caballero, R.J., Farhi, E. and P.O. Gourinchas (2008b), “Financial Crash, Commodity
   Prices, and Global Imbalances,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1—55.

Caballero, R., Farhi, E., and J. Ventura (2007), “Unique Bubbles,” mimeo.

CEBS (2009), “Position Paper on a Countercyclical Capital Buﬀer”, July 17.

Conlon, J. (2004). “Simple Finite Horizon Bubbles Robust to Higher Order Knowledge,”
    Econometrica, 72: 927—36.

Diamond, P. (1965), “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Economic
    Review, 55: 1126—1150.



                                          37
Dobles-Madrid, A. (2009). “A Robust Model of Bubbles with Multidimensional Uncer-
    tainty,” working paper, Michigan State University.

Farhi, E. and J. Tirole (2010), “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch and Systemic
    Bailouts,” forthcoming, American Economic Review.

Gale, D. (1973), “Pure Exchange Equilibrium of Dynamic Economic Models,” Journal of
    Economic Theory, 5: 12-36.

Grandmont, J.M. (1985), “On Endogenous Competitive Business Cycles,” Econometrica,
    53: 995-1045.

Gilchrist, S., and J. Leahy (2002), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics 49: 75—97.

Grossman, G.M. and N. Yanagawa (1993), “Asset Bubbles and Endogenous Growth,” Jour-
    nal of Monetary Economics, 31(1): 3—19.

Hahn, F. (1982), Money and Inflation, Basil Blackwell.

Hirano, T., and N. Yanagawa (2010) “Asset Bubbles, Endogenous Growth, and Financial
    Frictions,” mimeo.

Holmström, B., and J. Tirole (1998), “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of
    Political Economy, 106(1): 1—40.

King, I. and D. Ferguson (1993), “Dynamic Ineﬃciency, Endogenous Growth, and Ponzi
    games,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 32(1): 79—104.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997), “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2):
    211—248.

                       (2008), “Liquidity, Business Cycles and Monetary Policy,” mimeo.

Kocherlakota, N. (2009), “Bursting Bubbles: Consequences and Cures,” mimeo, University
    of Minnesota.

Lagos, R., and R. Wright (2005) “A Unified Framework for Monetary Theory and Policy
    Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(3): 463—484.

Olivier, J. (2000), “Growth-Enhancing Bubbles,” International Economic Review, 41(1):
    133—151.

                                           38
Nosal, E. and G. Rocheteau (2010), A Search Approach to Money, Payments, and Liquidity,
    forthcoming in MIT Press.

Rocheteau, G. and R. Wright (2005), “Money in Search Equilibrium, in Competitive Equi-
    librium, and in Competitive Search Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 73: 175—202.

Rocheteau, G. and R. Wright (2010), “Liquidity and Asset Market Dynamics,” mimeo,
    University of California-Irvine and University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Saint Paul, G. (1992), “Fiscal Policy in an Endogenous Growth Model,” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 107(4): 1243—1260.

–––- (2005), “Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth: The Role of Financial Intermedia-
  tion,” Review of International Economics, 13(3): 612—629.

Santos, M.S. and M. Woodford (1997), “Rational Asset Pricing Bubbles,” Econometrica,
    65(1): 19—58.

Scheinkman, J., and W. Xiong (2003). “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles,” Journal
    of Political Economy 111(6): 1183—1220.

Tirole, J. (1985), “Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,” Econometrica, 53(6):
    1499—1528.

–––- (2006), The Theory of Corporate Finance, Princeton University Press.

US Treasury (2009), “Financial Regulatory Reform : A New Foundation”, June 17.

Ventura, J. (2003), “Bubbles and Capital Flows,” CEPR discussion paper #3657.

Wallace, N. (1980), “The Overlapping Generations Model of Fiat Money,” Models of Mon-
    etary Economies, ed. by J. Kareken and N. Wallace, Federal Reserve Bank of Min-
    neapolis.

Weil, P. (1987), “Confidence and the Real Value of Money in an Overlapping Generations
    Economy,” Quarterly Journal of Econmics, 102: 1—22.

Williamson, S. and R. Wright (2010), “New Monetarist Economics: Models,” forthcoming
     in Handbook of Monetary Economics.

Woodford, M. (1990), “Public Debt as Private Liquidity,” American Economic Review
   80(2): 382—388.

                                         39
   Appendix
A.1 Proofs for Section II
   Although we focus on the case  ≥ 0 in the text, the derivations in this Appendix A1 are also
valid when   0. We make use of some of these results when we turn to the case   0 in Section
V.1.


      Derivation of the closed-form expressions for the policy functions Φ , Φ and Φ in the
bubble-free case. Assume that  = 0. The system of two equations (2,3) in the two unkowns
(  +1 ) can be solved as follows. Using equation (3) to find an expression for +1 and replacing
this expression in equation (2), we are led to the following a quadratic equation:
                                ∙                µ       ¶¸
                                                   1            ( + 0 −1 )
                         2   −  + 0 −1 −       − 1  −                                              (12)
                                                   0                0

Given a solution to this equation, we can then compute the associated interest rate 1 + +1 =
(0  + ) . The only solution of equation (12) with  ≥ 0 and an associated interest rate such
that 1 + +1 ≥ 0 is given by:

                              ³           ´   rh             ³      ´ i2
                                   1
               + 0 −1 −        0
                                        −1 +    + 0 −1 − 1 − 1  + 4  ( + 0 −1 )
                                                                            0                   0
        =                                                                                                 (13)
                                                                 2

Using the asset demand equation (3) we can compute the associated interest rate:

                              ³                   ´      rh             ³     ´ i2
                                             1
                  + 0 −1 + 1 +           0
                                                      +    + 0 −1 −  − 1  + 4  ( + 0 −1 )
                                                                          1
                                                                                0                   0
 1++1 = 0                                                                                                 (14)
                                                              2 ( −  )




   Derivation of the bubble-free steady state. A steady state (∗  ∗ ) of the bubble-free economy
solves
                                          + 0 ∗                           (1 + ∗ ) − 
                               ∗ =           0           and       ∗ =                   
                                         1 − 1+ ∗                                0
This yields the following quadratic equation in ∗ :
                                          ∙       µ      ¶ ¸
                              ∗2                    1 ∗       2
                           (1 − 0 ) −   +  −      −1  −    = 0                                        (15)
                                                    0        0


                                                              40
This equation has two solutions. When  6= 0, one of these solutions is strictly negative, and the
other one is strictly positive. The strictly positive solution is given by:

                                 ³          ´   rh         ³      ´ i2
                                     1                                     2
                     ( + ) −       0
                                          −1 +   ( + ) − 1 − 1  + 4  (1 − 0 )
                                                                             0            0
                ∗
                =                                                                                         (16)
                                                          2 (1 − 0 )

Using 1 + ∗ = (0 ∗ + ) , we can compute the associated interest rate ∗ :
                                                 rh         ³      ´ i2
                                                                           2
                                 +       0
                                               +   ( + ) − 1 − 1  + 4  (1 − 0 )
                                                                     0            0
                           ∗
                    1 +  = 0                                                                             (17)
                                                            2 (1 − 0 )

When  = 0, we have 1 + ∗ = 0  (1 − 0 )  0 . When   0 we have 1 + ∗  0  (1 − 0 ).
This is obvious when from the equation ∗ =  (1 − 0 − 0  (1 + ∗ )).21

       With  = 0, the second solution of equation (16) features positive (in fact zero) investment. It
is given by
                                                          ∗ = 0

and
                                                       1 + ∗ = 0

However, this does not correspond to a competitive equilibrium (which requires 1 + ∗ ≥ 0 ).


   Proof of Proposition 1. We know that the steady state is the unique intersection of the
function  → Φ ( 0) with the identity function  →  on [0 ∞). We can compute
                                                            rn             o2
                                                                                  2
                                      − [ 1       − 1] +    − [  − 1] + 4 
                                                                    1
                                                0                        0            0
                       
                      Φ (0 0) =                                                           0
                                                                 2

Similarly
                                                       0
                                                    Φ ( 0) ∼→∞
                                                          
                                                        2
This ensures that Φ ( 0)   for  low enough and Φ ( 0)   for  high enough. Since there is
  21
    Note that the analysis extends to the case   0. In this case, the function
                                                                              ³       [1´− 0  (1 + ∗ ) − 0 ]
                                                                                    0
is convex and increasing.           It increases from −0 to +∞ on 0  1−          0
                                                                                           .    The function
         ∗
    ³ +  ) −´] 0 is linear and increasing. It increases from ³ −  0 
[ (1                                                                         ´ −0 to  (1 − 0 ) − 0
           0                                                            0
on 0  1−   0
                . The   unique  intersection of these functions on 0  1−
                                                                            0
                                                                                is given by (16) and (17).
                             ∗
Hence 0  (1 − 0 )  1 +   0 .


                                                            41
a unique positive solution to Φ ( 0) = , this proves that Φ ( 0)   for   ∗ and Φ ( 0)  
for   ∗ . Since in addition, Φ ( 0) is increasing in , we have that ∗  Φ ( 0)   for   ∗
and ∗  Φ ( 0)   for   ∗ . This ensures that this steady state is stable.


   Proof that ∗ increases with . We have

                      ∗                        (1 + ∗ ) − 0
                          =                    q                              0
                                                         2
                                   2 (1 − 0 ) [0 + ] − 4 (1 − 0 ) 0



A.2 Proofs for Section III
   Although we focus on the case  ≥ 0 in the text, the derviations in this Appendix A2 are also
valid when   0, except for the proof of Proposition 3 which is specific to the case  ≥ 0. We
make use of some of these results when we turn to the case   0 in Section V.1.


    Derivation of the closed-form expressions for the policy functions Φ , Φ and Φ . The
system of two equations (2,3) in the two unkowns (  +1 ) can be solved as follows. Using equation
(3) to find an expression for +1 and replacing this expression in equation (2), we are led to the
following a quadratic equation:
                            ∙                µ       ¶¸
                                               1            ( +  + 0 −1 )
                     2   −  + 0 −1 −       − 1  −                                          (18)
                                               0                   0

Given a solution to this equation, we can then compute the associated interest rate 1 + +1 =
(0  + )  ( −  ). When  ≥ 0    is a necessary condition for equilibrium. When   0
we can have    or  ≥ . Assume first that   . Then the only solution of equation (12)
with  ≥ 0 and an associated interest rate such that 1 + +1 ≥ 0 is given by:

                         ³          ´   rh             ³      ´ i2
                             1
          + 0 −1 −       0
                                  −1 +    + 0 −1 − 1 − 1  + 4  ( +  + 0 −1 )
                                                                    0            0
   =                                                                                              (19)
                                                          2

Using the asset demand equation (3) we can compute the associated interest rate:

                             ³                ´      rh             ³     ´ i2
                                         1
                 + 0 −1 + 1 +        0
                                                  +    + 0 −1 −  − 1  + 4  ( +  + 0 −1 )
                                                                      1
                                                                             0        0
1 + +1 = 0                                                                                             
                                                               2 ( −  )
                                                                                                     (20)


                                                          42
We now need to consider the case where   0 and  ≥ . In this case, there is a solution to the
quadractic equation (12) with  ≥ 0 and 1 + +1 ≥ 0 if and only if
                        ∙              µ       ¶ ¸2
                                         1            
                          + 0 −1 −      − 1  + 4 ( +  + 0 −1 ) ≥ 0
                                         0          0

and
                                                        
                                             −  −        +  + 0 −1 
                                                       0
When these conditions hold, (19) and (20) still represent one solution with  ≥ 0 and 1 + +1 ≥
0 22 , but there is now another solution given by

                               ³          ´   rh              ³      ´ i2
                                   1
                + 0 −1 −       0
                                        −1 −     + 0 −1 − 1 − 1  + 4  ( +  + 0 −1 )
                                                                         0            0
         =
                                                                2

and 1++1 = (0  + )  ( −  ). We argue that this solution has undesirable characteristics and
focus on the solution given by equation (19) and (20). Our motivation is that the other intersection
displays perverse comparative statics: it has the unnatural feature that an upward shift in the asset
demand curve leads to a decrease in −1 and a decrease in the price 1 (1 + +1 ). This is because
this solution corresponds to a point where the asset demand curve crosses the asset supply curve
from above at the intersection with the lowest value of  . By contrast, the asset demand curve
crosses the asset supply curve from below at the solution given by (19) and (20).


       Derivation of the  = −1 and +1 =  schedules. Imposing  = −1 in equation (2) we
find                                          µ                      ¶
                                                             0
                                          −1 1 − 0 −                  =  +                        (21)
                                                          1 + +1
Using equation (3), we can replace 1 (1 + +1 ) in equation (21) by

                                                   1          − 
                                                         =             
                                                1 + +1    + 0 −1
  22
    In the particular case where  = , equation (19) gives  = −0 . Both the numerator and the
denominator in expression for 1 + +1 in equation (20) are zero. The value of the interest rate is not pinned
down by this equation. In this case, the value of the interest rate can be inferred from the asset supply
equation
                                           0                         − 
                                                                            0
                       1 + +1 =                          = 0                         
                                   − ( +  + 0 −1 )     −  − ( +  + 0 −1 )
                                                                         0




                                                           43
This yields to the following equation for the  = −1 schedule:
                                                        ∙  µ      ¶ ¸
                                               0 −1        1
                       =   2−1 0(1 − 0 ) −          + 2−      − 
                                                             0

   Imposing +1 = 0 in equation (2), we find

                                                 +  + 0 −1
                                          =                                                 (22)
                                                    1 − 0

   Imposing +1 = 0 in equation (3) and imposing +1 = 0, we find

                                           =  + 0  +  


   Using equation (22) to replace  this expression can be rearranged as follows


                                 = −20 −1 + (1 − 0 ) ( − ) − 0 

yielding the desired equation for the +1 =  schedule.


   A useful Lemma.


Lemma 2 The interest rate +1 = Φ (−1   ) is increasing in −1 and  .


   The proof of this lemma is as follows. In the derivation of the closed-form expressions for the
policy functions Φ , Φ and Φ we proved the following: at the solution given by (19) and (20), the
asset demand curve (3) crosses the asset supply curve (2) from below. Moreover, the asset supply
curve is downward sloping. Since increases in −1 shift the asset supply curve upwards without
aﬀecting the asset demand curve. Increases in  shift the asset supply curve upwards and the asset
deman curve downwards. In both cases, the interest rate +1 increases.


    Proof of Lemmas 1 (and 3 below). The properties of the interest rate +1 = Φ (−1   ) are
a direct consequence of Lemma 2. Let us turn to the properties of investment  = Φ (−1   ).
We can solve for investment  as a function of −1 and  :




                                                    44
                                         + 0 −1 + [1 − 1 ]+
                            rn                        o2
                                                             0


                               + 0 −1 + [1 − 1 ] + 4  [ +  + 0 −1 ]
                                                       0            0
                      =
                                                           2
From this expression, it is clear that  is increasing in −1 and  if   0 and decreases with  if
  0 The other results follow directly from these properties of Φ and Φ .

   Proof of Proposition 3. The  = −1 schedule is given by
                                                             ∙  µ      ¶ ¸
                                                    0 −1        1
                     
                     (−1 ) =   2−1 0(1 − 0 ) −          + 2−      − 
                                                                  0

The  = +1 schedule is given by


                                       = −20 −1 + (1 − 0 )  − 

   The function  (−1 ) is a parabola. We have  (0) = −  0. The function  (−1 ) is strictly
negative on [0 ∗ ) It is strictly positive and strictly increasing on (∗  +∞).

   The function  (−1 ) is linear and decreasing. We have  (0) = (1 − 0 )  −   0 from
the bubble existence condition. The unique positive solution of  (−1 ) =  (−1 ) is the bubbly
steady state ∗∗ and  (∗∗ ) =  (∗∗ ) = ∗∗  0. As a result, we necessarily have ∗∗  ∗ . Since
 (−1 ) is decreasing, we have  (∗ )  0. As a result, 1 + ∗  1 or equivalently, ∗  0. This
proves the first part of the proposition.

   Consider two competitive equilibria {     } and {0  0  0 } such that −1 = 0−1 and 00  0 .
Using Lemma 1, it follows that 01  1 and 01  1 . By induction, we have 0   and 0   for
all . This also implies 0   for all . This proves the second part of the proposition.

   Consider the region  ≥ 0 and −1  0. The curves  (−1 ) and  (−1 ) divide this region
into four subregions. We call region A the set

                  ©                                   ©              ª            ª
                   (−1   ) | (−1 ) ≥  ≥ max  (−1 )  0 and −1  0 

We call region B the set

                   ©                  ©                       ª                     ª
                    (−1   ) | min  (−1 )   (−1 )   ≥ 0 and −1  0 



                                                      45
We call region C the set

                 ©                                   ©              ª            ª
                  (−1   ) | (−1 ) ≥  ≥ max  (−1 )  0 and −1  0 

We call region D the set

                   ©                      ©                       ª            ª
                    (−1   ) |  max  (−1 )   (−1 ) and −1  0 

It will prove useful to subdivide region B into regions B1 and B2. Region B1 is the set

              ©                  ©                       ª                           ª
               (−1   ) | min  (−1 )   (−1 )   ≥ 0 and ∗∗ ≥ −1  0 

Region B2 is the set

                ©                  ©                       ª                       ª
                 (−1   ) | min  (−1 )   (−1 )   ≥ 0 and −1  ∗∗ 

We will also subdivide region D into regions D1 and D2. Region D1 is the set

                ©                      ©                       ª                  ª
                 (−1   ) |  max  (−1 )   (−1 ) and ∗∗  −1  0 

Region D2 is the set

                  ©                      ©                       ª              ª
                   (−1   ) |  max  (−1 )   (−1 ) and −1 ≥ ∗∗ 




           Figure 5: regions in the phase diagram with positive outside liquidity.

   Consider a point (−1    ) in region A. Then  ≤  (−1 ). Using Lemma 1, we conclude that


                                                 46
         ¡               ¢                                 ¡             ¢
 ≤ Φ −1   (−1 ) . It is easy to check that Φ −1   (−1 ) = 0 −1 + . Therefore, we
get  ≤ 0 ∗∗ +  = ∗∗ . Hence (  +1 ) is either in region A, in region B1 or in region D1.
                                                                                          ¡                ¢
     Consider a point (−1    ) in region C. Using Lemma 1, we conclude that  ≥ Φ −1   (−1 ) =
0 −1 +  ≥ 0 ∗∗ +  = ∗∗ . Hence (  +1 ) is either in region C, in region B2 or in region D2.
    Consider a point (−1   ) in region B with   0. We show that (−1   ) is part of a
competitive equilibrium, and that this equilibrium converges to the bubble-free steady state (∗  0).
Using Lemma 1, we have +1   and   −1 . Hence (  +1 ) is etiher in region B or in
region A with +1    ∗∗ . It is then clear that for all  ≥ 0, (−1+  + ) is in region
B or in region A and satisfies +  +−1      ∗∗  The economy is eventually in
region B1 or in region A. This follows because if (−1+  + ) is in region  with + ≤ ∗∗
or in region B1, then so will be (−1+0  +0 ) for all 0 ≥ . The only other possibility is that
(−1+  + ) is in region B2 for all  ≥ 0. But this would imply that −1      −1+
and +  +−1     , which implies that (−1+  + ) converges. The convergence point
is necessarily a steady state, but there are no steady states in region B2, a contradiction. Hence,
for  high enough, we have + ≤ ∗∗ . But then since +   , we have, using Lemma 1 that
++1  Φ (∗∗   )  Φ (∗∗  ∗∗ ) = ∗∗ = 0. This in turn implies that the bubble + converges
                                                                  ¡       ¢
to 0 when  goes to ∞. Consider the equilibrium starting at 0−1  0 with 0−1 = −1 and 0 = 0.
We know that investment 0−1+ converges monotonically to ∗ . Hence 0−1+ ≥ min {∗∗  −1 }.
Using Lemma 1, we have −1+  0−1+ ≥ min {∗∗  −1 }. This implies that the sequence
{−1+ }≥0 is bounded. Together with the fact that + converges to 0, this implies that the
competitive equilibrium starting at (−1   ) converges to the bubble-free steady state (∗  0).

    This proof also establishes that a point (−1   ) in region A with   ∗∗ is part of a compet-
itive equilibrium, and that this equilibrium converges to the bubble-free steady state (∗  0).

    We show that a point (−1    ) in region D cannot be part of an equilibrium. Suppose by
contradiction that this point is reached in a competitive equilibrium. Using Lemma 1, we have
+1   and   −1 . Hence (  +1 ) is etiher in region D or in region C. Since +1 
  ∗∗ , it is clear that for all  ≥ 0, (−1+  + ) is in region D or in region C and satisfies
+  +−1      ∗∗ . The economy is eventually in region D2 or in region C. This follows
because if (−1+  + ) is in region C with +  ∗∗ or in region D2, then so will be (−1+0  +0 )
for all 0 ≥ . The only other possibility is that (−1+  + ) is in region D1 for all  ≥ 0. But
this would imply that −1      −1+ ≤ ∗∗ and  ≥ +  +−1     , which
implies that (−1+  + ) converges. The convergence point is necessarily a steady state, but there
are no steady states in region D1, a contradiction. Hence, for  high enough, we have + ≥ ∗∗ .



                                                     47
But then since +   , we have, using Lemma 1 ++1  Φ (∗∗   )  Φ (∗∗  ∗∗ ) = ∗∗ = 0.
This in turn implies that the bubble + eventually reaches , which is impossible in a competitive
equilibrium, a contradiction.

    This proof also establishes that a point (−1   ) in region C with   ∗∗ cannot be part of
an equilibrium.

    Consider a point in region (−1   ) in region A with  ≥ ∗∗ . Suppose that (−1   ) is part
of a competitive equilibrium that does not converge to the bubble-free steady state (∗  0). We
claim that the competitive equilibrium converges to the bubbly steady state (∗∗  ∗∗ ). Indeed, it
is necessarily the case that (−1+  + ) is in region A for all  ≥ 0. This implies that ∗∗ ≥
                                                                                                          ∗∗
−1+ ≥ −1+−1 ≥  ≥ −1 and 0 ≤ + ≤ +−1     ³ ≤´ ≤  . Hence
                                                                            ³ there´ exists ̃ ∈ [−1   ]
and ̃ ∈ [0  ] such that (−1+  + ) converges to ̃ ̃ . Moreover, ̃ ̃ is necessarily a steady
                                                                                      ³ ´
state. Since the economy is not converging to (  0) by assumption, we have ̃ ̃ = (∗∗  ∗∗ ) so
                                                      ∗

that the economy converges to the bubbly steady state.

    Similarly, consider a point in region (−1    ) in region C with  ≤ ∗∗ . Suppose that (−1   )
is part of a competitive equilibrium that does not converge to the bubble-free steady state (∗  0).
We claim that the competitive equilibrium converges to the bubbly steady state (∗∗  ∗∗ ). Indeed,
it is necessarily the case that (−1+  + ) is in region C for all  ≥ 0. This implies that ∗∗ ≤
−1+ ≤ −1+−1 ≤  ≤ −1 and ∗∗ ≥ + ≥ +−1    ³ ≥´  ≥  . Hence
                                                                             ³ there
                                                                                                     ∗∗
                                                                                    ´ exists ̃ ∈ [  −1 ]
and ̃ ∈ [0 ∗∗ ] such that (−1+  + ) converges to ̃ ̃ . Moreover, ̃ ̃ is necessarily a steady
                                                                                      ³ ´
state. Since the economy is not converging to (∗  0) by assumption, we have ̃ ̃ = (∗∗  ∗∗ ) so
that the economy converges to the bubbly steady state.

    Collecting our results, we have proved that if (−1   ) is part of a competitive equilibrium,
then (−1+  + ) converges over time, either to (∗  0) or to (∗∗  ∗∗ ).

    We now prove that for every −1  0, if (−1   ) is part of a competitive equilibrium, then
for all 0   , (−1  0 ) is part of a competitive equilibrium that converges to (∗  0). We know
that (−1+  + ) converges over time, either to (∗  0) or to (∗∗  ∗∗ )  Using Lemma 1 we know
                            0
that for all  ≥ 0, +  + and 0+  + . This implies that 0+   for all  ≥ 0 so that
(−1  0 ) is part of a competitive equilibrium. It therefore converges either to (∗  0) or to (∗∗  ∗∗ ).
                                                             0
Using Lemma 1 we know that for all  ≥ 0, +  +           . Hence lim→∞ 0+  (0  ) ∗∗  ∗∗ .
Hence (−1  0 ) is part of a competitive equilibrium that converges to (∗  0).

    We now prove that for every −1  0, the set of  such that (−1   ) is part of a competitive
equilibrium that converges to the bubble-free steady state (∗  0) is open to the right and contains


                                                       48
a neighborhood of of 0. The competitive equilibrium starting at (−1  0) converges to (∗  0). Let
Γ be a neighborhood of (∗  0) such that every point ( ) in Γ is either in region A or B and
satisfies   ∗∗ . Then there exists ̄  0 such that for  ≥ ̄, the competitive equilibrium starting
at (−1  0) lies in Γ. We can find   0 such that if    , the competitive equilibrium starting
at (−1   ) is such that (−1+̄  +̄ ) is in Γ. But then we know that it converges to (∗  0). This
proves that the set of  such that (−1   ) is part of a competitive equilibrium that converges
to the bubble-free steady state contains a neighborhood of of 0 Now consider   0 such that
(−1   ) is part of a competitive equilibrium that converges to the bubble-free steady state. Then
there exists ̄  0 such that for  ≥ ̄, the competitive equilibrium starting at (−1   ) lies in Γ.
We can find   0 such that if 0   +  , the competitive equilibrium starting at (−1  0 ) lies
is in Γ at date  + ̄. But then we know that it converges to (∗  0). This proves that the set of
 such that (−1   ) is part of a competitive equilibrium that converges to the bubble-free steady
state is open to the right.

    We now prove that for every −1  0, the set of  such that (−1   ) is part of a competitive
equilibrium is closed to the right. Consider an increasing and strictly positive sequence { }≥0 with
                                                                                 ¡          ¢
lim→∞ + =  , such that there exists a competitive equilibrium starting at −1   with −1 =
−1 . Using Lemma 1, we know that +−1 ≥ −1                 0              −1             0
                                                 +−1 ≥  ≥ +−1 , + ≥ + ≥  ≥ + and
            −1            0
++1  ≥ ++1  ≥  ≥ ++1 . We claim that for every  ≥ 0, lim→∞ +  . If not, then
           
                                                 £¡          ¢¡          ¢ ¡             ¢¤ ¡            ¢
lim→∞ ++1    = +∞. But then ++1 ≥ 0 1 + +1    0          0
                                                                1 + +2            0
                                                                            1 + +             
                                                                                              1 + ++1
so that lim→∞ ++1 = +∞, and hence ++1 exceeds  for some , a contradiction. We can
now define for all  ≥ 0, +−1 = lim→∞ +−1 , + = lim→∞ + and + = lim→∞ +        
                                                                                                         .
This constitutes a competitive equilibrium.

    Collecting our results, we know that for every −1  0, the set of  such that (−1   ) is part
                                                                                               £           ¤
of a competitive equilibrium is a closed interval with non-empty interior of the form 0 ̄ (−1 ) .
For  ∈ [0 ̄ (−1 )), the competitive equilibrium starting at (−1   ) converges either to (∗  0).
Since the set of  such that that (−1   ) is part of a competitive equilibrium that converges to
                              ¡                 ¢
(∗  0) is open to the right, −1  ̄ (−1 ) cannot converge to (∗  0). It therefore converges to
(∗∗  ∗∗ ).
    In addition we know that ̄ (−1 ) ≥ ∗∗ for −1  ∗∗ and ̄ (−1 ) ≤ ∗∗ for −1  ∗∗ .
                               ¡              ¢      ¡    ¡              ¢¢
Moreover we know that Φ ̄ (−1 )  −1 = ̄ Φ ̄ (−1 )  −1       . We now claim that ̄ (−1 )
is decreasing in −1 . Towards a contradiction, suppose that there exists 0−1  −1 with 0 =
  ¡     ¢                                                                         0
̄ 0−1 ≥  = ̄ (−1 ). Then using Lemma 1, we can infer that 0+               .
                                                                                   +
                                                                                            This contradicts
lim→∞ 0+ = lim→∞ + = ∗∗ .



                                                     49
       Combining these results yields Proposition 3.


     Proof of Proposition 4. Denote by −2 the resources consumed by entrepreneurs of generation
−2 in their old age at time , and denote by −2 the resources transferred to the original holders of
                                                              ©                     ª
trees in period  Suppose first that 1  1 If an allocation ∗−2  ∗−2  ∗−2 ≥0 solves the following
                                          ©               ª
program for some set of Pareto weights (−2  −2 ) ≥0 , then it is dynamically eﬃcient:

                                                          X
                                                          ∞
                                        max                     −2 −2 + −2 −2                   (23)
                                 {−2 −2 −2 }≥0
                                                          =0

s.t.
                                   −2 + −2 + −1 ≤ 1 −2 +  + 

                                                      −2 = ̄∗−2

                                                          −2 ≥ 0

                                                          −2 ≥ 0

It is important to emphasize that this program abstracts from pledgeability constraints. Assuming
that the positivity constraints are not binding, a necessary and suﬃcient condition is that for all
 ≥ 0 the resource constraint holds with equality and

                                            −2 = −2 = −
                                                           1 −2                                       (24)

Moreover, with Pareto weights chosen as in (24), the objective function in the planning problem is
well defined and the maximum is finite. Since all our competitive equilibria satisfy the constraints
of the planning problem with equality, the corresponding allocations are solutions of the planning
problem, and are therefore dynamically eﬃcient.
                                © ∗                  ª
       Consider an allocation    −2  ∗−2  ∗−2 ≥0 . If this allocation does not solve the following
planning problem, then it is not constrained dynamically eﬃcient:

                                                          max           −2                             (25)
                                               {−2 −2 −2 }≥0


s.t.
                                           −2 ≥ ∗−2 for all  ≥ 1

                                                    −2 ≥ ∗−2


                                                            50
                                −2 + −2 + −1 ≤ 1 −2 +  + 

                                        −2 ≥ (1 − 0 ) −2

                                              −2 = ̄−2

                                               −2 ≥ 0

                                               −2 ≥ 0

Note that this constrained social planning problem (25) incorporates pledgeability constraints
−2 ≥ (1 − 0 ) −2 .
                                                                                  ©                   ª
    Suppose now that 1  1 and consider a competitive equilibrium allocation ∗−2  ∗−2  ∗−2   ≥0
such that investment is strictly positive in every period (this is the case in every competitive equi-
librium). We reduce investment −1 in period 0 by  and give the freed resources to the old
entrepreneurs of generation −2 Resources available at date 1 have decreased by 1  Correspond-
ingly, we reduce investment in period 1 by 1  Resources available at date 2 have decreased by
21  Correspondingly, we reduce investment in period 2 by 21  We keep doing this ad infinitum:
we reduce investment in period  by 1 . The corresponding allocation is resource feasible, satisfies
the pledgeability constraints, and all agents are exactly as well oﬀ except for the old entrepreneurs
                                                © ∗                  ª
of generation −2 who are better oﬀ. Hence        −2  ∗−2  ∗−2 ≥0 does not solve the constrained
social planning problem (25) and is therefore not constrained dynamically eﬃcient.


    Proof of Proposition 5. The proposition is a direct consequence of expression (17) for ∗
derived in appendix A1.


A.3 Relationship with Woodford (1990)
    In this appendix, we clarify the relationship of our model with that of Woodford (1990). We
show that the mechanism by which bubbles aﬀect investment is quite diﬀerent in our model and in
Woodford’s model.

    Our model is closest to Woodford’s in a particular case of ours, when 0 = 0 and  = 0 We by
no means imply that this particular case is exactly the model he analyzed. There are important
diﬀerences. Notably in his model, preferences are not linear, production functions are concave,
and agents are infinitely lived. In particular, the discontinuity that we emphasize below in our
version of Woodford’s model would not occur in his model. Nonetheless, these results are useful to
emphasize how diﬀerent the mechanisms by which bubbles aﬀect investment are in our model and
in his.

                                                  51
       When 0 = 0 and  = 0, in the absence of a bubble, there are no stores of value. As a
consequence, in the bubble-free steady state (there is no transitional dynamics), investment  ∗ is
equal to 0: (i) the returns to investment are entirely non-pledgeable so that no outside funds can
be raised in the intermediate period; (ii) there is no way for the entrepreneurs to transfer funds
from the early period to the intermediate period. The implicit interest rate is 1 +  ∗ = 0 By
contrast, in the bubbly steady state,  ∗∗ =  and the interest rate is 1 +  ∗∗ = 1 The bubble
size  ∗∗ is commensurate to the amount of wealth that entrepreneurs have in the early period of
their life:  ∗∗ =  The bubble provides stores of value and allows the entrepreneurs to transfer
their funds to the intermediate period of their life where they can invest. The bubble simply allows
diﬀerent generations to realize some trades that were impossible in its absence: they now have an
asset that they can pass on to each other.

       Consider now our model when 0  0 We maintain the assumption that  = 0 In the bubble-
                                                         0
free steady state, we have ∗ =    1−0
                                          and 1 + ∗ =   1−0
                                                                 If 1 + ∗  1 there is also a bubbly steady
                                               
state where investment is given by ∗∗ =      1−0
                                                     and 1 + ∗∗ = 1 Note that we have ∗∗ = ∗ . Hence,
bubbles have no eﬀect on investment: in contrast with both Woodford’s model and our version of
it where bubbles crowd investment in, there is neither crowding in nor crowding out in our model
when 0  0 and  = 0.

       Recall that our intuition is that the eﬀect of bubbles on investment can be understood as follows:
bubbles raise the interest rate and therefore crowd investment in if outside liquidity is positive. In
considering the case  = 0 we have essentially gotten rid of the consumers sector. That in this
context, bubbles have no eﬀect on investment is therefore consistent with our intuition.23

       With  = 0, steady state investment at the bubble-free steady state is discountinuous at 0 = 0
By contrast, investment at the bubbly steady state is continuous at 0 = 0. Both in Woodford’s
model and in our version of it, bubbles systematically crowd investment in, even when  = 0 When
0  0 this direct eﬀect disappears and bubbles have no eﬀect on investment when  = 0
       We have restricted our discussion to the case  = 0. Note for completeness that investment
and interest rates in all the steady states that we consider in this section (both with 0  0 and
0 = 0) are continuous in .

A.4 Proofs for Section V.1
       In this Appendix A4, we make use of some the results we established for the case   0 in
Appendices A1 and A2 to prove the results in Section V.1.
  23
    For crowding in to occur in Woodford’s model, in addition, there needs to be suﬃcient intertemporal
substituability in consumption.

                                                      52
    Proof of Proposition 9. Define ˜ ≡ − The ̃ and ̃ schedules are now
                                                        "                   #
                                        1 2     0 −1                  ˜
                      = − (1 − 0 ) 0 −1 +           + (1 − 20 )       + ˜
                                        ˜         ˜                   0

and
                                      = −20 −1 + (1 − 0 )  + ˜

Investment is given by the following equation

                                          1
                                             (1 − 0 ) ˜ + 0 −1 + +
                          r              0
                                                                      h                 i
                           [ 1 (1 − 0 ) ˜ + 0 −1 + ]2 − 4 1 ˜  + 0 −1 − ˜
                              0                                         0
                    =
                                                           2

    We have  (0) = −  0 and  (0) = (1 − 0 ) ( − ) As long as (B) holds,  (0)  0. There
are two intersections of the functions  (−1 ) and  (−1 ) given by

                                                      
                                               1 =
                                                    1 − 0
                                                    1 − 0 ˜
                                               2 =        
                                                      0

Condition (11) guarantees that 2  1 

    We have
                                            ̃ (−1 ) ≥ ̃ (−1 )

                     [2  1 ]. Moreover, the function  (−1 ) reaches its maximum to the left of 1 so
if and only if −1 ∈
that  (−1 )is decreasing for −1 ≥ 1 (it decreases to −∞ as −1 goes to +∞). The bubble-free
steady state ∗ is given by  (∗ ) = 0. We necessarily have ∗  1 .

    A phase diagram analysis based on the lemma below shows that the bubbly steady state corre-
sponding to 1 is saddle path stable, while that corresponding to 2 is unstable.

Lemma 3 The interest rate +1 = Φ (−1   ) is increasing in −1 and  . Investment  =
Φ (−1   ) decreases with the state variable  . Investment  = Φ (−1   ) is greater (smaller)
than −1 if and only if  is smaller (greater) than  (−1 ). The bubble  = Φ (−1   ) is greater
(smaller) than −1 if and only if  is greater (smaller) than  (−1 ).

    The intuition for this lemma is simple: the presence of the bubble lowers the price of outside

                                                      53
liquidity, or in other words, increases the interest rate. Since entrepreneurs are now net suppliers
of liquidity, this decreases corporate net worth and investment.


    Proof of Remark 2 . Here we extend the results of the model to the case where entrepreneurs
have flexibility in their savings/dissavings choices. We show that our main results generalize. Once
we allow for flexibility in the entrepreneurs savings/dissavings choices, it is still true that bubbles
boost investment when outside liquidity  exceeds some threshold, this threshold need not be equal
to zero. By studying two examples, we now show that the threshold may indeed be positive or
negative.


    Example: log preferences. Suppose that entrepreneurs have utility from consumption vector
(    0 ) in the three periods of their life:

                                      = log  +  log  +  2 log 0 

Let  denote their endowment when young. The rates of return on generation-’s savings when
young is 1 +  ; the rate of return on their investment when credit-constrained at  + 1 is

                                                              1 − 0
                                            1 + ̂+1 =                   
                                                             1 − 1+0+1

Optimal saving behavior implies that they save

                                                          + 2
                                               ≡                 
                                                       1 +  + 2

when young. When middle aged, they contemplate consumptions:
                         µ                        ¶                             µ                 ¶
                                        0                         0                     0
          = (1 +  ) − 1 −                             and  = (1 + ̂+1 ) 1 −                   
                                      1 + +1                                         1 + +1

The asset supply and asset demand equations become respectively

                                                               +  + 0 −1
                                    (−1  +1 ) =
                                                           1 +  1 − 1+0+1

and
                                               (1 + +1 ) −  −  (1 + +1 )
                                (+1 ) ≡                                      
                                                             0



                                                            54
The condition for a bubble to exist becomes
                                                  ³              ´
                                                            
                                            1 − 0 1 +     1+           
                                                                                                 (Biv )
                                                  1 − 0                 

The analysis of the steady states and the dynamics of the economy is very similar to Section III.
It is omitted for conciseness. Instead,we focus on one important object that behaves diﬀerently in
this setup: the conditions under which bubbles increase investment. We find it most illustrative to
focus on steady states and characterize the threshold for outside liquidity above which investment
is higher at the bubbly steady state than at the bubble-free steady state.


Proposition 11 Suppose that preferences are log and that (Biv ) holds. Then there exists a thresh-
old 0  0 such that for   0  investment at the bubbly steady state is higher than at the bubble-free
steady state ∗∗  ∗ and for   0  investment at the bubbly steady state is lower than at the bubble-
free steady state ∗∗  ∗ 


   Proof. Let  =  (1 + )  Investment in the bubbly steady state is given by

                                                           
                                                 ∗∗ =
                                                         1 − 0

and investment in the bubble-free steady state is given by
                                          q
                    0  −  (1 − 20 ) + [0  −  (1 − 20 )]2 + 42 0 (1 − 0 )
             ∗ =
                                                    20 (1 − 0 )

and the interest rate is
                                            q
                               0  +  +    [0  −  (1 − 20 )]2 + 42 0 (1 − 0 )
                1 + ∗ =                                                                    
                                                      2 (1 − 0 )

It can be verified that (Biv ) is equivalent to ∗  0.

   After a few manipulations, it can be verified that ∗∗  ∗ if and only if
                                                 ∙             ¸
                           21 − 20        0      1 − 0
                         −           −                  − 1 2  0
                             1 − 0       1 − 0     1 − 0




                                                       55
Together with condition (Biv ), this is equivalent to  ∈ [0  1 ] where
                                             r³            ´2
                                1−20            1−20
                                 1−0
                                         −         1−0
                                                                − 40 (1 − ) 1−1−
                                                                                  0 (1+)
                                                                                     0
                     0 = 
                                             r³                 2
                                                           ´2
                                1−20            1−20
                                 1−0
                                         +         1−0
                                                                − 40 (1 − ) 1−1−
                                                                                  0 (1+)
                                                                                     0
                     1 =                                                                  
                                                                2

It can be shown that as long as (Biv ) holds, 0  0 and   1 

    Some intuition can be given along the following lines. Let us compare log preferences with the
preferences used in Section III for any given level of outside liquidity  Since now only a fraction
 (1 + ) of middle-aged wealth is spent on investment by entrepreneurs, the liquidity eﬀect of
bubbles through the impact of increased interest rates on internal funds is mitigated. On the other
hand, the leverage eﬀect through the impact of increased interest rates on leverage is unaﬀected.

    Example: linear-log preferences. We now sketch a specification of preferences for which even
for  = 0 investment at the bubbly steady state is higher than at the bubble-free steady state. We
take
                                                            1                    
                             =  + ̃ [ (1 + )] 1+ [ (1 + ) ] 1+

and refer to these preferences as linear-log. Linear-log preferences lead to the same asset supply
and asset demand equations as above, with the diﬀerence that now  =  (  +1 ) is endogenous,
with

                                         ⎧               µ          ¶ 1+
                                                                       
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪                    −
                                         ⎨  if (1 +  ) 1− 1 00         ̃1 
                                                             1++1
                         (  +1 ) =                 µ          ¶ 1+
                                                                                               (26)
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪                  1 −0
                                         ⎩ 0 if (1 +  ) 1− 0            ̃1 
                                                                     1++1



    The diﬀerence with the log preferences of the previous example is that now the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution between  and a composite period that aggregates  and 0 is equal to
infinity. This feature reinforces the liquidity eﬀect: bubbles, by increasing the interest rate, can
increase savings when young.

    The condition for a bubble to exist is:
                                               ³                 ´
                                                            
                                         1 − 0 1 +        1+        
                                                                                              (Bv )
                                              1 − 0                  

                                                      56
This condition is equivalent to ∗  0, where ∗ is the interest rate at the bubble-free steady state.
It is verified for  = 0 if and only if 0 (1 +  (1 + ))  1.

    We illustrate our point by deriving conditions for which investment ∗∗ at the bubbly steady
state is strictly positive but investment ∗ at the bubble-free steady state is zero. Assume that (Bv )
is verified. It is possible to find ̃  0 such that  (∗  ∗ ) = 0 and  ( ∗∗  ∗∗ ) =  if and only if

                                               µ        0     ¶ 1+
                                                                  
                                        1          1 − 1+ ∗
                                                                        1                            (27)
                                      1 + ∗        1 − 0

Since we have assumed that (Bv ) holds or equivalently that ∗  0, condition (27) is always verified
for  close enough to 0.


Proposition 12 Suppose that preferences are linear-log, that  = 0, and that (Bv ) holds. If
condition (27) is verified, then there exists ̃  0 such that investment at the bubbly steady state
is higher than investment at the bubble-free steady state ∗∗  ∗ = 0. This condition is always
verified when  is small enough.



A.5 Proofs for Section V.3
   Proof of Proposition 10. The proof proceeds as follows. Consider the economy where trees
supplied by consumers are fixed and equal to ˜
                                              = (∗ ) The corresponding variables for this
economy are denoted with a tilde. We can use the phase diagram derived in Sections III.1 and
                                                                                                       
V.1 to analyze this economy. At the intersection of ̃ and ̃  investment is equal to ̃∗∗ =       1−0
                                                                                                           
the bubble is equal to ̃∗∗ =  −      − ˜ (possibly negative) and the interest rate is equal to 0.
                                     1−20
                                      1−0
Note that this economy is such that,  = ̃∗  ∗ = ̃∗ and ∗∗ = ̃∗∗  Hence ∗∗  ∗ if and only if
                                          ∗

̃∗∗  ̃∗ 
    Let us first prove by contradiction that (B”’ ) implies that ∗  0 Assume that ∗ ≥ 0 Then
˜   () so that ̃∗∗  0 But this is possible only if ̃∗  0 i.e. ∗  0 This is a contradiction.
 Hence ∗  0

    Let us now move on to prove (i) and (ii) in Proposition 10. Suppose first that ˜
                                                                                     0 We
know from the phase diagram analysis in Section III.1 and the fact that ∗  0 that ̃∗∗  ̃∗ . We
therefore conclude that ∗∗  ∗ . The proof of (ii) proceeds exactly along the same lines.




                                                       57
