                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FINANCIAL INTEGRATION, ENTREPRENEURIAL RISK AND GLOBAL IMBALANCES

                                    George-Marios Angeletos
                                         Vasia Panousi

                                       Working Paper 16761
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16761


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2011




An earlier version of the paper was entitled “Financial Integration and Capital Accumulation.” We
thank an associate editor and two anonymous referees for very useful feedback. We also thank Daron
Acemoglu, Arnaud Caustinot, Dave Donaldson, Enrique Mendoza, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and Robert
Townsend for useful comments and discussions. Finally, we are particularly grateful to Dean Corbae
and Ramon Marimon for encouraging us to write this paper. The views presented in this paper are
solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, its staff members, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by George-Marios Angeletos and Vasia Panousi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Integration, Entrepreneurial Risk and Global Imbalances
George-Marios Angeletos and Vasia Panousi
NBER Working Paper No. 16761
February 2011
JEL No. E13,F15,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

How does financial integration impact capital accumulation, current-account dynamics, and cross-country
inequality? We investigate this question within a two-country, general-equilibrium, incomplete-markets
model that focuses on the importance of idiosyncratic entrepreneurial risk— a risk that introduces,
not only a precautionary motive for saving, but also a wedge between the interest rate and the marginal
product of capital. Our contribution is to show that this friction provides a simple explanation for the
emergence of global imbalances, a resolution to the empirical puzzle that capital often fails to flow
from the rich or slow-growing countries to the poor or fast-growing ones, and a set of policy lessons
regarding the intertemporal costs and benefits of capital-account liberalization.


George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics
MIT E52-251
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

Vasia Panousi
Federal Reserve Board
Vasia.panousi@frb.gov
1        Introduction
The last two or three decades have been characterized by significant liberalization of international
capital flows. This, in turn, appears to have facilitated the rise of significant global imbalances—a
large foreign debt on the side of the United States along with vast currency reserves and big positive
holdings of US Treasury securities on the side of emerging countries such as China. Furthermore,
whereas the standard neoclassical paradigm predicts that capital should be flowing from the rich to
the poor, or from the least-growing to the fastest-growing countries, the empirical evidence often
suggests the opposite direction of capital flows (Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2008).
        These observations, and more generally the themes of financial integration and global imbalances,
have motivated a large body of research.1 In this paper, we contribute to this growing literature
by studying the global macroeconomic effects of financial integration in the presence of a certain
market friction—uninsurable idiosyncratic entrepreneurial risk.
        Our focus on this friction is motivated, not only by the fact that entrepreneurship is of obvious
empirical relevance, but also by the observation that this friction can play a crucial role in capi-
tal accumulation and productivity growth. Indeed, this friction introduces both a precautionary
motive for saving, as entrepreneurs seek to self-insure against the uninsurable risk in their income,
and a wedge between the interest rate and the marginal product of capital, as entrepreneurs require
a (private) risk premium in compensation for the risk they face in their entrepreneurial activity.
Furthermore, this wedge is likely to vary across countries, with, say, entrepreneurs in China pre-
sumably enjoying less risk sharing and hence facing a higher wedge than those in the United States.
Our contribution is to show how cross-country differences in this wedge may help explain a num-
ber of stylized facts—such as the persistence of cross-country inequality, the emergence of global
imbalances, and the failure of capital to flow from the rich or slow-growing countries to the poor
or fast-growing ones—while also providing a distinct set of policy lessons regarding the dynamic
effects of capital-account liberalization.2
        Preview of model. We conduct our theoretical exercise within a tractable, general-equilibrium,
incomplete-markets model. There are two economies (countries), each of which is populated by a
continuum of households (families). Each family includes a worker and an entrepreneur. The
worker supplies his labor in the domestic labor market; the entrepreneur runs a private business
    1
     See, for example, Aoki, Benigno, and Kiyotaki (2009), Blanchard, Giavazzi, and Sa (2005), Boyd and Smith
(1997), Broner and Ventura (2008), Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008), Engel and Rogers (2006), Fogli and
Perri (2006), Gertler and Rogoff (1990), Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006), Gourinchas and Rey (2007), Hausmann and
Sturzenegger (2006), Hunt and Rebucci (2005), Kraay and Ventura (2007), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007), Lucas
(1990), McGrattan and Prescott (2007), Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2007, 2008), Obstefeld and Rogoff (2004),
Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian (2007), Reinhart and Rogoff (2004), and Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2009).
   2
     Borrowing constraints, although not explicitly considered here, are complementary sources of a wedge between
the “external” and the “internal” return to capital. This offers a useful re-interpretation of our contribution. As it will
become clear, our key results hinge on the properties that the aforementioned wedge is positive and decreasing with
wealth—properties that may hold whether the wedge originates in idiosyncratic risk or in borrowing constraints.



                                                            2
that operates a constant-returns-to-scale technology, employs labor from the domestic labor market,
and uses the capital stock owned by her family. All households can freely trade a safe asset,
but can diversify only a fraction of the idiosyncratic shocks hitting their private firms. The two
countries differ in the magnitude of the uninsurable risk—with the “North” enjoying better risk-
sharing possibilities and hence less risk than the “South”—but are otherwise identical.
   Within this model, we define “financial autarchy” as the regime in which the market for the safe
asset clears on a country-wide level, and “financial integration” as the regime in which this market
clears on a world-wide level. We then study the steady states that obtain under these two regimes,
as well as the entire transitional dynamics of the global economy between the two steady states.
   Preview of results. Under financial autarchy, the South features a lower interest rate. This is
due to the stronger demand for precautionary saving implied by the larger amount of undiversifiable
idiosyncratic risk (or, in an extension, due to the lower supply of the safe asset). Despite its lower
interest rate, however, the South may also have a lower capital stock and a lower level of income
than the North. This is because the South faces a higher wedge between the marginal product of
capital and the interest rate. It follows that, prior to financial integration, the South identifies the
poor, capital-scarce country, whereas the North identifies the rich, capital-abundant country.
   Because the South has a lower autarchic interest rate than the North, financial integration
triggers the North to run large current-account deficits and, symmetrically, the South to accumulate
a large positive foreign asset position. Intuitively, this is because the North has a comparative
advantage in supplying the safe asset: the North “exports” this asset by running current-account
deficits. What is more, as financial integration causes the interest rate to rise in the South, the
opportunity cost of capital goes up and the capital stock goes down, thereby depressing domestic
wages and output. Conversely, the North experiences a boom.
   If the North is interpreted as the United States, and the South as China or other emerging
economies, these results help explain the significant “global imbalances” that the world economy
has experienced in recent history. Furthermore, they help explain why financial globalization may
initially exacerbate cross-country inequality, and why capital may often fail to flow from the rich,
capital-abundant countries to the poor, capital-scarce ones.
   Interestingly, though, the long-run effects of financial integration can be quite different. Because
financial integration permits the South to save abroad at higher returns than otherwise, the South
is able to accumulate more and more wealth over time. As this happens, the willingness to take
risk increases, the wedge between the interest rate and the marginal product of capital falls, and
the capital stock increases. As a result, in the new steady state the South may well end up with
higher levels of capital, wages, output and consumption than in its autarchic steady state. Our
model therefore predicts that financial integration may help poor countries in the long run, even
as it hurts them on impact—and may reduce cross-country inequality in the long run, even as it
increases it on impact.


                                                   3
    Furthermore, because of the aforementioned wealth accumulation and the consequent increase
in risk taking, the transition in the South may feature a reallocation of saving from safe but low-
return investment opportunities to risky but high-return ones. As a result, the South experiences
an acceleration in its TFP growth, while the converse is true for the North. Along with the property
that the South runs current-account surpluses, while the North runs current-account deficits, this
result means that capital flows from the faster growing countries to the slower growing ones—a
prediction that is the opposite of the one made by the standard neoclassical paradigm and that
helps resolve the empirical puzzle documented by Gourinchas and Jeanne (2008).
    Combined, our results provide, not only a possible explanation to certain stylized facts, but also
a distinct policy lesson: the benefits of capital-account liberalization for less developed economies
may be higher in the long run than on the impact of the reform. As already noted, the key intuition
is that financial integration helps agents in the South accumulate more wealth over time, which in
turn permits them to mitigate the friction they face in their entrepreneurial activities. We reinforce
this intuition by studying the welfare effects of financial integration in our model.
    Upon financial integration, the South’s poor tend to lose for two complementary reasons: the
increase in interest rates means an increase in the cost of borrowing; and the initial outflow of
capital means a reduction in their wages. In contrast, the rich gain because of the higher returns to
their saving and of the lower labor costs in their private businesses. But as time passes and capital
eventually reaches higher levels than under autarchy, the resulting increase in wages alleviates the
burden of agents who happen to be poor at that point in time, and it even leads to benefits for
most of them. Overall, at the time of the reform, almost everyone, except for the very rich, suffers
welfare losses, and the poor more so than anyone else; but among the agents living in the future
integrated world almost everyone gains from the reform, except for the very rich, and the poor and
middle classes more so than anyone else. Once again, this highlights the distinct effects that our
analysis brings to light for the impact of integration on current versus future generations.3
    Related literature. Our paper belongs to a large, and growing, literature that uses Bewley-
type models to study various macroeconomic implications of incomplete markets. Key references
include Aiyagari (1994), Huggett (1997), Krusell and Smith (1998), and Rios-Rull (1994); see Heath-
cote, Storesletten, and Violante (2009) and Krusell and Smith (2006) for eclectic reviews. The bulk
of this literature focuses on idiosyncratic endowment or labor-income risk. Important exceptions
are Angeletos and Calvet (2000, 2006) and Angeletos (2007), which are among the first papers to
emphasize the distinct implications of idiosyncratic investment risk for aggregate saving within the
context of the neoclassical growth model.4 Our paper starts by extending Angeletos (2007) to a
   3
     Complementary in this regard is Aoki, Benigno and Kiyotaki (2009), which also stresses the importance of
studying the intertemporal costs and benefits of financial integration, albeit in a different model than ours.
   4
     Other papers that touch the same theme, but focus on different questions, include Angeletos and Panousi (2009),
Benhabib and Zhou (2008), Cagetti and De Nardi (2006), Giesecke and Goldberg (2008), Quadrini (2000), Covas
(2006), Meh and Quadrini (2006), Kitao (2007), and Panousi (2010).



                                                         4
two-country open-economy setting. Our contribution is then to study how cross-country differences
in the level of idiosyncratic entrepreneurial or investment risk impact global macroeconomic dynam-
ics. In independent parallel work, Corneli (2010) undertakes a similar exercise and obtains closely
related results.
       As in our paper, Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2008) study how cross-country differences
in domestic risk sharing can help explain significant and persistent global imbalances. See also
Willen (2004) for an earlier take on the same key insight. However, unlike our paper, this work
rules out endogenous capital accumulation and/or idiosyncratic investment risk.5 It is precisely the
combination of these two features that distinguishes our theoretical exercise and that explains the
novelty of our results.
       Also closely related are Buera and Shin (2010) and Sandri (2010). Buera and Shin’s model shares
the two key features of our model, namely capital accumulation and entrepreneurial risk, but adds a
number of other ingredients, such as borrowing constraints, occupational choice, and cross-sectional
distortions in the allocation of capital. By assuming that capital-account liberalization comes in
tandem with a structural reform that removes these distortions, they obtain an acceleration in
TFP growth. At the same time, a surge in current-account surpluses occurs for reasons similar to
ours. Their paper and ours are thus highly complementary.6 Sandri considers a one-country model
that also features entrepreneurial risk, but focuses on a different policy exercise. In particular, he
studies a reform that permits some agents to switch from “farmers” to “entrepreneurs”. Because
entrepreneurial activity is assumed to face more risk than farming, this means an increase in the
level of idiosyncratic risk and hence a surge in precautionary saving, which in turn helps generate
current-account surpluses. A similar mechanism operates in Carroll and Jeane (2009), except that
there the driving force is an increase in idiosyncratic labor-income risk.
       Our paper also shares with Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008) the idea that global im-
balances are explained, in a certain sense, by a shortage of assets in the South. But whereas that
paper assumes that the South has a lower capacity in supplying any asset, we only assume that the
North has a comparative advantage in supplying the relatively safer assets. This in turn can be the
case, not because of different technologies, but simply because the North has a weaker demand for
precautionary saving. Furthermore, that paper rules out capital accumulation, thus also ruling out
the distinct dynamic effects that are at the core of our contribution.
       Layout. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model. Section 3
characterizes the general equilibrium. Section 4 studies the autarchic and integrated steady states,
   5
     Mendoza et al. (2008) allow for a certain type of investment risk, but rule out capital accumulation: the
investment opportunity in that paper is an exogenous “Lucas tree”. Mendoza et al. (2009), on the other hand, allow
for capital accumulation, but rule out idiosyncratic investment risk. Finally, Willen (2004) studies an endowment
economy, thus ruling out both capital accumulation and idiosyncratic investment risk.
   6
     The comparative advantage of their paper is that it contains a richer quantitative exercise, while that of our
analysis rests on its increased tractability and the consequent clarity of the theoretical insights.




                                                        5
section 5 the transitional dynamics between the two, and section 6 the welfare implications. Section
7 considers a useful extension. Section 8 concludes. The proofs are delegated to the appendix.


2        The model
Our model is a two-country variant of the closed-economy model of Angeletos (2007). There are
two countries, indexed by j ∈ {1, 2}, and a single good, which can be used for either consumption
or investment purposes. Each country is populated by a continuum of infinitely-lived households,
indexed by i and distributed uniformly over [0, 1]. Each household includes a worker and a producer
(“entrepreneur”). The worker supplies his labor inelastically to the domestic labor market. The
entrepreneur runs a privately-held firm (“family business”). Each household can freely save or borrow
in the riskless bond—up to a natural borrowing constraint—and can accumulate physical capital
within its own family business. Firms are hit by idiosyncratic shocks, which the households can only
partially diversify. Finally, to maintain tractability, we abstract from any aggregate uncertainty.
We also let the time be continuous, indexed by t ∈ [0, ∞).
        Preferences take an Epstein-Zin specification, which permits us to distinguish intertemporal
substitution from risk aversion. Fix a household i in county j. Her preferences are defined as the
limit, for ∆t → 0, of the solution to the following recursive specification:
                           (                                                                     )     1
                                                                                       1−1/θ       1−1/θ
                                               1−1/θ
                                      e−β∆t ) cijt     + e−β∆t       Et [ Uij1−γ
                                                                                         1−γ
                  Uijt =       (1 −                                           t+∆t ]                         ,     (1)


where β > 0 is the discount rate, γ > 0 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and θ > 0 is the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution.7
        The financial wealth of this household, denoted by xijt , is the sum of its holdings in private
capital, kijt , and in the riskless bond, bijt :

                                                  xijt = kijt + bijt .                                             (2)

The evolution of xijt is given by the following budget constraint:

                                 dxijt = dπijt + [Rt bijt + ωjt − cijt ]dt + dTijt .                               (3)

Here, dπijt is the household’s capital income (i.e., the profits from the private firm it owns), Rjt is
the interest rate on the riskless bond, ωjt is the wage rate, cijt is the household’s consumption, and
dTijt is a transfer that captures risk-sharing opportunities (to be defined later on).
                                                                              R∞                                 1−1/θ
    Standard expected utility is nested for θ = 1/γ; in this case, Uijt = Et t e−βs U (cijs )ds, where U (c) = c1−1/θ .
    7

We allow for θ 6= 1/γ so as to facilitate a more precise understanding of the underlying forces in our environment and
a better calibration. However, none of our results rest on letting θ 6= 1/γ.


                                                           6
   Whereas the sequences of the wage and the interest rate are deterministic (due to the absence
of aggregate risk), firm profits, and hence household capital income, are subject to undiversified
idiosyncratic risk:
                        dπijt = [F (kijt , nijt ) − ωjt nijt − δkijt ]dt + σj kijt dzijt .                (4)

Here, nijt is the amount of labor the firm hires in the competitive labor market, δ is the mean depre-
ciation rate, and F is a constant-returns-to-scale neoclassical production function. For simplicity,
we assume a Cobb-Douglas specification: F (k, n) = k α n1−α , with α ∈ (0, 1).
   Idiosyncratic risk is introduced through dzijt , a standard Wiener process that is i.i.d. across
agents and time. Literally taken, dzijt represents a stochastic depreciation, or productivity, shock.
However, we wish to interpret this shock more broadly as encompassing various sources of idiosyn-
cratic risk in the entrepreneurial activity and, more generally, in the returns to private investment.
The scalar σj then parameterizes the level of this risk in country j.
   Since this risk is purely idiosyncratic, agents would be able to obtain full insurance against it
if financial markets were complete. A number of reasons—moral hazard, adverse selection, costly
state verification, inefficient legal and enforcement systems, or mere lack of sophistication—may
explain why this does not happen in the real world. In this paper, as in most other papers in the
Bewley tradition, we abstract from the deeper micro-foundations of incomplete markets. Instead,
we exogenously impose that the available risk-sharing possibilities are limited, and more severely so
in the South. We capture this by assuming that:

                                           dTijt = −λj σj kijt dzijt ,                                    (5)

for some λj ∈ (0, 1). This assumption can also be justified by introducing an exogenous asset
structure that permits agents to diversify only certain components of their idiosyncratic risk, or by
letting them sell equity on only a fraction of their profits. Either way, the scalar λj measures the
fraction of idiosyncratic risk that agents are able to diversify in country j; this is what defines the
level of financial development in our model.
   Combining conditions (3)-(5), we get that the household budget reduces to:

                                   dxijt = dπ̃it + [Rt bijt + ωjt − cijt ]dt ,                            (6)

where
           dπ̃ijt ≡ dπijt + dTijt = [F (kijt , nijt ) − ωjt nijt − δkijt ]dt + (1 − λj )σj kijt dzijt .

It is then evident that the quantity σ̃j ≡ (1 − λj )σj measures the amount of undiversifiable idiosyn-
cratic risk in country j. We henceforth impose σ̃2 < σ̃1 , which permit us to identify country 1 as
the country with a lower level of uninsurable entrepreneurial risk—and, in this particular sense, as



                                                        7
the country with the more advanced financial markets. We accordingly refer to country 1 as the
“North” or the “developed” economy, and to country 2 as the “South” or the “developing” economy.
    At this point, we would like to invite the reader to maintain a flexible interpretation of the
assumption that σ̃2 > σ̃1 . For example, entrepreneurial risk may be higher in developing economies
because, in comparison to developed economies such as the United States, developing economies
such as China, India, and Mexico appear to face more severe agency and/or enforcement problems.
Government corruption and weak property rights also contribute to higher levels of idiosyncratic
entrepreneurial risk in developing economies: some times the entrepreneur is the fortunate recipient
of preferential treatment by corrupt politicians and bureaucrats, some times he is the unfortunate
victim. Finally, as tax and regulatory policies tend to be more volatile in these economies, the
idiosyncratic incidence of these policies appears to be more volatile as well, contributing to additional
risk in entrepreneurial activity.


3    Equilibrium
Let Yjt , Cjt , Njt , Kjt , and Bjt denote the aggregate levels of output, consumption, employment,
capital, and bond holdings in country j at date t (that is, the cross-sectional averages of yijt , cijt
and so on). We consider two policy regimes. In the first, countries are in financial autarchy: the
riskless bond cannot move across borders. In the second, they are financially integrated: countries
can borrow and lend to one another. We define the corresponding equilibrium concepts as follows.

Definition 1. An autarchic equilibrium consists of a deterministic sequence of country-specific
interest rates, wages, and macroeconomic quantities, {Rjt , ωjt , Yjt , Cjt , Njt , Kjt }t∈[0,∞) for j ∈ {1, 2},
and a collection of individual contingent plans, {cijt , nijt , kijt , bijt }t∈[0,∞) for i ∈ [0, 1], j ∈ {1, 2},
such that the following are true: (i) individual plans are optimal given the sequences of prices; (ii)
macroeconomic quantities are obtained by aggregating individual plans; (iii) labor and bond markets
clear at the country level, namely Njt = 1 and Bjt = 0 for all j, t.

Definition 2. An integrated equilibrium consists of a deterministic sequence of world-wide inter-
est rates, {Rt }t∈[0,∞) , a deterministic sequence of country-specific wages and macroeconomic quan-
tities, {ωjt , Yjt , Cjt , Njt , Kjt }t∈[0,∞) for j ∈ {1, 2}, and a collection of individual contingent plans,
({cijt , nijt , kijt , bijt }t∈[0,∞) )i∈[0,1] for i ∈ [0, 1], j ∈ {1, 2}, such that the following are true: (i) indi-
vidual plans are optimal given the sequences of prices; (ii) macroeconomic quantities are obtained
by aggregating individual plans; (iii) labor markets clear at the country level, namely Njt = 1 for all
j, t; (iv) the bond market clears at the world level, namely B1t + B2t = 0 for all t.

    In the remaining of this section, we first characterize the individual household’s problem for a
given sequence of wages and interest rates. We then proceed to characterize the general equilibrium
under both regimes.

                                                         8
3.1      Individual behavior

Since employment is chosen after the capital stock has been installed and the idiosyncratic shock
has been observed, optimal employment maximizes profits state-by-state. Furthermore, by constant
returns to scale, optimal employment and profits are linear in own capital. We therefore have that:

                          nijt = n̄jt kijt       and       dπijt = r̄jt kijt dt + σj kijt dzijt ,                    (7)

where n̄jt = n̄(ωjt ) ≡ arg maxn [F (1, n) − ωjt n] and r̄jt = r̄(ωjt ) ≡ maxn [F (1, n) − ωjt n] − δ. As in
Angeletos (2007), the key finding here is that households face linear, albeit risky, returns to their
capital. This linearity, together with the homotheticity of preferences, ensures that the household’s
consumption-saving problem reduces to a tractable homothetic optimization problem, much like in
Samuelson’s and Merton’s classic portfolio analysis. It then follows that the optimal policy rules
are linear in wealth, as shown in the next lemma.

Lemma 1. Let {ωjt , Rjt }t∈[0,∞) be equilibrium price sequences (with R1t = R2t = Rt if the world is
                         R∞ Rs
integrated) and let hjt ≡ t e− t Rjτ dτ ωjs ds denote the present value of labor income (a.k.a. human
capital). Then, optimal consumption, investment and bond holdings are given by

         cijt = mjt (xijt + hjt ),   kijt = φjt (xijt + hjt ),     and     bijt = (1 − φjt )(xijt + hjt ) − hjt ,    (8)

where mjt denotes the marginal propensity to consume and φjt the marginal propensity to invest in
private capital. The marginal propensity to consumer solves the following recursion:

                                             ṁjt
                                                  = mt + (θ − 1)ρ̂jt − θβ ,                                          (9)
                                             mt

where ρ̂jt ≡ ρjt − 12 γφ2jt σ̃j2 denotes the risk-adjusted return to saving and ρjt ≡ φt r̄jt + (1 − φjt )Rt
the mean return to saving. Finally, the marginal propensity to invest is given by

                                                           r̄jt − Rjt
                                                   φjt =              .                                             (10)
                                                               γ σ̃j2

       Condition (8) establishes the linearity of optimal consumption, capital and bond holdings in
wealth. Condition (10) identifies the propensity to invest in the risky asset as an increasing function
of the risk premium, µt ≡ r̄t − Rt , and a decreasing function of the amount of uninsurable risk,
σ̃j = (1 − λj )σ. Finally, condition (9) is essentially the Euler condition: it describes the growth
rate of the marginal propensity to consume as a function of the anticipated path of risk-adjusted
returns to saving.8
   8
    Note that higher risk-adjusted returns reduce the propensity to consume (i.e., increase the propensity to save) if
and only if the elasticity of intertemporal substitution θ exceeds one; this is is due to the familiar tension between
the income and substitution effects implied by an increase in the rate of return.


                                                            9
3.2     General equilibrium

Let f (K) ≡ F (K, 1) = K α . From Proposition 1, we have that the equilibrium values of the
propensity to invest and the risk-adjusted return to saving are given by φjt = φ(Kjt , Rt , σ̃j ) and
ρ̂jt = ρ̂(Kjt , Rt , σ̃j ), where

                                (f 0 (K) − δ − R)                                  (f 0 (K) − δ − R)2
               φ(K, R, σ̃) ≡                           and ρ̂(K, R, σ̃) ≡ R +                         .
                                       γ σ̃ 2                                             2γ σ̃ 2

Furthermore, the equilibrium wage satisfies ωjt = f (Kjt ) − f 0 (Kjt )Kjt = (1 − α)f (Kjt ). Using these
facts, aggregating the policy rules of the agents, and imposing market clearing for the risk-free bond,
we arrive at the following tractable characterization of the general equilibrium of the economy.

Proposition 1. In either the autarchic or the integrated equilibrium, the aggregate dynamics of
country j satisfy the following ODE system

                                    Cjt + K̇jt + Ḃjt = f (Kjt ) − δKjt + Rjt Bjt                         (11)
                                            Ċjt
                                                 = θ (ρ̂jt − β) + 12 γ σ̃j2 φ2jt                          (12)
                                            Cjt
                                          Ḣjt = Rjt Hjt − (1 − α)f (Kjt )                                (13)
                                      Bjt = (1 − φjt )(Kjt + Bjt ) − φjt Hjt ,                            (14)

where φjt = φ(Kjt , Rjt , σ̃j ) and ρ̂jt = ρ̂(Kjt Rjt , σ̃j ). The autarchic equilibrium is then obtained by
letting R1t 6= R2t and requiring that, for each j, Rjt adjusts so that

                                                        Bjt = 0 .                                         (15)

In contrast, the integrated equilibrium is obtained by imposing R1t = R2t = Rt and requiring that
Rt adjusts so that
                                                    B1t + B2t = 0 .                                       (16)

    Conditions (11) and (12) give, respectively, the resource constraint and the aggregate Euler
condition. Condition (13) gives the law of motion for human capital, whereas condition (14) gives
the equilibrium level of aggregate holdings of the riskless bond or, equivalently, the net foreign
asset position of the country. Conditions (15) and (16) then complete the characterization of the
equilibrium: under financial autarchy, the domestic interest rate of each country must be such that
the net foreign asset position of that country is zero; under financial integration, the world-wide
interest rate must be such that the asset positions of the two countries balance one another.
    At this point, it is important to recognize how idiosyncratic risk impacts the general-equilibrium
system. When σ̃j = 0, arbitrage imposes that Rt = f 0 (Kjt ) − δ = ρ̂jt , and the Euler condition


                                                            10
                                                        Ċjt
reduces to its familiar complete-markets version,       Cjt    = θ (Rt − β). When instead σ̃j > 0, there
are two important changes. First, the precautionary motive for saving introduces a positive drift
in consumption growth, represented by the term 21 γ σ̃j2 φ2jt in the Euler condition (12). This is the
key force in Bewley-type models such as Aiyagari (1994) and Mendoza et al. (2008). Second, the
fact that investment is subject to undiversifiable idiosyncratic risk introduces a wedge between the
risk-free rate and the marginal product of capital, so that Rjt < ρ̂jt < f 0 (Kjt ) − δ. This wedge
plays a crucial role in the results of our paper and distinguishes it from the aforementioned work.


4     Steady state
In this section we first explain how long-run wealth accumulation impacts the wedge between the
interest rate and the marginal product of capital, and thereby the steady-state level of capital for
given interest rate. This identifies the key mechanism behind the long-run effects in our framework.
We then complete the characterization of the autarchic and integrated steady states by studying
the determination of the interest rate.


4.1   Long-run wealth accumulation and the wedge on investment

In steady state, whether under autarchy or under integration, the growth rate of aggregate con-
sumption in each country must be zero. The Euler condition (12) then reduces to the following:

                                                       1γ 2 2
                                          ρ̂j = β −      σ̃ φ .                                         (17)
                                                       2θ j j

This condition simply requires that the risk-adjusted return to saving in country j be lower than
the discount rate as much as it takes for the associated negative intertemporal substitution effect to
just offset the positive precautionary motive. Using the facts that ρ̂j = Rj + 2γ1σ̃2 µ2j and φj =     1
                                                                                                           µ ,
                                                                                                     γ σ̃j2 j
                                                                                     j
where µj = f 0 (Kj ) − δ − Rj is the risk premium, we can restate condition (17) as follows:
                                                       s
                                                           2θγ σ̃j2 (β − Rj )
                                f 0 (Kj ) − δ = Rj +                            .                       (18)
                                                                θ+1

We infer that this condition pins down the combinations of the domestic capital stock and the
interest rate that are consistent with stationarity of aggregate consumption—equivalently, with
stationarity of aggregate wealth—in country j.
    If there were no uninsurable idiosyncratic risk (σ̃ = 0), condition (18) would have reduced to the
familiar condition f 0 (K) − δ = R; that is, the marginal product of capital would have been equated
to the interest rate. Furthermore, this would have implied that the capital stock is a decreasing
function of the interest rate. Now, instead, we have that the marginal product of capital exceeds
the interest rate: f 0 (K) − δ > R. This is because agents require a positive risk premium in order

                                                   11
to be willing to hold their risky entrepreneurial capital. In addition, the steady-state value of this
premium, which is given by the square-root term in (18), is decreasing in the interest rate. This is
because a higher interest rate permits the domestic agents to accumulate more wealth in the long
run, which in turn increases their willingness to take risk and thereby reduces the wedge between
the interest rate and the marginal product of capital.9
      Indeed, for any given initial level of aggregate wealth, a higher interest rate necessarily increases
the mean return to saving and therefore also increases the level of aggregate wealth in subsequent
periods. It follows that the long-run level of aggregate wealth also increases. The accumulation of
more wealth, in turn, increases agents’ willingness to take risk—due to diminishing absolute risk
aversion—and thereby reduces the premium they require in order to hold any given amount of
capital. Hence, the overall impact of the interest rate on capital accumulation is now ambiguous: a
higher interest rate may actually induce more investment in the long run, due to the wealth effect
on risk taking. This wealth and risk-taking effect plays a central role in the results of our paper;
we will revisit it shortly.
      Going back to the determination of the steady state, we now note that, because the interest
rate and the wage are constant in steady state, the present value of labor income is also constant.
In particular, it is given by Hj = (1 − α)f (Kj )/Rj . Using this into condition (14), we infer
that aggregate bond holdings—equivalently, the net foreign asset position—of country j satisfy the
following condition:
                                                         1 − φj      (1 − α)f (Kj )
                                                  Bj =          Kj −                .                                     (19)
                                                           φj             Rj
Combining this result with the one in condition (18), we reach the following lemma.

Lemma 2. (i) There exist continuous functions K, B : (0, β) × R+ → R such that, under either
autarchy or integration, the steady-state levels of aggregate capital and bond holdings satisfy

                                    Kj = K(Rj , σ̃j )          and             Bj = B(Rj , σ̃j )Kj                        (20)

These functions are defined by

                                                                                    1 − φ(R, σ̃) (1 − α)f (K(R, σ̃))
       K(R, σ̃) ≡ (f 0 )−1 (R + µ(R, σ̃) + δ)               and     B(R, σ̃) ≡                  −                    ,
                                                                                      φ(R, σ̃)       RK(R, σ̃)
                         q
                             2θγ σ̃ 2                                 1
where µ(R, σ̃) ≡              1+θ (β     − R) and φ(R, σ̃) ≡        γ σ̃ 2
                                                                           µ(R, σ̃) .
              ∂K(R,σ̃)                                             θ
      (ii)      ∂R       > 0 if and only if φ(R, σ̃) <            1+θ , which in        turn is true if and only if R > R̂(σ̃),
                            θ   γ σ̃ 2
where R̂(σ̃) ≡ β −         1+θ 2         < R̄ .
              ∂K(R,σ̃)
      (iii)     ∂ σ̃     < 0 necessarily.
  9
    A similar mechanism—the impact of interest rates on wealth accumulation and thereby on entrepreneurial
investment—plays a central role in Goldberg (2010) and Moll (2010). These papers, however, focus is on how
wealth accumulation alleviates collateral/borrowing constraints, not risk-taking.


                                                                    12
           ∂B(R,σ̃)
   (iv)      ∂R     > 0 necessarily.
          ∂B(R,σ̃)                                               2θ(1−α)
   (v)      ∂ σ̃    > 0 if and only if   R > R, where 0 < R ≡ β α+(2−α)θ < R̄ .

   Part (i) follows from conditions (18) and (19). The functions K and B give, respectively, the
domestic capital stock and the net foreign-asset position that are consistent with stationarity of
aggregate wealth when the interest rate is R and the level of risk is σ̃. These functions will turn
out to be particularly helpful in the characterization of the steady states.
   Parts (ii) through (iv) then provide us with the comparative statics of these functions with
respect to the interest rate and the level of risk. Part (ii), in particular, establishes that the
steady-state capital stock is a U-shaped function of the interest rate. What lies behind this U-
shaped relation is our wealth-and-risk-taking effect: for sufficiently high R, this effect dominates
the familiar opportunity-cost effect, guaranteeing that a higher interest rate increases the capital
stock in the steady state. This result plays a crucial role in our subsequent analysis. Part (iv), then,
complements this result by showing that, as the interest rate increases, the propensity to save in
the bond also increases: as the risk-free rate increases, saving in the riskless asset (bond) increases
relative to aggregate saving in the risky asset (capital).
   Finally, parts (iii) and (v) establish that, for any given interest rate, an increase in the level
of risk necessarily reduces the steady-state capital stock, while it increases the propensity to save
in the bond as long as the interest-rate is not too low. These properties capture, respectively, the
risk-aversion and precautionary-saving effects of higher idiosyncratic risk.
   Combined, these results facilitate the characterization of the autarchic and integrated steady
states. To sharpen this characterization, we now introduce the following assumption, which we will
invoke for a subset of our results.

Assumption 1. Suppose that either of the following conditions holds:
                                 s
                                        2αβ(1 + θ)                α − saut
                                                                       j       θ
                         σ̃j >                               or            <       ,
                                     θγ(α + θ(2 − α))             1 − saut
                                                                       j     1 + θ

where saut
       j   ≡ δKjaut /f (Kjaut ) is the autarchic steady-state saving rate of country j.

   This assumption requires either (i) that the uninsurable idiosyncratic risk exceeds some minimal
level, or (ii) that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, θ, is sufficiently high relative to saving
rates. It can be shown that the former property implies the latter (see appendix). The advantage of
the former property is that it is stated in terms of purely exogenous parameters, thus guaranteeing
the existence of economies for which the assumption holds. The advantage of the latter property is
that it can easily be mapped to data.
   In particular, consider the following back-of-the-envelope exercise. Using US data, we can set
α ≈ .36 and saut ≈ .23. It then follows that Assumption 1 is satisfied for the United States if θ > .2.


                                                        13
For countries with higher saving rates, this condition might be satisfied for even lower values of θ.
Since most recent estimates of θ are almost always above .5, and often above 1, we conclude that
Assumption 1 is a very plausible benchmark.
   In any event, the role of this assumption is to guarantee that the autarchic steady states lie
in the increasing portion of the function K. In words, this means that, in the neighborhood of
the autarchic steady state, the wealth-and-risk-taking effect of a higher interest rate dominates the
standard opportunity-cost effect.


4.2   Autarchy

We are now ready to provide our first main result, which concerns the characterization of the
autarchic steady state.

Proposition 2. There always exists an autarchic steady state, it is unique, and it features the
following properties:
   (i) The autarchic interest rates are given by Rjaut , where Rjaut solves B(Rjaut , σ̃j ) = 0, and satisfy

                                        R < R2aut < R1aut < R̄ ,

where R̄ is the complete-markets interest rate, R̄ = β.
   (ii) The autarchic capital stocks are given by Kjaut = K(Rjaut , σ̃j ). Furthermore, under Assump-
tion 1,
                                        0 < K2aut < K1aut < K̄ ,

where K̄ is the complete-markets capital stock, defined by f 0 (K̄) = β + δ.
   (iii) The autarchic consumption levels are given by Cjaut = f (Kjaut )−δKjaut . Furthermore, under
Assumption 1,
                                         0 < C2aut < C1aut < C̄,

where C̄ is the complete-markets consumption level, defined by C̄ = f (K̄) − δ K̄ .

   The existence and the uniqueness of the autarchic steady state follow from the continuity and
monotonicity of the function B with respect to R (which we established in Lemma 2), along with
appropriate limit properties (which we establish in the appendix).
   Part (i) characterizes the steady-state levels of the interest rate: it establishes that the interest
rate is lower than the discount rate in both countries, and more so in the South than in the North.
The first property, namely that the autarchic interest rates are lower than the discount rate, reflects
the presence of a precautionary motive for saving. As noted earlier, this is similar to Aiyagari (1994)
and Mendoza et al. (2008). The second property, that the interest rate in the South is lower than the
one in the North, is then a consequence of the fact that the precautionary motive is stronger in the


                                                    14
South, due to the higher level of idiosyncratic risk. Formally, this is captured by the monotonicity
of the function B with respect to σ̃: the higher the level of undiversifiable idiosyncratic risk, the
higher the steady-state demand for the risk-free asset for any given R; but since the net supply of
this asset is zero when the economy is in autarchy, it must be that the autarchic interest rate is
lower the higher is σ̃.
   This result is also illustrated in Figure 1. The interest rate is on the horizontal axis. The solid
line is the curve B for the North; the dashed line is the curve B for the South. These curves can be
interpreted as the aggregate demand for the safe asset in each country (normalized, though, by the
corresponding capital stocks). Both curves are increasing in R, but the one for the South lies above
the one for the North, reflecting the stronger precautionary motive in the South. The autarchic
steady-state interest rates are given by the intersections of the two curves with the horizontal zero
line. Clearly, the South has a lower autarchic interest rate, R2aut < R1aut .
   Part (ii) characterizes the steady-state levels of the capital stock: it establishes, under Assump-
tion 1, that the capital stock is lower than its complete-markets counterpart in both countries, and
more so in the South than in the North. The first property, namely that the autarchic capital stocks
are lower than their complete-markets counterparts, revisits the key result in Angeletos (2006). As
mentioned in the introduction, this is a core prediction that differentiates our framework from prior
work, including Aiyagari (1994), Krusell and Smith (1998), Mendoza et al. (2008, 2009), and most
other Bewley-type models where incomplete risk sharing is typically associated with higher capital
accumulation. Furthermore, this prediction is obviously more consistent with the data than the
alternative featured in the aforementioned class of models: our framework predicts that the least
financially developed countries are the poorest ones, not the richest ones.
   The key for this difference is the type of risk featured in those models versus the type of risk in
our model. In those models, agents face only idiosyncratic labor-income risk. This risk introduces
a precautionary motive for saving, which reduces the interest rate, but does not break the equality
between the interest rate and the marginal product of capital. In contrast, our model features
entrepreneurial, or capital-income, risk. This risk introduces not only a precautionary motive, but
also a positive wedge between the interest rate and the marginal product of capital; this wedge is
the risk premium on private investment. It follows that, while incomplete risk-sharing necessarily
encourages more capital accumulation in Bewley models by reducing the interest rate, it can dis-
courage capital accumulation in our model by introducing the risk-premium wedge. The conditions
in Assumption 1 then suffice for this wedge to dominate the reduction in the interest rate, thus
guaranteeing that the capital stock is lower than under complete markets. Finally, the result that
the autarchic capital stock is lower in the South than in the North reflects the fact that the wedge
is higher in the South. Formally, this last result follows combining the facts that σ̃ is higher in the
South, that R is lower in the South, that the function K is necessarily decreasing in σ̃, and that,
under Assumption 1, this function is also increasing in R for all R ≥ Rjaut .


                                                  15
   Finally, part (iii) characterizes the steady-state level of consumption: it establishes, under As-
sumption 1, that the aggregate level of consumption is lower than its complete-markets counterpart
in both countries, and more so in the South than in the North.
   Combined, the above results show that, under autarchy, the South—the economy with more
severe financial frictions—features a lower risk-free rate, a higher marginal product of capital, and
lower levels of aggregate capital, wealth and consumption.


4.3   Financial integration

We now proceed to our second main result, the characterization of the integrated steady state.

Proposition 3. An integrated steady state exists, and it necessarily features the following properties:
   (i) The interest rate is given by Rint , where Rint solves j∈{1,2} B(Rint , σ̃j )K(Rint , σ̃j ) = 0,
                                                               P

and satisfies
                                       R2aut < Rint < R1aut < β .

   (ii) The foreign asset positions are given by Bjint = B(Rint , σ̃j )Kjint and satisfy

                                           B1int < 0 < B2int .

   (iii) The capital stocks are given by Kjint = K(Rint , σ̃j ). Furthermore, under Assumption 1,

                                    K2aut < K2int < K1int < K1aut .

   (iv) The consumption levels are given by Cjint = f (Kjint )−δKjint +Rint Bjint . Furthermore, under
Assumption 1,
                                     C2aut < C2int < C1int < C1aut .

   Part (i) establishes that the interest rate in the integrated steady state falls between the two
autarchic values, while part (ii) states that in the integrated steady state the South is a net creditor,
while the North is a net debtor. As we will see in the next section, this steady-state position is
attained after a long transition throughout which the North runs persistent current-account deficits
(and, symmetrically, the South runs persistent current-account surpluses).
   These two results contain the explanation that our model offers for global imbalances:

Corollary 1. Along the transition from the autarchic to the integrated steady state, the North must
accumulate a negative foreign asset position, that is, it must run a series of current-account deficits.

Intuitively, this is because the North has a comparative advantage in supplying the riskless asset.
More precisely, the autarchic price of the riskless asset is lower (i.e., the autarchic interest rate is
higher) in the North than in the South because of the weaker precautionary motive in the North.

                                                   16
Extrapolating from standard trade theory, one would thus expect that the North will become a net
supplier of the riskless asset once the two countries are allowed to trade. Of course, this intuition
could have been misleading both because we are talking here about capital flaws, not goods trade,
and because of the rich dynamics that are involved in our environment. Nevertheless, our results
show that this basic intuition is largely correct.
    Parts (iii) and (iv) then study the long-run implications of financial integration for economic
activity and world-wide inequality. In particular, part (iii) establishes that the South has a higher
capital stock in the integrated steady state than in the autarchic one. Formally, this is a direct
implication of our earlier result in Lemma 2 that the function K is increasing in R. More intuitively,
this is because of the dynamics of wealth accumulation that we highlighted earlier: agents in the
South enjoy a higher capital stock in the integrated steady state because a prolonged access to higher
safe returns permits them to accumulate more wealth, and therefore to take more risk. The converse
is true for the North. Finally, part (iv) spells out the implications for aggregate consumption. The
South enjoys a higher level of consumption in the integrated steady state than under autarchy, both
because it has accumulated more capital domestically and because it has accumulated a positive
position against the North. Once again, the converse is true for the North.
    Clearly, similar properties as those for capital and consumption hold if we look at GDP, wages,
and labor productivity. This gives the key prediction of our model regarding the long-run impact
of financial integration on cross-country inequality:

Corollary 2. In the long run, financial integration reduces cross-country inequality.

    As we will see next, however, the short-run effects are quite different.


5    Transitional dynamics and numerical example
In this section we examine in more detail the dynamic responses of the two countries to the inte-
gration of their financial markets, starting from an initial position that coincides with the autarchic
steady states. For this purpose, we henceforth have to abandon generality and focus on a particular
numerical exercise. While we base this numerical exercise on a somewhat plausible calibration of
the model, we invite the reader not to focus on the precise numbers: the simplicity of our model and
data limitations preclude a rich, serious quantitative assessment. That being said, the numerical
exercise indicates that the effects can be of non-trivial magnitude. Furthermore, the qualitative
patterns we identify with this particular numerical exercise are extremely robust: as one should
anticipate from our earlier theoretical results, they obtain for a wide range of parameters that we
have experimented with as long as Assumption 1 is maintained.




                                                     17
5.1       Parameterization

The two economies are parameterized by (α, β, γ, δ, θ, σ̃1 , σ̃2 ), where α is the income share of
capital, β is the discount rate, γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, δ is the depreciation rate,
θ is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, and σ̃j is the undiversifiable risk in country j.
       The time period is interpreted as one year. All the preference and technology parameters
are set in a manner that is broadly consistent with the macro and macro-finance literatures. In
particular, the discount rate is β = 0.05. The elasticity of intertemporal substitution is θ = 1, a
value broadly consistent with recent micro and macro estimates.10 The coefficient of relative risk
aversion is γ = 8, a value commonly used in the macro-finance literature to help generate plausible
risk premia. Finally, the depreciation rate is δ = 0.10, and the share of capital in production is
α = 0.40.
       This leaves us with σ̃j or, equivalently, with σj and λj . We first focus on σj , which we interpret
as the idiosyncratic volatility of the rate of return that an individual entrepreneur faces in his
investment, regardless of whether this risk is insurable or not. This interpretation is analogous to
the notion of idiosyncratic volatility for stock market returns, except that here we are primarily
interested in privately-held businesses.11
       Unfortunately, there is no direct measure for σ in the US economy because of the unavailability
of sufficiently rich data about entrepreneurial returns. However, there are various indications that
idiosyncratic investment risks in the United States are significant. For instance, the probability that
a privately held firm survives five years after entry is less than 40%. Furthermore, even conditional
on survival, the risks faced by entrepreneurs and private investors appear to be very large: as
Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen (2002) document, not only is there a dramatic cross-sectional
variation in the returns to private equity, but also the volatility of the book value of an index of
private firms is twice as large as that of the index of public firms. Since this index already diversifies
the firm-specific risk in private equity, and since the volatility of the entire pool of public firms is
about 15% per annum, this gives another indication of the significant risks faced by entrepreneurs.
Finally, if one takes the idiosyncratic volatility of public firms as a proxy for that of private firms,
this would suggest a value of σ over 50% for the United States. This is actually the value preferred
by Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen (2002), Bitler et al. (2005) and Roussanov (2009).
       Another indirect estimate for the private-sector volatility in the US could be motivated by the
work of Davis et al. (2006), who use the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). They find that in
2001 the ratio of private to public volatility of employment growth rates was in the range of 1.43-
1.75. Given that the average annual standard deviation of returns for public firms over 1990-1997
  10
     See Angeletos (2007) for a more thorough discussion of the relevance of this parameter within the type of model
we have employed here, and also for references on the empirical estimates of this parameter.
  11
     Note, though, that idiosyncratic risk may affect the investment decisions of publicly traded firms as well. See
Panousi and Papanikolaou (2010) for evidence.



                                                        18
was 0.11 according to Campbell et al. (2001), and that there is, at least in the context of the present
model, a close relationship between the volatility of profits and the volatility of labor demand, a
choice of σ near 0.20 for the US economy could be justified from this perspective. Finally, if one
also takes into account that, in the data, sales and profits are more volatile than employment (at
least for public firms), this would suggest even higher values for σ.
    Combining the above observations, and interpreting the North in our model as the United States,
we conclude that a value for σ1 near 0.5 is a plausible benchmark. However, as already mentioned,
the entrepreneur may be able to diversify away a fraction λ of that risk, so that the volatility of
the remaining undiversifiable risk is in fact lower than σ. Furthermore, our model assumes that all
capital is held in private businesses, whereas in reality an important fraction is held in publicly-
traded companies. For these reasons, we next proceed to discuss the value of λ and/or σ̃.
    Although we have not explicitly modelled the distinction between private and public equity,
the following conceptual exercise provides a possible mapping between our model and the data.12
Suppose that each household in our model is able to split its family business in two accounting
identities. The one, which takes a fraction λ of the business’s output and profits, “goes public”:
it is sold in the market for its expected value, so that the household diversifies the risk in that
component. The other, which takes the residual (1 − λ) of the business’s output and profits, “stays
private”: the household has to bear the risk in that component. This interpretation then suggests
that λ can be matched to the ratio of public firm profits over total profits in the United States, where
total profits are the sum of privately held firm profits plus corporate profits. In the National Income
and Product Accounts (NIPAs), the ratio of proprietors’ profits over total profits (proprietors plus
corporate) is 47% on average over the period 1981-2006. This gives a value for λ1 around 0.5 or 0.6,
which is consistent with other estimates of the size of public equity relative to total capital.13
    Finally, a direct calibration of the uninsurable risk σ̃1 can be obtained as follows. In our model,
the idiosyncratic volatility of individual consumption growth is proportional to σ̃1 . We could then
ask what is the value of σ̃1 that makes our model’s prediction about idiosyncratic consumption
volatility match the one found in the data. Using studies that estimate this idiosyncratic variance
of consumption growth in US data, such as Ait-Sahalia et al. (2001) and Malloy et al. (2006), we
then infer that the appropriate value for σ̃1 is close to 0.2. On the basis of this observation and
the preceding discussion, we pick σ1 = 0.5, λ1 = 0.6 and σ̃1 ≡ (1 − λ1 )σ1 = 0.2 as our favorable
parameterization for the North.
    Turning to the South, we note that data on entrepreneurial activity and idiosyncratic investment
risk are even more scarce in developing countries than in the United States. Nevertheless, there are
multiple indications that idiosyncratic risk is higher in developing countries. For lack of a better
  12
     Incidentally, note that the distinction between private and public equity is unclear in the data too, since ownership
of many public companies is often concentrated in the hands of few key investors.
  13
     See Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen (2002) for a more extensive discussion of the relative size of private and
public equity in the United States.


                                                           19
                                  Baseline parameter values
                 Preferences and technologies      Risk: North                    Risk: South
  Parameter         β    θ γ      α     δ        σ1     λ1    σ̃1               σ2     λ2    σ̃2
    Value         0.05 1 8 0.40 0.10            0.50 0.60 0.20                 0.50 0.20 0.40


                                  Table 1: Baseline parameter values.


alternative, we assume that the overall amount of risk σ2 in the South is the same as the one
assumed for the North. We then set λ2 at the conservative value of 0.2. This is at the upper range
of available estimates of the ratio of public equity to total capital in less advanced economies such
as China, India, Brazil and Mexico (e.g., Demirguc and Levine, 1996; La Porta et al., 1997). This
approach gives σ2 = 0.5, λ2 = 0.2 and σ̃2 ≡ (1 − λ1 )σ1 = 0.4 as our favorable parameterization for
the South.
   In any event, what matters for the qualitative properties of all the results we document below
is merely the fact that σ̃2 is higher than σ̃1 , not the precise numbers we have picked. With this
qualification in mind, we summarize the baseline parameterization of our model in Table 1 and
proceed to document the dynamic effects of financial integration.


5.2   Dynamic responses

We are now ready to conduct the experiment of interest, namely a reform that lets the two economies
integrate their financial markets (i.e., to trade the riskless asset). This reform is assumed to be
unexpected and irreversible. Before this reform, the two economies are assumed to rest at their
respective autarchic steady states. The objective is then to study the dynamics responses of these
economies to this reform.
   Tracking the transitional dynamics of incomplete-market models is often a daunting exercise.
This is not the case here, thanks to the low dimensionality of the general-equilibrium system of
our model. In particular, note from Lemma 1 that, when θ = 1, the marginal propensity to
consume out of total wealth reduces to mjt = β for all j, t. It then follows from Proposition 1
that the transitional dynamics of the world economy can be reduced to a simple system of four
first-order ODE’s in (Xjt , Hjt )j∈{1,2} , where Xjt ≡ Kjt + Bjt . Our numerical algorithm then works
as follows. First, we solve for both the autarchic and the integrated steady-state aggregates. Next,
we numerically solve the aforementioned ODE system using the autarchic steady-state values of
capital, Xj0 ≡ Kjaut , as initial conditions and the integrated steady-state values of human wealth,
Hjint , as terminal conditions.
   The dynamic path of the South is illustrated in Figure 2, and that of the North in Figure 3.
Time in years is on the horizontal axis, and levels of several macroeconomic variables are on the
vertical axis. The dotted lines indicate the levels of the variables at the autarchic steady state. The


                                                  20
dashed lines indicate the levels of the variables at the integrated steady state. The solid lines show
the dynamic responses of the variables.
   Figure 2 shows that, immediately upon integration, the capital stock in the South falls below its
autarchic steady-state level. But after this initial fall, the capital stock starts recovering. In fact,
it is back to the autarchy level in about thirty years and it keeps increasing after that, eventually
converging to the new, higher, integrated steady state. In other words, the South faces a bleak
picture in the short run, with a significant outflow of capital immediately after integration, but this
picture is reversed in the long run, as capital starts flying back into the country, eventually reaching
a higher level than under autarchy. In particular, the capital stock in the South falls by almost
4% immediately after integration, compared to its autarchic steady state. But, at the long-run
integrated steady state, the capital stock in the South has increased almost 9% above its autarchic
level. The same qualitative picture is true for the other aggregate variables, such as aggregate
output, consumption, and the wage. For example, aggregate output in the South falls by almost
2% in the short run, and it increases by almost 3% in the long run, compared to its autarchic value.
   Figure 3 demonstrates the exact opposite picture for the North. Immediately upon integration,
the North experiences an inflow of capital, and capital remains above its autarchic level for about
fifty years. However, in the long run, capital settles at an integrated level lower than the autarchic
one. The same is true for the other aggregate variables. The interest rate jumps down from the
autarchic steady state upon integration, and it settles at an even lower level in the long run. Finally,
in the long run the North ends up borrowing from the South. In other words, the North experiences
an initial period of prosperity, but in the long run this picture is reversed. For example, capital
in the North increases by about 2.5% upon integration, but it falls by about 5% in the long-run
steady state, compared to its autarchy level. And aggregate output in the North increases by 1%
upon integration, but it falls by 2% in the long run, compared to autarchy.
   The intuition behind these results is as follows. While in autarchy, the South faces higher levels
of idiosyncratic risk and therefore features a higher demand for precautionary saving than the North.
This stronger precautionary motive keeps the domestic (risk-free) interest rate suppressed in the
South relative to the North. Upon integration, however, the precautionary saving of the South is
partly absorbed by the North, implying that the domestic interest rate has to increase in the South
(and decrease in the North). This in turn has very different implications for the macroeconomic
outcomes of the South depending on whether we look at the short run or the long run. In the short
run, the increase in the interest rate means an increase in the opportunity cost of capital, causing
a reduction in the capital stock of the South. In the long run, however, this increase in the interest
rate permits the residents of the South to accumulate more wealth. As they do so, they become
willing to undertake more investment risk, which explains why the capital stock recovers over time.
The fact that the capital stock eventually increases beyond its autarchic value then follows from
Proposition 3.


                                                  21
    Finally, note that, along the transition to the new steady state, the South runs significant
current-account surpluses, so that it keeps increasing its financial position abroad. Conversely, the
North runs significant current-account deficits, eventually reaching a dramatic level of foreign debt,
equal to about 3.5 times its GDP. Clearly, this is the manifestation of the precautionary saving of
the South rushing for safety in the North.
    Our findings thus provide a novel perspective on the ongoing debate on the costs and benefits
of capital-market liberalization. In particular, while many fear that such a reform may cause an
outflow of capital, and while this fear seems to be validated by the recent emergence of global
imbalances, here we find that this effect may be reversed in the long run thanks to the endogenous
accumulation of capital.

Corollary 3. Financial integration can trigger an outflow of capital from the poor country in the
short run, thereby exacerbating cross-country inequality. These effects, however, are reversed in the
long run.



6     Welfare implications
In this section we examine the welfare effects of integration within each country. In so doing, we
are interested in distinguishing how these effects may vary between the poor and the rich, as well as
across different generations.14 This motivates us to consider two exercises. The first studies welfare
at the moment the reform takes place, taking into account the entire transitional dynamics that
will follow, i.e. it examines the welfare effects of integration for the generations currently alive at
the time of the reform. The second compares welfare across the autarchic and the integrated steady
states, i.e. it captures the welfare effects of integration for future generations (those who will be
alive at the new integrated-world steady state).
    More precisely, the first exercise seeks to answer the following question. Suppose that a country
rests in its autarchic steady state and the current generation contemplates the option to undertake
a reform that would let it integrate with the other country. Pick a particular level of wealth. What
is the minimal compensation an agent with that particular level of wealth would be willing to
accept in return for the failure of the reform to take place? The second exercise seeks to answer
   14
      At this point, we note that our baseline model features an explosive level of wealth inequality within each country.
This is because individual dynamics follow a random walk in steady state and agents leave for ever. To fix this issue,
we modify the model to let the agents die with a constant Poisson rate v > 0 and get replaced with other agents who
“inherit” the average level of wealth. We can then adjust the subjective discount rate so that the effective discount
rate, which now includes v, remains the same as in our baseline model. This guarantees that the aggregate dynamics
of the modified model remain exactly the same as those of our baseline model, while at the same time the modified
model admits a unique, well-defined steady-state wealth distribution. The appendix provides the basic details of the
modified model, and Panousi (2010) provides all the details on this approach. For our numerical exercise, we set
v = 1/150; this is motivated by the fact that the average mortality rate is about 1/75 per year and the fact that
agents are imperfectly altruistic towards future generations.



                                                           22
the following question. Suppose that future generations are offered the option to be born in the
autarchic steady state versus be born in the integrated steady state. Fix a particular ranking in
the wealth distribution (say, the 7-th percentile). What is the minimal compensation an agent with
that particular ranking would have to receive under the autarchic steady state in order to be as
happy as an agent with the same ranking under the integrated steady state? In short, the first
exercise studies how financial integration impacts the welfare of the poor and the rich in the current
generation, while the second exercise studies how it impacts the welfare of the poor and the rich of
future generations.
                                       j            j             j
    Formally, fix a country j and let V∞,aut (x), V0,int (x) and V∞,int (x) denote the value functions
at, respectively, the autarchic steady state, the time the reform initiates, and the integrated steady
state. The first welfare exercise is to compute, for each level of financial wealth x, a compensating
                               j                      j
differential τj (x) such that V∞,aut (x + τj (x)) = V0,int (x). The second exercise is to compute a
                                             j                      j
compensating differential τj0 (x) such that V∞,aut (x + τj0 (x)) = V∞,int (g j (x)), where g j (x) is the level
of wealth that corresponds to the same relative wealth position under the integrated steady state as
the one obtained with wealth x under the autarchic steady state. For either of these two exercises,
we then express the corresponding compensating differential as a fraction of the agent’s permanent
income.15 The resulting number represents a welfare gain if it is positive, and a welfare loss if it is
negative.
    These welfare gains and losses are then illustrated in Table 2 and in Figure 4, for each of the
two countries and for different levels of wealth. Table 2 summarizes the welfare gains and losses
across the four quartiles of the autarchic steady-state wealth distribution. Figure 4 gives a similar
but finer picture, by illustrating the welfare effects across all percentiles of the wealth distribution.
The solid line in this figure represents the welfare effects for the current generation (that is, those
obtained by the first of the aforementioned welfare exercises), while the dashed line represents the
welfare effects for future generations (that is, those obtained by the second exercise).
    We first consider the South, which is in panel (a) of Figure 4. On impact (solid line), financial
integration benefits the rich at the expense of the poor: the currently-poor suffer losses, whereas
the currently-rich enjoy gains. However, in future generations (dashed line), the effects for these
income groups are reversed: the poor of the future are better off living under integration than under
autarchy, while the converse is true for the rich of the future. For example, as shown in Table 2,
agents at the bottom quartile of the wealth distribution in the current generation suffer an average
loss equal to 8.4% of their permanent income upon integration, while agents at the bottom quartile
of the wealth distribution in future generations enjoy an average gain of 3.8% from integration. The
corresponding numbers for those agents at the top quartile of the wealth distribution are a gain of
   15
      That is, a number equal to, say, 5% means that the agent must receive either a lump sum equal to 5% of his
effective wealth or, equivalently, a perpetuity with annual dividend equal to 5% of his permanent income.




                                                      23
                                          Baseline welfare effects
                                                  South                               North
                                          Q1    Q2    Q3     Q4              Q1       Q2 Q3          Q4
            Current generation
                                         −8.4    −2.8     −1.1     0.9       3.3      1.2     0.5   −0.7
            (at time of reform)
            Future generations
                                          3.8     3.8      1.8    −0.8     −11.6     −3.0     0.8    6.8
           (across steady states)


Table 2: Baseline welfare effects. This table summarizes the welfare effects of financial inte-
gration across the quartiles of the wealth distribution. Q1 is the first quartile, Q2 is the second
quartile, and so on. The numbers is the cells of the table report the within-quartile averages of the
compensating differentials for the current generation (at the moment integration takes place) and
for future generations (compares welfare across the autarchic and integrated steady states). The
compensating differentials are measured as percent of permanent income.


0.9% for the current generation and a loss of 0.8% for the future generation, respectively.16
    The intuition behind these results is as follows. On impact, financial integration causes the
South’s wages to fall and its interest rates to rise, as we have seen in Figure 2. Both these forces tend
to reduce the present discounted value of wages, that is, the human wealth of households. In turn,
this hurts all agents, but more so the poorer ones, since a larger fraction of poor agents’ effective
wealth comes from labor income. At the same time, the reduction in wages means that private
businesses now face lower labor costs, which increases the average return on private investment.
Along with the fact that the interest rate has also increased, this means that the overall return
to saving has increased. This effect tends to benefit the rich, who have large amounts of financial
wealth relative to human wealth. In our example, this positive effect is strong enough to offset the
negative effect of the reduced human wealth for richer agents, and it explains why richer agents gain
whereas poorer agents lose from integration on the impact of the reform.
    At the new integrated steady state, on the other hand, wages in the South eventually settle
at a higher level than under autarchy. This tends to increase human wealth. The increase in the
interest rate contributes in the opposite direction, but it does not offset the positive effect of higher
wages. The resulting increase in human wealth then benefits both the poor and the rich of future
generations. Along with the fact that the wealth distribution shifts to the right, this explains why
the future-poor (and middle classes) are the most likely to benefit from integration. The future-rich,
however, may end up losing because the new steady state is associated with higher labor costs and
lower mean returns to entrepreneurship, compared to autarchy.
    We next consider the North, which is illustrated in panel (b) of Figure 4. On impact (solid line),
the poor and the middle classes of the current generation gain, while the very rich lose. Once again,
  16
     We note here that, compared to its autarchic level, GDP in the South falls by 1.6% on the impact of the reform,
while it increases by 3.3% at the integrated steady state. The effects of integration on GDP for both countries are
presented in Table 5, which is delegated to the appendix to economize in space.



                                                        24
                                   Sensitivity analysis for the South
                                         Current generation          Future generations
                                     Q1     Q2       Q3      Q4    Q1    Q2    Q3     Q4
                 baseline          −8.4    −2.8    −1.1     0.9   3.8    3.8   1.8 −0.8
                 σ̃2 = 0.6         −18.3 −5.0      −1.8     1.9   5.2    5.8   2.6 −1.7
                  α = 0.7          −14.0 −12.0 −10.8 −8.4         53.3 0.6     0.7    2.2
           σ̃2 = 0.6, α = 0.7      −25.9 −19.6 −16.2 −10.3 65.2 2.5            2.4    2.3
             σ̃2 : 0.4 → 0.2        23.9   16.1     15.9    15.6  40.2 30.0 22.9 13.9


Table 3: Sensitivity analysis for the South. This table revisits the welfare effects of financial
integration for the South, for three alternative parameterizations and a variant policy reform.


future generations face reversed effects (dashed line): the poor lose and the rich gain. For example,
as shown in Table 2, the agents currently at the bottom quartile of the wealth distribution gain
3.3%, while those at the bottom quartile of the distribution in the future lose 11.6%. The agents
at the top quartile of the distribution in the current generation lose 0.7%, while those at the top
quartile in future generations gain 6.8%. The intuition for these results is analogous to that for the
South. Immediately upon integration, the current-generation poor in the North gain because of the
increase in human wealth, whereas the current-generation rich lose because of the lower return to
their bond holdings and the higher labor costs in their private businesses. But as time passes and
capital starts decreasing, the consequent reduction in wages hurts the poor and benefits the rich of
future generations.17
    In what follows we examine the sensitivity of our findings to three variant parameterizations of
the model. In addition, we also consider an alternative policy exercise. The results are presented
in Table 3 for the South and in Table 4 for the North. In each table, the first block presents the
welfare effects for the current generation, and the second block presents the welfare effects for future
generations. The first line repeats the baseline welfare effects from Table 2. The next three lines
present the three variant parameterizations. The last line presents the alternative reform exercise.
    The first variant we consider raises the level of uninsurable risk in the South, from σ̃2 = 0.4 to
σ̃2 = 0.6. The second variant raises the income share of capital in both countries from α = 0.4 to
α = 0.7; this is meant to capture the broader definition of capital one may wish to use for long-run
considerations. The third variant combines the aforementioned two variants. Finally, we return
to the baseline parameterization but consider an alternative policy exercise: we now assume that
financial integration permits the South to obtain access, not only to the higher safe returns of the
North, but also to the improved risk-sharing opportunities of the latter. That is, we let financial
integration be associated with an increase of λ2 from 0.2 to 0.6, and hence with a reduction in σ̃2
from 0.4 to 0.2.
  17
     Compared to its autarchic level, GDP in the North increases by 1.1% on the impact of the reform, while it falls
by 2% at the integrated steady state.


                                                        25
                                 Sensitivity analysis for the North
                                      Current generation      Future generations
                                     Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4             Q1     Q2 Q3 Q4
                      baseline       3.3 1.2 0.5 −0.7 −11.6 −3.0 0.8 6.8
                      σ̃2 = 0.6      4.5 1.8 0.8 −0.8 −15.3 −3.6 1.2 9.3
                       α = 0.7       4.7 4.4 4.2 3.8        −16.1 0.5 0.6 6.8
                σ̃2 = 0.6, α = 0.7 3.6 3.4 3.3 3.0          −15.2 0.3 0.5 7.1
                  σ̃2 : 0.4 → 0.2    0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0         0.0    0.0 0.0 0.0


Table 4: Sensitivity analysis for the North. This table revisits the welfare effects of financial
integration for the North, for three alternative parameterizations and a variant policy reform.


   Under any of the three variant parameterizations, upon integration the very poor of the current
generation continue to suffer losses in the South and to enjoy benefits in the North, as was the
case in the baseline. Notably though, the losses from integration in the South are now much more
widespread across agents at all wealth levels, and these losses become rather large in the second and
third variant parameterizations. Turning to future generations, the very poor continue to gain in the
South and to lose in the North, though the poor’s gains in the South now tend to be much bigger
than under the baseline, while the poor’s losses in the North are not much different. Although,
compared to the baseline, future-generation benefits become more widespread in the South, with
all quartiles actually gaining in the last two variants, nonetheless the benefits from integration are
primarily enjoyed by agents in the bottom quartile. In other words, compared to the baseline,
integration for the South results in more widespread losses for the current generation, and in more
widespread benefits, which however also exhibit a very high concentration at the bottom, for future
generations. These findings suggest that the welfare gains of capital-account liberalization for the
very poor of future generations are likely to be highest for economies where idiosyncratic risk impacts
a broad range of entrepreneurial, investment, and human-capital choices.
   In the last exercise, agents in the South now gain at all wealth levels, both in the current
generation and in future ones. In addition, these welfare gains are now much bigger than in the
baseline policy exercise, and they are also more widespread in the population. For example, agents
in the bottom quartile in the current generation now gain 23.9% (instead of losing 8.4%, as in the
benchmark), and agents in the bottom quartile in future generations gain 40.2% (instead of 3.8%).
Agents in the top quartile in the current generation gain 15.6% (instead of 0.9%), and agents in the
top quartile in future generations gain 13.9% (instead of losing 0.8%). These findings indicate that
the benefits of capital-account liberalization for the future generations of developing economies are
likely to be maximal if the reform also helps these countries alleviate their own agency, enforcement
and institutional problems by gaining access to the more efficient financial institutions of developed
economies.



                                                  26
         The numerical findings we have reported in this section are, of course, only illustrative. A serious
quantitative exercise would require a richer model, one that would allow for more sources of hetero-
geneity (e.g., different levels of entrepreneurial ability), for diminishing returns in entrepreneurial
investment, and for endogenous occupational and educational choices. Nevertheless, the qualita-
tive properties we have uncovered are likely to be robust and they highlight the distinct effects for
current versus future periods that are at the focus of our analysis.


7         TFP growth and shortage of assets
In this section we discuss an extension of our model that helps accommodate the idea that developing
countries suffer from a shortage of assets (Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas, 2008), uncovers the
possible implications of our analysis for TFP growth, and helps resolve the puzzle that capital often
flows from fast-growing to slow-growing countries (Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2008).
         This extension introduces a “safe sector”. The technology in this sector has a lower mean return
than entrepreneurial activity, but entails no risk. One can think of this as, say, “farming”, or as some
form of storage technology. The broader idea here is that entrepreneurs face a trade-off between risk
and return as they choose among an array of investment opportunities—a trade-off that is known
to play a crucial role in aggregate TFP and growth dynamics (e.g., Acemoglu and Zillibotti, 1997).
                                                                                                  α , where
         The production function in the “safe sector” is assumed to take the form gj (Mjt ) = Aj Mjt
Mjt is the corresponding level of capital and Aj is a productivity parameter that determines the
size of the safe sector relative to that of the risky, entrepreneurial sector.18 Clearly, the equilibrium
must now satisfy Rjt = gj0 (Mjt ) for each country j and all periods t: the marginal product of
capital in the safe sector is equated to the interest rate. This pins down the capital stock of the
safe sector—which can be interpreted as the supply of safe assets—as an increasing function of the
interest rate. The rest of the equilibrium characterization then proceeds in similar lines as in our
benchmark model, and is omitted here because of space limitations.
         Consider now the following exercise. Restrict σ̃1 = σ̃2 but let 0 < A2 < A1 . Letting A1 > A2
captures the idea that the North may have a technological or institutional superiority in supplying
the safe asset; restricting σ̃1 = σ̃2 seeks to isolate this possibility from the possibility of differential
levels of uninsurable entrepreneurial risk, the implications of which we have already studied. It is
then possible to check that all our findings continue to hold as before. In particular, the South
is poorer than the North under both autarchy and integration; the North runs persistent current-
account deficits upon integration; capital initially flies out of the South and into the North in the
short run; and finally this effect is reversed in the long run.
         This extension thus offers a direct re-interpretation of the preceding analysis: our results origi-
nate interchangeably in the relatively higher level of uninsurable risk faced by entrepreneurs in the
    18
         That the safe sector does not employ labor is for simplicity.


                                                              27
South and/or in the relative superiority of the North in supplying the global economy with safe
stores of value. In turn, this builds a bridge between our paper and Caballero, Farhi and Gourin-
chas (2008). Like this earlier work, our analysis indicates that global imbalances may stem from a
shortage of assets in emerging countries. But unlike this earlier work, our analysis requires only a
shortage of the relatively safe assets, not of all assets. Indeed, emerging economies appear to be
producing a lot of assets in reality. Yet, most of these assets are risky and their residents seem
to be searching abroad for safer assets such as US Treasury securities. It is thus the shortage of
such “quality” assets, and not of all assets, that explains why financial capital may be flowing from
emerging countries to the United States and other advanced economies.
         Finally, our analysis has distinct implication for aggregate TFP and growth dynamics. To see
this, note that along the transition from the autarchic to the integrated steady state, agents in
the South become increasingly willing to take risk. Like in our baseline mode, this is because the
increase in the interest rate induces agents in the South to accumulate more wealth. But now that
the agents face a choice between the safe sector and the risky, entrepreneurial sector, this increase
in the willingness to take risk also means a reallocation of resources from the safe sector to the more
risky, but also more efficient, entrepreneurial sector. As this happens, the South enjoys an increase
in TFP. Conversely, because the North de-cumulates wealth and reallocates capital away from its
entrepreneurial sector, it experiences a drop in its TFP. This is illustrated in Figure 5, which shows
the dynamics of TFP in the two countries for a numerical version of the extended model.19
         Along with our model’s prediction regarding current-account dynamics, this provides a simple
resolution to the empirical puzzle documented by Gourinchas and Jeanne (2008). This work showed
that, in the data, capital often appears to flow from countries that experience higher productivity
growth to those that experience lower productivity growth. While this fact is inconsistent with the
standard neoclassical growth paradigm, it is easily accommodated in our model.20


8         Conclusion
This paper studies the global macroeconomic implications of financial integration within a tractable
incomplete-markets model that features uninsurable idiosyncratic entrepreneurial risk—a friction
that introduces, not only a precautionary motive for saving, but also a wedge between the interest
rate and the marginal product of capital.
    19
      The numerical exercise here assumes σ̃1 = σ̃2 = .50, α = 0.7, and (A1 , A2 ) chosen so that in autarchy the capital
in the “safe sector” accounts for 50% of total capital in the North and for 20% of total capital in the South. Also, note
that TFP growth is negative in the North and positive in the South, but both countries could feature positive TFP
growth if we had allowed for an exogenous constant drift in technology. The robust prediction is that integration
speeds up TFP growth in the South while it slows it down in the North.
   20
      In fact, if we focus on labor productivity (output per worker) rather than TFP, this statement holds true even
for our baseline model: along the transition from the autarchic to the integrated steady states, the South experiences
higher growth in physical capital and labor productivity than the North, and yet it is the North that is borrowing
from the South. The extension of this section helps reinforce this point by establishing a similar property for TFP.


                                                           28
   Because of this wedge, a financially underdeveloped economy (“South” or “China”) can feature
both a lower interest rate and a lower capital stock under autarchy than a more advanced economy
(“North” or “US”). As the two economies open up their capital accounts, interest rates rise in the
South and fall in the North; the North starts running large current-account deficits; and the South
suffers an outflow of capital. Over time, however, integration permits the South to accumulate more
wealth, in part by saving in the North. As this happens, the bite of the aforementioned friction
diminishes. Eventually, this helps boost capital accumulation and growth, thereby reducing cross-
country inequality in the long run. Combined, these results provide a simple explanation for the
emergence of global imbalances, a simple resolution to the empirical puzzle that capital often fails
to flow from the rich or slow-growing to the poor or fast-growing countries, and a distinct set of
policy lessons regarding the intertemporal costs and benefits of capital-account liberalization.
   Underlying these findings are two key properties. First, a positive wedge between the marginal
product of capital and the risk-free rate. Second, the tendency of this wedge to diminish as wealth
increases. In our model, the first property is due to uninsurable idiosyncratic investment risk; the
second property then follows from diminishing absolute risk aversion. Interestingly, these properties
may naturally emerge also in models with borrowing constraints. These models feature a positive
wedge between the marginal product of capital (“internal returns”) and the interest rate faced by
savers (“external returns”), either because constraints bind now or because they are expected to bind
in the future. What is more, this wedge typically falls with wealth, as more wealth helps overcome
current and future borrowing constraints. We thus conjecture that similar results would obtain in a
variant of our model that would introduce realistic borrowing constraints in addition to, or in place
of, the entrepreneurial risk that we have focused on in this paper.




                                                 29
9    Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1 (individual policy rules). This result is essentially a variant of the Merton-
Samuelson optimal portfolio problem; see the proof of Proposition 1 in Angeletos and Panousi
(2009).

   Proof of Proposition 1 (equilibrium dynamics). For simplicity, we drop the index j. Since
aggregate labor demand is i nit = n̄(ωt )Kt and aggregate labor supply is 1, the labor market clears if
                         R

and only if n̄(ωt )Kt = 1. It follows that the equilibrium wage satisfies ωt = FL (Kt , 1) and, similarly,
the equilibrium mean return to capital satisfies r̄t = FK (Kt , 1) − δ. The bond market clears if and
only if Bt = 0. We define total effective wealth for an agent i as the sum of his financial wealth,
which in turn is the sum of his capital holdings and bond holdings, plus human wealth (or human
capital), i.e. wti ≡ kti + bit + ht = xit + ht . Then, in general equilibrium of the autarchic economy,
Wt = Kt + Ht . Combining Xt = Kt + Bt with the aggregation of bond holdings from (8), gives
(14). Aggregating over the definition of human capital in Lemma 1, we get:
                                                      Z    ∞        Rs
                                        Ht = ht =              e−   t    Rj dj
                                                                                 ωs ds .
                                                       t

Expressing this in recursive form gives condition (13). Aggregating the household budget, which
can be written as dwti = [r̄t kti + Rt (bit + ht ) − cit ]dt + σkti dzti , using the aggregated policy functions
from (8), using (9) and (13), and the fact that, in equilibrium, r̄t Kt + ωt = F (Kt , 1) − δKt , we get
the resource constraint (11). Finally, using Ct = mt Wt , and therefore Ċt /Ct = ṁt /mt + Ẇt /Wt ,
together with (10) and the definition of ρ̂jt , gives the aggregate Euler condition (12).

    Proof of Lemma 2. (i) The form of the function K is evident from condition (18), while the
form of the function B follows from condition (19).

    (ii) Using our Cobb-Douglas assumption for the production function and equation (18), we
                   h       i 1
get that K(R) = µ(R)+δ+R
                            α−1                                            1
                       α        . It follows that KR has the same sign as α−1 (µR + 1). Since
               2                                                                           2
µ(R) = ( 2θγ σ̃
          1+θ (β − R))
                      1/2 from (18), we get that µ = (− 1 2θγ σ̃ )1/2 (β − R)−1/2 . Using this, we
                                                  R     2 1+θ
                                  1 θγ σ̃ 2
have that KR > 0 ⇔ R > β −        2 θ+1       ≡ R̂(σ̃) < β ≡ R̄.

    In addition, since Ẇt = ρt Wt − Ct = (ρt − mt ) Wt , where ρt ≡ φt r̄t + (1 − φt )Rt , wealth
stationarity requires ρ = m. Combining this with the Euler equation in steady state, we get:

                                 θ+1
                                     φ(f 0 (K) − δ − R) − θ(β − R) = 0 .
                                  2

From this, and for steady-state capital to be lower than under complete markets, that is, for f 0 (K)−



                                                           30
δ > β, it has to be the case that:

                                                θ+1
                                                    φ(β − R) − θ(β − R) < 0 ,
                                                 2

which, since β − R > 0, gives θ > φ/(2 − φ) or φ < θ/(θ + 1) .
                                 h              i    1
                                     µ(R)+δ+R       α−1
        (iii) Since K(R) =               α                , it follows that Kσ̃ has the same sign as −µσ̃ . Since µ(R) =
    2θγ σ̃ 2                                           θγ 2θγ σ̃ 2 −1/2
(    1+θ       (β − R))1/2 , we get that µσ̃ =        1+θ ( 1+θ )       (β     − R). Using this, we have that Kσ̃ < 0.

        (iv) From (19) we have that:

                                                                      K(R)α 1 − φ (R)
                                       B(R) = − (1 − α)                    +          K(R) .                              (21)
                                                                        R     φ(R)

                                                                                                          2
Consider the limits of B as R → 0+ and R → β − . Note that µ(0) = ( 2θγ σ̃
                                                                     1+θ β)
                                                                           1/2 is finite and hence

both φ(0) and K(0) are finite. It follows that:

                                                                              1     1
                           lim B(R) = −(1 − α)K(0)α lim                         +(      + 1)K(0) = −∞ .
                          R→0+                                         R→0+   R    φ(0)

Furthermore, µ(β) = 0, implying φ (β) = 0 and K(β) = (f 0 )−1 (β) is finite. It follows that:

                                                                       1         1
                           lim B(R) = −(1 − α)K(β)α                      + lim (   + 1)K(β) = +∞ .
                         R→β −                                         β R→β φ(R)
                                                                              −



        Next, note that, from (21):

                                     K(R)α      K 0 (R)         φ0 (R)
                                                           
                       ∂B                                                        1   0
                          = −(1 − α)         αR         − 1   −       2 K(R) + φ(R) K (R) .
                       ∂R             R2        K (R)           φ (R)

                                          h                 i    1                 q
                                              µ(R)+δ+R          α−1                          2θ
Now note that, since K(R) =                       α                   and φ(R) ≡       γ σ̃ 2 (1+θ)
                                                                                                    (β   − R), we have:

                                        f 0 (K)           K0     1 µ0 + 1                      φ0   γ σ̃ 2 µ0
                            K α−1 =             ,            =               ,      and           =           ,
                                            α             K    α − 1 f 0 (K)                   φ2      µ2

where we suppress the dependence of K, µ, and φ on R for notational simplicity. It follows that:

                                      ∂B    1 − α Rµ0 + R − f 0 (K) γ σ̃ 2 µ0
                                         =−                        −          .
                                      ∂R      α         R2             µ2

Since µ0 (R) < 0 and R < f 0 (K (R)) for all R ∈ (0, β), we have that ∂B/∂R > 0 for all R ∈ (0, β).
        (v) Using the formulas for µ(R) and φ(R) from above, we get:

                   ∂B      ∂ B      ∂ −1                                         1 − α −1
                        =     ( )=      (φ − 1 − (1 − α)K α−1 R−2 ) = −φ−2 φσ̃ −      R µσ̃ ,
                   ∂ σ̃   ∂ σ̃ K   ∂ σ̃                                            α

                                                                        31
where φσ̃ = − σ̃12 ( 2θ(β−R)
                      γ(1+θ) )
                               1/2 and µ = ( 2θγ(β−R) )1/2 . Substituting this into
                                        σ̃      1+θ
                                                                                      ∂B
                                                                                      ∂ σ̃   > 0 yields:

                                           2θβ(1 − α)
                                     R>                ≡ R < R̄ ≡ β .
                                          α + θ(2 − α)   ¯



    Proof that the first part of Assumption 1 implies its second part. Using the definitions
of R̂ and R, we get:
          ¯                                           2αβ(1 + θ)
                                     R̂ < R ⇔ σ̃ <                  .
                                          ¯        θγ(α + θ(2 − α))
In this region of interest rates, KR > 0, and therefore φ < θ/(1 + θ). Next, let f (K) = K α ,
fˆ(K) = K α + δK, and s ≡ δK/fˆ. From (19) in autarchic bond market clearing, we have that:

                         1−φ   H    ω   f (K) − f 0 (K)K   f /K − f 0
                             =   =    =                  >            ,
                          φ    K   RK         RK               f0

and therefore
                                            fˆ0 K/fˆ − δK/fˆ α − s
                                       φ<                   =      .
                                                1 − δK/fˆ     1−s
                         α−s                                    α−s        θ
For σ̃ very small, φ '   1−s ,   which implies that KR > 0 ⇔    1−s   <   1+θ   .

    Proof of Proposition 2. (i) The equation B(Rjaut , σ̃j ) = 0 is simply bond market clearing
for each country. Under Assumption 1, we are in the region where Bσ̃ > 0. From (20) we have
that B = B/K ≡ D. Using a proof similar to that in Lemma 2(iv), we get that DR < 0. Hence,
BR < 0. We also have that Bσ̃ = BR Rσ̃ > 0, with BR < 0. Therefore, it has to be that Rσ̃ < 0 in
autarchy. In other words, R1aut > R2aut .

    (ii) This part follows from the proof of Lemma 2, part (iii). The limits of B(R), together with
the continuity of B (R) in R, establish the existence of an R that solves B(R) = 0. This is in fact
the unique steady-state R, since BR > 0 always.

    (iii) Under Assumption 1, we are in the region where KR > 0. Hence, the fact that R1aut > R2aut
implies that K1aut > K2aut > 0. Since consumption is increasing in capital, we also have that
C1aut > C2aut .

    Proof of Proposition 3. (i) Consider the function WB(R) defined by:

                          WB(R) ≡ B(R, σ̃1 )K(R, σ̃1 ) + B(R, σ̃2 )K(R, σ̃2 ) .

An integrated steady state is given by any solution to WB(R) = 0. Note that the function K is
always positively valued, while the function B can take both signs and is increasing in R and σ̃.

                                                    32
Furthermore, recall that R2aut < R1aut . Whenever R ≤ R2aut (< R1aut ), by the monotonicity of B
in R we have that B(R, σ̃2 ) ≤ B(R2aut , σ̃2 ) = 0 and B(R, σ̃1 ) < B(R2aut , σ̃2 ) = 0; it follows that
WB(R) < 0. Similarly, whenever R ≥ R1aut , we have that WB(R) > 0. Along with the fact that
the function WB(R) is continuous in R, this implies that a solution Rint to WB(R) = 0 always
exists and it necessarily satisfies R2aut < Rint < R1aut .

   (ii) Under Assumption 1, we are in the area where Bσ̃ > 0, which implies that B1int < B2int , and
since the world bond market has to clear, this means that B1int < 0 < B2int .

   (iii) Since Kσ̃ < 0, it follows that K1int > K2int . Since Assumption 1 ensures that KR > 0, and
using (i), we get the desired result.

   (iv) This part follows directly from parts (ii) and (iii).

   Details on demographics. In order to guarantee the existence of a stationary wealth dis-
tribution, we slightly modify the baseline model setup so that all households now face a constant
probability of death, with Poisson arrival rate v dt at every instant in time. There is no intergenera-
tional altruism linking a household to its descendants, and utility is zero after death. The discount
rate in preferences can then be reinterpreted as β = β̃ + v, where β̃ is the psychological or subjective
discount rate and v is the probability of death.
   In order to isolate the effects of entrepreneurial risk, we assume that agents can still freely
                                                                           R∞ Rs
borrow the entire net present value of their future labor income, now hjt ≡ t e− t (Rjτ +v)dτ ωjs ds,
because there exist annuity firms permitting all agents to get insurance against mortality risk. Then,
ḣjt = (Rjt + v)hjt − ωjt . If we let bjt = −hjt , then ḃjt = Rjt bjt − vhjt + ωjt . These equations are
consistent with each other and with market clearing, and they have two alternative but isomorphic
interpretations. First, at the beginning of time, every worker borrows from the annuity firms an
amount equal to his entire human capital. From then on, he repays this debt every period by giving
up his wage plus interest to the annuity firms, which only stops when he dies. Second, the annuity
firms borrow from the worker his entire human capital, and every period from then on repay this
by giving him a wage plus interest, until he dies.
   At each point in time, the agents who die are replaced by newborn agents who are endowed with
the average wealth of the exiting agents, which is the same as the mean wealth in the economy.
Hence, each agent starts life with the sum of the mean wealth plus his human wealth.
   Note that for v = 0 Ricardian equivalence holds in our baseline model, because all agents
can freely borrow in the riskless bond. However, in general, with finite lives (v > 0) and no
altruism, Ricardian equivalence might fail. Nonetheless, because of the way wealth is transmitted
to the newborn agents here, Ricardian equivalence approximately holds in our setup for v positive
but small. Hence, in the characterization of the general equilibrium when v > 0 we continue to


                                                    33
                                           Change in GDP
                                                 Impact     Long      run
                                             South North South        North
                               baseline      −1.6     1.0  3.3         −2.0
                               σ̃2 = 0.6     −2.7     1.1  5.9         −2.6
                                α = 0.7      −9.9     2.7  9.5         −2.7
                         σ̃2 = 0.6, α = 0.7 −16.1     1.7  19.4        −2.8
                           σ̃2 : 0.4 → 0.2    22.0    0.00 23.4        0.00


Table 5: Output effects. This table presents the effects of financial integration on GDP for both
countries, on the impact of financial integration and in the long run (at the new integrated-world
steady state), for the baseline model parameterizations, for three alternative parameterizations, and
for an alternative reform exercise. See the main text for details on the exercises.

write the government budget constraint (11) as in the main text. However, equation (13) becomes
Ḣjt = (Rjt + v)Hjt − ωjt .
   In sum, our theoretical steady-state results for the aggregates are derived for v = 0 in the
baseline model, but they carry through when we allow for v small but positive. Finally, for the com-
plete characterization of the steady-state invariant wealth distribution, see Panousi (2010). The
entrepreneurial wealth distribution is characterized by a second-order linear differential equation.
The model captures the empirically observed fact that the wealth distribution displays higher in-
equality than the consumption distribution. Wealth inequality increases with risk. The wealth
distribution exhibits a thick right tail (thicker than the corresponding tails generated by benchmark
models of idiosyncratic labor-income risk alone), as a result of the random walk component that
uninsurable investment risk introduces in entrepreneurial returns.

   Output effects. Table 5 presents the effects on GDP on the impact of integration and in the
long run (at the new integrated-world steady state), for the baseline parameterization of the model,
for three variant parameterization, and for an alternative reform exercise, for both countries. See
the main text for details on the alternative parameterizations and exercises. The numbers in the
table are percent changes from the autarchic GDP levels.




                                                 34
References
 [1] D. Acemoglu, F. Zilibotti, Was Prometheus unbound by chance? Risk, diversification and
    growth, J. Polit. Economy 105 (1997), 709-751.

 [2] Y. Ait-Sahalia, J.A. Parker, M. Yogo, Luxury goods and the equity premium, NBER Working
    Paper 8417, 2001.

 [3] S.R. Aiyagari, Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving, Quart. J. Econ. 109 (1994),
    659-684.

 [4] G.-M. Angeletos, Uninsured idiosyncratic investment risk and aggregate saving, Rev. Econ.
    Dynam. 10 (2007), 1-30.

 [5] G.-M. Angeletos, L.-E. Calvet, Incomplete markets, growth, and the business cycle, MIT De-
    partment of Economics Working Paper, 2000.

 [6] G.-M. Angeletos, L.-E. Calvet, Idiosyncratic production risk, growth, and the business cycle,
    J. Monet. Econ. 53 (2006), 1095-1115.

 [7] G.-M. Angeletos, V. Panousi, Revisiting the supply-side effects of government spending, J.
    Monet. Econ. 56 (2009), 137-153.

 [8] K. Aoki, G. Benigno, N. Kiyotaki, Adjusting to capital account liberalization, London School
    of Economics/Princeton University mimeo, 2009.

 [9] J. Benhabib, S. Zhou, Age, luck, and inheritance, NBER Working Paper 14128, 2008.

[10] M.P. Bitler, T.J. Moskowitz, A. Vissing-Jørgensen, Testing agency theory with entrepreneur
    effort and wealth, J. Finance 60 (2005), 539-576.

[11] O. Blanchard, F. Giavazzi, F. Sa, International investors, the U.S. current account, and the
    dollar, Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 36 (2005), 1-66.

[12] J.H. Boyd, B.D. Smith, Capital market imperfections, international credit markets, and non-
    convergence, J. Econ. Theory 73 (1997), 335-364.

[13] F. Broner, J. Ventura, Rethinking the effects of financial liberalization, CREI mimeo, 2008.

[14] F. Buera, Y. Shin, Productivity growth and capital flows: The dynamics of reforms, UCLA
    mimeo, 2010.

[15] R.J. Caballero, E. Farhi, P.-O. Gourinchas, An equilibrium model of global imbalances and low
    interest rates, Amer. Econ. Rev. 98 (2008), 358-93.


                                                35
[16] J.Y. Campbell, M. Lettau, B.G. Malkiel, Y. Xu, Have individual stocks become more volatile?
    An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk, J. Finance 56 (2001), 1-41.

[17] M. Cagetti, M. De Nardi, Entrepreneurship, frictions, and wealth, J. Polit. Economy 114 (2006),
    835-870.

[18] C. Carroll, O. Jeanne, A tractable model of precautionary reserves or net foreign assets, Johns
    Hopkins University mimeo, 2009.

[19] F. Corneli, Medium and long run implications of financial integration without financial devel-
    opment, Bank of Italy mimeo, 2010.

[20] F. Covas, Uninsured Idiosyncratic production risk with borrowing constraints, J. Econ. Dynam.
    Control 30 (2006), 2167-2190.

[21] S.J. Davis, J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, J. Miranda, Volatility and dispersion in business growth
    rates: publicly traded versus privately held firms, NBER Working Paper 12354, 2006.

[22] A. Demirguc-Kunt, R. Levine, Stock market development and financial intermediaries: stylized
    facts, World Bank Econ. Rev. 10 (1996), 291-321.

[23] C. Engel, J. Rogers, The U.S. current account deficit and the expected share of world output,
    J. Monet. Econ. 53 (2006), 1063-1093.

[24] A. Fogli, F. Perri, The great moderation and the US external imbalance, NBER Working Paper
    12708, 2006.

[25] M. Gertler, K. Rogoff, North-South lending and endogenous domestic capital market inefficien-
    cies, J. Monet. Econ. 26 (1990), 245-266.

[26] K. Giesecke, L.R. Goldberg, The market price of credit risk: the impact of asymmetric infor-
    mation, Working Paper, 2008.

[27] J. Goldberg, A model of deleveraging, MIT mimeo, 2010.

[28] P.-O. Gourinchas, O. Jeanne, The elusive gains from international financial integration, Rev.
    Econ. Stud. 73 (2006), 715-741.

[29] P.-O.Gourinchas, O. Jeanne, Capital flows to developing countries: the allocation puzzle, NBER
    Working Paper 13602, 2008.

[30] P.-O. Gourinchas, H. Rey, From world banker to world venture capitalist: US external ad-
    justment and the exorbitant privilege, in R.H. Clarida (Ed.), G7 Current Account Imbalances:
    Sustainability and Adjustment, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, 2007, pp. 11-67.

                                                36
[31] R. Hausmann, F. Sturzenegger, U.S. and global imbalances: can dark matter prevent a big
    bang?, Center for International Development, Harvard University, Working Paper 124, 2006.

[32] J. Heathcote, K. Storesletten, G. Violante, Quantitative macroeconomics with heterogeneous
    households, Annual Rev. Econ. 1 (2009), 319-354.

[33] M. Huggett, The one-sector growth model with idiosyncratic shocks, J. Monet. Econ. 39 (1997),
    385-403.

[34] B. Hunt, A. Rebucci, The U.S. dollar and the trade deficit: what accounts for the late 1990s?,
    Int. Finance 8 (2005), 399-434.

[35] S. Kitao, Entrepreneurship, taxation, and capital investment, Rev. Econ. Dynam. 11 (2007),
    44-69.

[36] A. Kraay, J. Ventura, The dot-com bubble, the bush deficits, and the U.S. current account, in
    R.H. Clarida (Ed.), G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, Univer-
    sity of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, 2007, pp. 457-497.

[37] P. Krusell, A.A. Smith, Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy, J. Polit. Econ-
    omy 106 (1998), 867-896.

[38] P. Krusell, A.A. Smith, Quantitative macroeconomic models with heterogeneous agents, in
    Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Ninth World Congress of
    the Econometric Society, 2006.

[39] P.R. Lane, M. Milesi-Ferretti, A global perspective on external position, in R.H. Clarida (Ed.),
    G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago, Illinois, 2007, pp. 67-103.

[40] R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, R. Vishny, Legal determinants of external finance,
    J. Finance 52 (1997), 1131-1150.

[41] R.E. Jr Lucas, Why doesn’t capital flow from rich to poor countries?, Amer. Econ. Rev. 80
    (1990), 92-96.

[42] C.J. Malloy, T.J. Moskowitz, A. Vissing-Jørgensen, Long run stockholder consumption risk and
    asset returns, Working Paper, 2006.

[43] E.R. McGrattan, E.C. Prescott, Technology capital and the U.S. current account, Federal
    Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Staff Report 406, 2007.

[44] C. Meh, V. Quadrini, Endogenous market incompleteness with investment risks, J. Econ. Dy-
    nam. Control 30 (2006), 2143-2165.

                                                 37
[45] E. Mendoza, V. Quadrini, V. Rios-Rull, On the welfare implications of financial globalization
    without financial development, NBER Working Paper 13412, 2007.

[46] E. Mendoza, V. Quadrini, V. Rios-Rull, Financial integration, financial deepness and global
    imbalances, J. Polit. Economy 115 (2008), 665-703.

[47] B. Moll, Productivity losses from financial frictions: can self-financing undo capital misalloca-
    tion?, University of Chicago mimeo, 2010.

[48] T.J. Moskowitz, A. Vissing-Jørgensen, The returns to entrepreneurial investment: a private
    equity premium puzzle, Amer. Econ. Rev. 92 (2002), 745-778.

[49] M. Obstefeld, K. Rogoff, The unsustainable U.S. current account position revisited, NBER
    Working Paper 10869, 2004.

[50] V. Panousi, Capital taxation with entrepreneurial risk, Federal Reserve Board mimeo, 2010.

[51] V. Panousi, D. Papanikolaou, Investment, idiosyncratic risk, and ownership, Working Paper,
    2010.

[52] E.S. Prasad, R.G. Rajan, A. Subramanian, Foreign capital and economic growth, Brookings
    Pap. Econ. Act. 38 (2007), 153-230.

[53] V. Quadrini, Entrepreneurship, saving, and social mobility, Rev. Econ. Dynam. 3 (2000), 1-40.

[54] C.M. Reinhart, K.S. Rogoff, Serieal default and the “paradox” of rich to poor capital flows,
    NBER Working Paper 10296.

[55] J.-V. Rios-Rull, On the quantitative importance of market completeness, J. Monet. Econ. 34
    (1994), 463-496.

[56] N.L. Roussanov, Diversification and its discontents: idiosyncratic and entrepreneurial risk and
    the quest for social status, Working Paper, 2009.

[57] D. Sandri, Growth and capital flows with risky entrepreneurship, IMF Working Paper, 2009.

[58] Z. Song, K. Storesletten, F. Zilibotti, Growing like China, mimeo, 2009.

[59] P.S. Willen, Incomplete markets and trade, Working Paper Series No. 04-8, Federal Reserve
    Bank of Boston, 2004.




                                                 38
                                              centering


                                                                              Raut
                                                                               2
      0
                                                                                          Raut
                                                                                           1




  B




          0                                        R                                             β

Figure 1: Steady state. This figure illustrates the determination of the autarchic and integrated
steady states. The interest rate is on the horizontal axis, the net foreign asset position of a country
is on the vertical axis. The solid line is the function B(R) for the North. The dashed line is the
function B(R) for the South. The intersection of these curves with the zero line gives the autarchic
interest rates, where R2aut < R1aut . The integrated interest rate, Rint , falls in between the two
autarchic values.




                                                  39
                     0.65
                                                                                                                              0.84



                     0.64                                                                                                    0.835



                     0.63                                                                                                     0.83



                     0.62                                                                                                    0.825



                     0.61                                                                                                     0.82



                      0.6                                                                                                    0.815



                     0.59                                                                                                     0.81



                     0.58                                                                                                    0.805



                     0.57                                                                                                      0.8




centering                    0          50          100          150           200                 250         t
                                                                                                                             0.795
                                                                                                                                     0           50          100          150         200       250   t



                                       (a) Aggregate Capital Stock                                                                                    (b) Aggregate Output

                                                                                                   1.1


 0.84



0.835                                                                                          1.05



 0.83

                                                                                                    1
0.825



 0.82
                                                                                               0.95


0.815


                                                                                                   0.9
 0.81



0.805

                                                                                               0.85

  0.8



0.795                                                                                              0.8
         0      50               100          150          200           250             t               0              50                 100         150          200         250         t




             (c) Labor Productivity and Wage                                                                  (d) Aggregate Consumption


                                                                                             4.5
0.0425


                                                                                              4

 0.042

                                                                                             3.5


0.0415
                                                                                              3



 0.041                                                                                       2.5



                                                                                              2
0.0405


                                                                                             1.5
  0.04

                                                                                              1

0.0395
                                                                                             0.5


 0.039
                                                                                              0

         0      50               100         150          200          250           t               0             50                    100          150          200          250         t



                            (e) Interest Rate                                                                (f) Net Foreign Asset Position



Figure 2: South’s dynamic adjustment to financial integration. This figure illustrates the
transition of the South from its autarchic steady state to the integrated one. Time in years is on
the horizontal axis. Integration occurs at time zero. The dotted line indicates the value of the
variables in the autarchic steady state. The dashed line indicates the value of the variables in the
integrated steady state. The solid line indicates the dynamic path of the variables. Capital, output,
consumption, and the wage are normalized by the corresponding autarchy values of the North. The
net foreign asset position is given as a fraction of contemporaneous GDP.


                                                                                                                             40
           1.03

                                                                                                        1.01

           1.02

                                                                                                    1.005

           1.01


                                                                                                          1
             1



                                                                                                    0.995
           0.99



           0.98                                                                                         0.99



           0.97
                                                                                                    0.985


           0.96
                                                                                                        0.98


           0.95

                                                                                                    0.975
                      0              50         100     150         200         250         t                      0             50        100     150     200    250    t



                                   (a) Aggregate Capital Stock                                                                        (b) Aggregate Output



            1.01

                                                                                                               1.05


           1.005


                                                                                                                   1
                  1




           0.995                                                                                               0.95




            0.99
                                                                                                                0.9



           0.985

                                                                                                               0.85


            0.98


                                                                                                                0.8
           0.975
                          0           50          100         150         200         250           t
                                                                                                                           0          50     100     150    200    250       t



                                  (c) Labor Productivity and Wage                                                               (d) Aggregate Consumption


                                                                                                               0


             0.044
                                                                                                         −0.5



                                                                                                           −1
            0.0435



                                                                                                         −1.5


             0.043
                                                                                                           −2



                                                                                                         −2.5
            0.0425



                                                                                                           −3

             0.042

                                                                                                         −3.5




            0.0415                                                                                         −4
                              0           50      100     150         200         250           t                      0          50        100     150     200    250       t




                                               (e) Interest Rate                                                               (f) Net Foreign Asset Position



Figure 3: North’s dynamic adjustment to financial integration. This figure illustrates the
transition of the North from its autarchic steady state to the integrated one. time zero. The dotted
line indicates the value of the variables in the autarchic steady state. The dashed line indicates the
value of the variables in the integrated steady state. The solid line indicates the dynamic path of
the variables. Capital, output, consumption, and the wage are normalized by their corresponding
autarchy values. The net foreign asset position is given as a fraction of contemporaneous GDP.



                                                                                                41
                                                               20                                                                                                                                               20
 gains from integration as percent of individual consumption




                                                                                                                                                  gains from integration as percent of individual consumption
                                                               15                                                                                                                                               15



                                                               10                                                                                                                                               10



                                                                5                                                                                                                                                5


                                                                0                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                −5                                                                                                                                               −5


                                                               −10                                                                                                                                              −10


                                                               −15                                                                                                                                              −15


                                                               −20                                                                                                                                              −20
                                                                     0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4       0.5       0.6      0.7   0.8   0.9   1                                                                        0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4       0.5       0.6      0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                                                           individual wealth percentiles                                                                                                                    individual wealth percentiles

                                                                         (a) Welfare Gains/Losses for the South                                                                                                           (b) Welfare Gains/Losses for the North




Figure 4: Welfare effects. This figure illustrates the welfare effects of financial integration across
different wealth levels. The horizontal axis measures wealth in terms of percentiles of the autarchic
steady-state distributions. The vertical axis measures the welfare gains (positive numbers) or losses
(negative numbers), evaluated as percent of individual permanent income. The solid line represents
the welfare effects for the current generation (the effects that obtain by evaluating welfare at the
time of reform); the dashed line represents the welfare effects for future generations (the effects that
obtain from comparing welfare across the two steady states).




                                                                                                                                                 42
                                                      1.1
   1

 0.98                                             1.08

 0.96
                                                  1.06
 0.94
                                                  1.04
 0.92

  0.9                                             1.02

 0.88
                                                       1
 0.86
     0    50     100    150    200   250     t          0   50   100     150    200   250   t
                (a) TFP of South                                 (b) TFP of North




Figure 5: TFP dynamics. This figure illustrates the dynamic adjustment of TFP to financial
integration, within the context of the extended model. Time in years is on the horizontal axis.
Integration occurs at time zero. The TFP of each country, normalized by its corresponding value
at the integrated steady state, is on the vertical axis.




                                                 43
