                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FDI SPILLOVERS AND INDUSTRIAL POLICY:
                        THE ROLE OF TARIFFS AND TAX HOLIDAYS

                                             Luosha Du
                                            Ann Harrison
                                            Gary Jefferson

                                         Working Paper 16767
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16767


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2011




This paper previously circulated as "Do Institutions Matter for FDI Spillovers? The Implications of
China's 'Special Characteristics'." The authors gratefully acknowledge suggestions by the editor and
two anonymous referees, who have significantly improved this paper. We are also grateful to the conference
organizers at Fudan University, including the contributions of Peter Petri. We would also like to thank
Justin Lin, Max Auffhammer, and Jeremy Magruder for their valuable comments, as well as seminar
participants at Yale University, the Wharton Management Department at the University of Pennsylvania,
and the World Bank. This work is partially based on work supported by the National Science Foundation
under grant No. 0519902, and through a grant from the Research Support Budget of the World Bank.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Luosha Du, Ann Harrison, and Gary Jefferson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
FDI Spillovers and Industrial Policy: The Role of Tariffs and Tax Holidays
Luosha Du, Ann Harrison, and Gary Jefferson
NBER Working Paper No. 16767
February 2011, Revised June 2014
JEL No. F2,F23

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper examines how industrial policy – specifically tariff liberalization and tax subsidies – affects
the magnitude and direction of FDI spillovers. We examine these spillover effects across the diverse
ownership structure of China’s manufacturing sector. Using this approach, we control for policies
that are likely to be correlated with both firm-level productivity and industry FDI, thereby limiting
the problem of omitted variables and bias associated with estimating the impacts of FDI spillovers.
 During 1998-2007, the span of our Chinese firm-level data set, both tariffs and FDI tax holidays changed
dramatically. Our results highlight the efficacy of vertical FDI spillovers. We find that tariff reforms,
particularly tariff reductions associated with China’s WTO ascension, increased the productivity impacts
of FDI’s backward spillovers. Tax policy – both corporate income and VAT subsidies – has seemingly
drawn FDI into strategic industries that spawn significant vertical spillovers. We conclude that liberalization
measures during the critical 1998-2007 period on balance served to enhance productivity growth in
Chinese industry.


Luosha Du                                              Gary Jefferson
Department of Agricultural                             Brandeis University
and Resource Economics                                 Economics Department
UC Berkeley                                            Waltham, Ma. 02254
Giannini Hall                                          jefferson@brandeis.edu
Berkeley, California 94720
luosha@berkeley.edu

Ann Harrison
Management Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2016 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
and NBER
annh@wharton.upenn.edu
     The Chinese government intervenes extensively to promote industrialization, relying on a

range of policy instruments.    In this paper, we examine three such policies that affect the

magnitude and direction of the spillovers from foreign direct investment.     These policies are the

ownership structure of the enterprise system, including direct state-ownership and

accommodations to FDI, and tariffs and tax subsidies, both of which serve the purpose of

promoting foreign investment in key sectors.      In this paper, we extend our understanding of

how each of these policies – state and foreign ownership, tariffs and trade reform, and tax

incentives – operates through intra- and/or inter-industry FDI spillovers to affect the performance

of Chinese-based manufacturing firms.

      Incorporating these policy instruments into the analysis of FDI spillovers addresses two

objectives. The first is to assess the effectiveness of different forms of industrial policy,

including their indirect effects.   A second purpose is to control for possible bias associated with

econometric estimates of FDI spillovers resulting from the omission of industrial policies that are

systematically correlated with FDI clusters. These FDI clusters include both within- industry

clusters spurring horizontal spillovers or between-industry FDI clusters leading to vertical

upstream or downstream effects.      Given the likely interactions of industrial policy and FDI,

studies of FDI spillovers should attempt to control for the direct and indirect impacts of these

policies.

       The period between 1998 and 2007 witnessed many policy shifts as China altered and

experimented with a range of industrial policies.      Tens of thousands of state-owned enterprises

changed ownership or were liquidated.       At the end of 2001, China became a member of the

World Trade Organization (WTO).         Average tariffs on manufacturing in China, which stood at



                                                   3
43 percent in 1994, following China’s accession to the WTO fell to 9.4 percent by 2004.4                                    FDI

inflows accelerated, and by the end of the period China was one of the top destinations for

foreign investment.          Over these ten years, many foreign investors in China faced much lower

corporate tax rates than domestic enterprises.                  Before 2008, foreign investors received a 15

percent corporate tax rate while domestic enterprises faced a regular 33 percent corporate tax

rate5.    This policy of promoting foreign invested firms and other favored firms was only

discontinued in 2008.           It is difficult to imagine that these substantial changes have not, both

directly and through their impact on FDI, affected the productivity performance of Chinese

manufacturing.

     Other countries have received extensive FDI within the context of state- and foreign-

ownership, tariff protection, and tax incentives. However, probably no country to the extent of

China has sponsored such an active range of industrial policies in combination with as

heterogeneous a group of enterprise types. China’s enterprise system includes an extensive

system of state-owned enterprises, including those with a mix of state and foreign ownership;

foreign-owned firms distinguish overseas investment from Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan

versus that from other areas including the OECD countries.                         Patterns of tariff protection and

liberalization, as well as the fabric of tax subsidies, are likely to be interconnected with patterns

of enterprise ownership.

     Our results suggest that the trade reforms and tax policies adopted by China during the 10

years of our sample period increased the gains from incoming FDI.                             Our first result is that both

tariff reductions and China’s entry into the WTO increased the gains from vertical FDI spillovers.


4
  Naughton (2007), Ch. 16.
5
  However, the government adjusted this preferential policy in 2008. Beginning Jan 1, 2008, the following corporate tax policy
for foreign-invested firms came into effect: foreign-invested firms that previously received preferential corporate tax rates would
return to the regular tax rate within 5 years. In 2008, the tax rate increased from 15% to 18%; in 2009, the rate further increased
to 20%; in 2010, the corporate tax rate rose to 22% and finally reached 25% in 2012.

                                                                 4
By interacting measures of tariff reform and WTO entry with our foreign investment measures,

we find significant increases in the benefits from FDI after trade reform, especially for backward

linkages. Second, we find that foreign investors who received corporate tax breaks transmitted

larger externalities to domestic enterprises.   Third, the evidence suggests that pairing foreign

firms with SOEs led to gains for SOE partners that generally exceeded gains for other domestic

firms.

    We suggest a set of reasons for the robustness of downstream FDI and backward spillovers;

some of these are general, while some are specific to China.     Recent analyses of vertical FDI

spillovers for other countries (see the survey in Harrison and Rodriguez Clare (2010)) have

emphasized the importance of backward linkages from domestic suppliers to foreign buyers.

Strong backward linkages were present in studies of Lithuania, Great Britain, and Indonesia, for

example. Other conditions are specific to China: formal and informal “technology for markets”

programs have emphasized the provision of knowledge in exchange for market access in a

variety of sectors such as automobiles where the acquisition of knowledge by local suppliers is a

key constraint.

    While the focus of this paper is on the interaction between FDI spillovers and domestic

policies, the stand-alone results for ownership and spillover effects are themselves of interest.

Horizontal spillovers, which measure spillovers from foreign to domestic firms in the same

sector, are robust only for firms with foreign partners and for SOEs. Forward linkages, which

include positive spillovers from upstream foreign suppliers to downstream firms, are generally

significant.   Backward linkages, which measure linkages from domestic suppliers to foreign

buyers, are largest in magnitude and significant once we control for trade policies and their

interaction with FDI.



                                                  5
    In addition to measuring the impact of formal tariff reductions on final goods and on inputs,

we also explore the impact of China’s entry into the WTO at the end of 2001. Tariff changes do

not capture the important shift in market access to foreign markets induced by China’s WTO

entry. Tariff changes also do not capture other changes associated with WTO membership, such

as reductions in non-tariff barriers and domestic content laws. To capture this, we also explore

the impact of a WTO dummy on firm performance. For all enterprises except the foreign

invested firms, WTO entry was associated with a very large and significant improvement in

performance. The evidence suggests that market access to foreign markets was a more

important driver of firm performance, as measured by TFP growth, than internal tariff reductions.

     We also explore the differential impact of tax subsidies bestowed on foreign investors.     If

the Chinese government correctly targets, through tax concessions, those sectors and firms with

greater potential for creating spillovers, we would expect stronger linkages associated with tax

breaks. We do, in fact, find statistically significant evidence of stronger FDI productivity

externalities associated with sectors and firms that received tax breaks.

    We examine these connections in the five sections that follow. Section II reviews the

existing literature and Section III lays out the analytical framework of the paper. Our data set,

described in Section IV, consists of a comprehensive panel of firm-level data constructed from

extensive annual firm surveys covering the period 1998-2007. We use these data to implement

our econometric strategy described in Section V.     Section VI describes and analyzes the key

results of the analysis, and Section VII presents the concluding comments.




                                    II.     Literature Review



                                                 6
      China’s transition from a highly centralized, monopolistic trade regime with extensive

import and export controls began at the end of 1978. Figure 1 shows that the share of trade

(exports plus imports) in GDP for China was less than 10 percent in the 1970s, but increased

rapidly as the regime liberalized. By the mid-1990s, the share of trade in GDP had reached

over 40 percent.        Naughton (1996) documents the transition to a more open trade and foreign

investment regime from 1978 onwards.6                   One important feature of the reforms was its dualistic

nature, similar to other types of dual track reforms introduced in China the last several decades.

The dualism was characterized by a rapidly expanding system of export processing operating

alongside a fairly protected domestic economy.

     In 1980 the government established the first four Special Economic Zones and extended

these to 14 coastal cities in 1984 (Brandt, Van Biesebroeck, Wang, and Zhang, 2012).                                Foreign

investment inflows were encouraged to bring in capital, and the government began a policy of

sometimes explicit and other times implicit bargaining to grant domestic market access to foreign

companies in exchange for technological know-how. Duty free importation was also allowed

outside special zones, particularly for targeted foreign firms.

     As Figure 1 shows, beginning in the mid-1990s China’s integration into the global economy

accelerated, with trade growing to 70 percent of GDP right before the financial crisis in 2007.

One factor that has facilitated the continued growth in trade is the spectacular rise in inward

foreign investment, which is documented in Figure 2. Major reforms to encourage incoming

foreign investment were introduced in 1986 and 1991.                       Inducements to foreign investors

included duty drawbacks, tariff exemptions, subsidies, infrastructure provisions, and tax

6
  Elements of the trade and investment reforms included exchange rate devaluation, relaxing rules on currency convertibility,
increasing the number of foreign trade corporations from twelve national monopolies to many thousands, reducing non-tariff
barriers, and gradually reducing tariffs and freeing up import prices.

                                                                7
holidays.

      Numerous papers have examined the existence and magnitude of FDI spillovers in China.

Jefferson and Miao (2014) review much of the literature and try to explain the lack of

consistency regarding the research findings concerning China’s FDI spillovers.                                Their central

finding, resulting from their review of 16 Chinese FDI spillover papers, is that the multiplicity of

data sources and research methodologies render impossible an effective comparison of the results.

These differences include the use of value added versus gross output measures of factor

productivity; some analyses are derived with the assumption of constant returns to scale; others

are not.     Moreover, while the earlier papers focused largely on horizontal, intra-industry

spillovers, more recent papers have included vertical, forward and backward, as well as

horizontal spillovers. Different papers invariably impose different controls. Some papers

control, often in different ways, for China’s extensive set of ownership types; some seek to

identify the channels through which FDI might affect host firm productivity, such as labor

market movement and trade; most do not.                     With respect to econometric strategy, some use

industry, region or province, or firm-level fixed effects; others do not. These are but some of

the differences that Jefferson and Miao identify which frustrate efforts to arrive at robust

consensus conclusions regarding the body of research on Chinese FDI spillovers.7                                  By


       7
            Two of the papers reviewed by Jefferson and Miao (2014) use the above size firm-level data set and incorporate both
horizontal and vertical FDI spillover possibilities, both of which are used in this paper. These papers are Lin, Liu, and Zhang
(2009) and Girma, Gong, and Gord (2009). The samples drawn from those papers both use shorter time horizons than we use in
this paper. Lin et al (2009) distinguish between spillover effects originating from investment from Hong Kong, Macao, and
Taiwan (HMT) and foreign, non-HMT investment. In either case, they find strong and robust vertical spillover effects on both
state-owned firms and non-state firms. Girma et al (2009) examine the impact of FDI spillovers, both horizontal and vertical,
on new product innovation rather than TFP. They conclude that FDI clusters have negative impacts on innovation in SOEs.
However, for a subsample of the SOEs – those that export, invest in human capital or R&D, or have prior innovation experience
(i.e., the more technologically advanced SOEs) – Girma et al find that FDI has positive impacts on their innovation activity. A
third paper by Hu and Jefferson (2002) that looks only at horizontal spillovers finds that SOEs are more susceptible to negative
spillover effects than non-SOEs. Thus, while there is no common core findings, stitching the various findings together, this
slice of the literature concludes that the spillover impacts across different ownership types are varied, depending on the direction
of the spillover. SOEs, particularly those that are more technologically sophisticated, are likely to benefit from vertical FDI
spillovers. Less technologically advanced SOEs appear not to benefit from horizontal spillovers.



                                                                 8
introducing tariff and tax policy into the analysis, this paper only extends the variety of research

approaches. However, we will be able to compare FDI spillover impacts on different ownership

types with such attention given in other papers.

     None of the papers in the Jefferson and Miao review controls for tariffs or tax subsidies.

However, outside of China, we do find an extensive literature that explores the role of trade

liberalization and its impact on productivity for both developed and developing countries.

While this literature is reviewed in detail in Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare (2010), we discuss

some of the most relevant papers here.    Recent papers on trade liberalization include Trefler

(2004) for Canada and Bustos (2011) for Argentina. Trefler (2004) explores the impact of tariff

reductions on Canadian manufacturing after the passage of the North American Free Trade

Agreement (NAFTA).       Trefler finds that in the short run employment fell on average 5 percent

and up to 12 percent in the most heavily affected sectors that had large tariff declines. He also

finds large increases in Canadian labor productivity as a result of the tariff reductions, of 14 to 15

percent.   Trefler concludes that parts of the labor force experienced significant short term losses

despite the longer term efficiency gains, and that this explains in part the public’s disaffection

with trade reform.    Bustos (2011) uses a similar event: the reduction of tariffs under the

MERCOSUR agreement, to explore the impact on Argentina’s firms. She finds that firms

facing tariff cuts increased their investments in both process and product technological

upgrading.

     One new area of research seeks to disentangle the effects of input and output tariffs.

Illustrative of this research is Amiti and Konings (2007), who use Indonesian manufacturing

census data to show that the effect of reducing input tariffs significantly increases productivity,

and that this effect is much higher than that of reducing output tariffs. New research on India



                                                   9
by Nataraj (2011) as well as Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2010a, 2010b), and

Topalova and Khandelwal (2011) also shows that tariff reductions on both inputs and final goods

are associated with productivity improvements. Topalova and Khandelwal (2011) estimate the

impact on listed firms of the reductions in input and output tariffs on total factor productivity

(TFP) in India.   Like Amiti and Konings, they find that while reducing output tariffs raised TFP,

reductions in input tariffs had an even bigger positive impact on measured TFP.       Like this recent

body of tariff literature, this paper distinguishes between the implications of input and final

goods tariffs on FDI spillovers.

     The interaction between trade policy and foreign investment flows has long been of

research interest to scholars. The classic reference on the interaction between tariffs and FDI is

Brecher and Diaz-Alejandro (1977), who formalize the argument proposed by Jagdish Bhagwati

(1973) that incoming capital induced by high tariffs can lead to immiserizing growth and a fall in

welfare. Foreign capital inflows exacerbate the production and consumption distortions created

by tariffs, and by repatriating the profits abroad foreign firms further reduce domestic welfare.

Further studies have suggested evidence of “tariff-jumping” FDI, suggesting that foreign firms

are attracted to protected domestic markets. While these early studies do not directly speak to the

effects of backward spillovers in the presence of tariff distortions, they do suggest that tariffs

interact in a harmful way with foreign firms.

     We are not aware of any studies which measure the differences in foreign investment

spillovers across different levels of corporate tax rates.   There are also very few published

studies of the impact of trade reforms on firm productivity in China.     One exception is Yu

(forthcoming) on the linkages between output tariffs, input tariffs, and processing trade in China.

Yu merges the Chinese census data used in this paper with firm-specific measures of final goods



                                                  10
and imported intermediate input trade to calculate firm-specific final goods and input tariffs.

Yu finds that contrary to the results for Indonesia in Amiti and Konings (2007) and Topalova and

Khandwal (2011), reductions in final goods tariffs increased productivity more for processing

firms than did reductions in intermediate input tariffs. Yu attributes this result in large part to

the fact that firms under the processing trade regime were exempted from tariffs on intermediate

inputs.

     Existing research on the link between tax subsidies and FDI is largely focused on countries

and regions apart from China.     In their review, Morisett and Pirnia (1999) conclude “incentives

will neither make up for serious deficiencies in the investment environment, nor generate the

desired externalities.”   The authors find that, more important than tax preferences, investors are

most attentive to “fundamental factors like economic conditions and political climate.” Only

when such factors are “more or less equal” across locations that offer a similar range of

fundamental factors, such as with the U.S. or within the E.U., tax policy may exert a significant

impact.   While the authors review no studies relating to China, they do find that firms operating

in several similar country settings may exploit different tax regimes.

     Solis (2011) reviews the literature on developing country subsidies for multinational

corporations. He examines the link between subsidized FDI and six critical development

factors: competitiveness, social development, democracy, governance, and entrepreneurship and

finds no coherent or sustainable justification for FDI subsidies. While Solis does not include

any empirical reference to China’s experience with FDI, he does suggest that it may differ from

that of Latin America with respect to the practice of the Chinese government in imposing greater

conditionality on FDI and also having the ability to capture some of the rents from FDI.

     Summarizing, we find that FDI may affect firms of different ownership types, depending



                                                  11
upon the direction of the spillovers and the capacity of the recipient firms to absorb the impact of

the spillovers, whether technology, competition, or some combination of the two. While much

of the FDI spillover literature focuses on the impacts of FDI on different ownership types in

China, we find no prior literature on ways in which tariffs and taxes in China have affected the

nature of FDI spillovers in that country.



                                     III.    Basic Framework



     To examine the impact of trade policy and foreign investment promotion, we employ a two

stage procedure.   In the first stage we estimate a three-input gross-output production function

by subsector for firm subsamples representing two ownership types: (1) all firms and (2)

domestic firms with zero foreign investment that are not classified as SOEs.      We use the

estimated factor output elasticities for labor, capital, and materials to construct measures of total

factor productivity (TFP) for each firm and year.      In the second stage, we regress the dependent

variable, lnTFP, on the relevant FDI cluster, policy variables, and controls.

       The first-stage production function is:

lnYijt = α0 + αLlnLijt + αKlnKijt + + αMlnMijt + μijt, (1)




where i = the firm in sector j and in year t = 1998-2007.

    For the purpose of estimating the first-stage production function, we employ the Olley-Pakes

method to get unbiased estimates of the factor output elasticities.    China’s Input-Output table

divides China’s manufacturing industry into 71 sectors (as shown in Table 2). Our firm-level



                                                  12
survey data include 4-digit level industry classifications. Hence, to construct the intra- and

inter-industry spillover variables (as for constructing the input tariff variables), we need to

aggregate the 4-digit classifications up to 71 sectors.8

     When applying with Olley-Pakes estimation procedure, all output and input variables are

deflated by their corresponding price indices.                                    We deflate the output value by the 29 individual

sector ex-factory price indices of industrial products.9                                          Capital is defined as the net value of

fixed assets, which is deflated by a uniform fixed assets investment index, and labor is a physical

measure of the total number of employees.                                     Intermediate inputs purchased by firms for the

purpose of producing gross output are deflated by the intermediate input price index.10

     In the second-stage, we regress firm-level TFP on a series of firm-level and sector-level

controls, as described in equation (2):



ln TFP ijt   0   1 ForeignSha reHKTM                       ijt
                                                                       2 ForeignSha reFR              ijt

  3 StateShare    ijt
                            4 Horizontal   jt
                                                        5 Backward                   jt
                                                                                              6 Forward     jt
                                                                                                                     7 Output _ Tariff   jt
                                                                                                                                                (2)
  8 Input _ Tariff      jt
                                 9WTO        i    i
                                                                   t
                                                                          t   ijt




           In equation (2), lnTFP ≡ lnYijt – [αLlnLijt + αKlnKijt + + αMlnMijt], where αL, αK and αM are

obtained by the OP estimation.                    The αi represent firm-level fixed effects and αt represent annual

time dummies.             ForeignShareHKTMijt, ForeignShareFRijt, and StateShareijt are defined as the

share of the firm’s total equity owned by Hong Kong-Taiwan-Macau investors, foreign investors,


8
   For example, the furniture industry (coded as 19 in Table 2) includes 5 four-digit sub-sectors. These are wood furniture
manufacturing (2110), bamboo furniture manufacturing (2120), metal furniture manufacturing (2130), plastic furniture
manufacturing (2140), and other furniture manufacturing (2190).
9
   Sector-specific ex-factory price indices for industrial products appear in China Urban Life and Price Yearbook (2008, Table
4-3-3). The price indices are published for 29 individual sectors, consequently we created a concordance between the 29 and the
71 sectors.
10
    Price indices for fixed investment and industry-wide intermediate inputs are reported in the China Statistical Yearbook (2006)
(obtained from the website of the National Bureau of Statistics of China).

                                                                                  13
and the state respectively.11                     By construction, these three firm-level controls are continuous

variables that range from 0 to 1 in value12.

      Following Javorcik (2004), we define three sector-level FDI variables.                            First, Horizontaljt

captures the extent of foreign presence in sector j at time t and is defined as foreign equity

participation averaged over all firms in the sector, weighted by each firm’s share in sectoral

output.     In other words,

                                                           
       Horizontal        jt
                                 ForeignSha re it * Y it  /  Y it ( 3 ), ,
                                 iforalli  j               iforalli  j

where ForeignSha re it is the sum of ForeignSha reHKTM and ForeignSha reFR . Second,

Backwardjt captures the foreign presence in the sectors that are supplied by sector j13. Therefore,

Backwardjt is a measure for foreign participation in the downstream industries of sector j.                                It is

defined as

      Backward      jt
                                      jk
                                              Horizontal   kt
                                                                ( 4 ).
                              kifk  j




The value of jk is taken from the 2002 input-output table14 representing the proportion of sector

j’s production supplied to downstream sector k.

      Finally, Forwardjt is defined as the weighted share of output in upstream industries of sector

j produced by firms with foreign capital participation.                       As Javorcik points out, since only


11
    The omitted share, the non-state domestically-owned share, is represented by the constant term.
       12
          In some specifications, we run regressions with domestic firms only. For these cases, we use the sample of domestic
firms with zero foreign investment. At the individual establishment level, we control for two types of FDI: ForeignShareHKTMijt,
and ForeignShareFRijt. This allows us to determine whether some types of foreign investment are more productive than others.
It is generally assumed that OECD-based FDI is more technology-intensive than HKMT FDI. On the other hand, HKMT FDI
may be more physically and organizationally integrated with domestic operations than OECD-based FDI. Anecdotal evidence
suggests large quantities of so-called foreign investors in China are actually domestic investors who channel investment through
Hong Kong in order to take advantage of special treatment for foreign firms (so-called “round tripping”). If this is the case, then
we would expect that firms with HKMT ownership might be less productive than other types of FDI.
13
    For instance, both the furniture and apparel industries use leather to produce leather sofas and leather jackets. Suppose the
leather processing industry sells 1/3 of its output to furniture producers and 2/3 of its output to jacket producers. If no
multinationals produce furniture but half of all jacket production comes from foreign affiliates, the Backward variable will be
calculated as follows: 1/3*0+2/3*1/2=1/3.
14
    Input-output tables of China (2002) Table 4.2, which divides manufacturing industry into 71 sectors.

                                                                         14
intermediates sold in the domestic market are relevant to the study, goods produced by foreign

affiliates for exports (Xit) should be excluded.                         Thus, the following formula is applied:

                                                                                                       
      Forward      jt
                                    jm      ForeignSha re it * (Y it  X it )  /   (Y it  X it )   ( 5 ).
                            mifm  j          iforalli  m                         iforalli  m        

The value of jm is also taken from 2002 input-output table.                               Since Horizontaljt already captures

linkages between firms within a sector, inputs purchased within sector j are excluded from both

Backwardjt and Forwardjt.

     To test for trade interactions with FDI and control for the effects of trade policies, we have

created a time series of tariffs, obtained from the World Integrated Trading Solution (WITS),

maintained by the World Bank. We first created a concordance between the tariff data and the

Chinese census data at the most disaggregated level possible.15                                 Then, we aggregate up output

tariffs to the same industry classification as sectoral FDI, giving us a total of 71 sectors (see

Table 2).16

      We also created a measure of input tariffs. To construct input tariffs, we use China’s

Input-Ouput table (2002) and follow the procedures suggested by Amiti and Konings (2007). The

input tariffs are constructed as a weighted average of the output tariffs.17                                Finally, we construct a

dummy variable, WTO, equal to one after China entered the World Trade Organization at the end

of 2001. This is a time dummy equal to zero from 1998 through 2001 and equal to 1 from 2002

onwards. The WTO dummy captures the impact of reforms not captured by tariff measures

(such as reductions in non-tariff barriers). The WTO dummy also captures the aggregate
15
   This was a challenge given that the two series are not in the same nomenclature. For example, we have different categories
for ship-building, electronic computers, tobacco products, motor vehicles, and parts and accessories for motor vehicles.
16
   To aggregate the tariff line items to the level which would allow us to create a concordance with the census data, we used
output for 2003 as weights.
       17
           The weights are based on input-output table. For instance, if a chocolate producer uses 60 percent sugar and 40 percent
cocoa pounder, the input tariff for that chocolate industry is equal to 60 percent of the sugar tariff plus 40 percent of the cocoa
tariff. Since China’s input-out tables only allow us to calculate input tariffs at the three-digit level, we use the same level of
3-digit disaggregation for final goods tariffs as well.



                                                                         15
increase in market access for Chinese firms to export destinations.



                                           IV.        Data and Broad Trends



     The dataset employed in this paper was collected by the Chinese National Bureau of

Statistics.     The Statistical Bureau conducts an annual survey of industrial plants, which includes

manufacturing firms as well as firms that specialize in mining operations and those that produce

and supply electricity, gas, and water.               The data set is firm-level based, including all

state-owned enterprises (SOEs), regardless of size, and non-state-owned firms (non-SOEs) with

annual sales of more than 5 million Yuan. We use a ten-year unbalanced panel dataset, from 1998

to 2007.      The number of firms per year varies from a low of 162,033 in 1999 to a high of

336,768 in 2007. The sampling strategy is the same throughout the period; the variation in

numbers is driven by changes in ownership or sales volume relative to the threshold.18

      The dataset contains information on output, fixed assets, total workforce, total wages,

intermediate inputs, foreign investment, Hong Kong-Taiwan-Macau investment, sales revenue,

and export sales.19 We use the criterion of zero foreign ownership to distinguish domestic firms

and foreign owned firms, that is, domestic firms are those with zero foreign capital in their total

assets.     In the dataset, 1,197,597 observations or 77.5 percent of the observations meet the



18
   The data show that the 5 million yuan threshold is not a strict rule. Among non-SOEs, about 6 percent of the firms report
annual sales of less than 5 million yuan in 1998; this number rises to 8 percent by 1999 and falls after 2003. In 2007, only 1
percent of non-SOEs have annual sales below 5 million yuan.
19
   The original dataset over the ten-year period includes 2,226,104 observations and contains identifiers that can be used to track
firms over time. Since the study focuses on manufacturing firms, we eliminate non-manufacturing observations. The sample
size is further reduced by deleting missing values, as well as observations with negative or zero values for output, number of
employees, capital, and the inputs, leaving a sample size of 1,842,786. Due to incompleteness of information on official output
price indices, which are reported annually in the official publication, three sectors are dropped from the sample. They are the
following sectors: processing food from agricultural products; printing, reproduction of recording media; and general purpose
machinery.       Thus, our final regression sample size is 1,545,626.



                                                                16
criterion of domestic firms; 22.5 percent are designated as foreign firms.20

     Table 1 reports the summary statistics for the main variables used in the regressions. The

summary statistics report the mean of the ratios, which is different than weighted means that

would give more weight to larger firms.                 The first three columns report means for levels and the

last three columns report means for growth rates of the key variables used in the analysis.

     The statistical means highlight the remarkable growth rates exhibited by the manufacturing

sector during this period, with average real output growing 13.5 percent a year, and the net

capital stock growing 10.7 percent per year.                 Labor input grew significantly slower, with

average annual increases of only 1.3 percent per year. Total factor productivity (TFP), which is

calculated using the Olley-Pakes two step approach described in more detail in the next section,

grew on average 5.6 percent per year, implying a forty percent contribution to overall growth.

The means also document that, on average, foreign-invested assets have been almost evenly split

between sources in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Macau (“HKTM”), and foreign investment

originating in other locations.           The first three columns indicate that the state continues to play

an important role in manufacturing, with a mean asset share of 8.9 percent during the sample

period; over the sample period the total share of total foreign investment in manufacturing is

significantly larger, at 16.8 percent.            For the sample as a whole, the average state share during

this period fell by approximately 0.7 percentage point per year.

       The summary statistics for final goods and input tariffs appear in Tables 1 and 2.                             During

the sample period, average tariffs fell for final goods and input tariffs by 87 and 36 percent


20
   Actually, the international criterion used to distinguish domestic and foreign-invested firms is 10%, that is, the share of
subscribed capital owned by foreign investors is equal to or less than 10%. In an earlier version of the paper, we tested whether
the results are sensitive to using zero, 10%, and 25% foreign ownership. Our results show that between the zero and 10%
thresholds, the magnitude and the significance levels of the estimated coefficients remain close, which makes us comfortable
using the more restrictive sample of domestic firms for which the foreign capital share is zero. The results based on the 25%
criterion exhibit small differences, but the results are generally robust to the choice of definition for foreign versus domestic
ownership.

                                                               17
respectively, significant declines for a ten year period.    While the average level of tariffs during

this period, which spans the years before and after WTO accession, was nearly 13 percent, as

shown in Table 2, this average masks significant heterogeneity across sectors, with a high of 41

percent in grain mill products and a low of 4 percent in railroad equipment.

     One issue which arises is the question of the endogeneity of the tariff changes in the data.

Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007) argue that in the case of India’s trade reforms that began in earnest

in 1991, the largest tariff cuts were in those sectors where tariffs were initially high, in order to

comply with WTO entry provisions.         Thus, in the case of India, tariff reductions followed from

initial tariff levels, a condition that helps to address the fear that tariff changes could be

endogeneous with respect to productivity changes at the firm level.        We see a similar pattern of

tariff reductions in the Chinese case.    The scatter plot shown in Figure 4 demonstrates that tariff

reductions were highest in those sectors where tariff levels were high at the beginning of the

sample period. Thus the reductions were broadly rule-based rather than specific to industry

characteristics.   In addition, tariffs are defined at the 2 digit level; since tariff categories are

quite broad (see Table 2), it is difficult to argue that they are set endogeneously with respect to

disaggregated firm level behavior.

     In Tables 3-1 and 3-2, we provide summary statistics for the FDI spillover variables in

relation to the government’s assignment of tax holidays.       Table 3-1 reports annual figures for

means of the output shares calculated separately for clusters of FDI that do and do not receive

corporate income subsidies.      In the left panel of Table 3-1, we define our sector-level foreign

output shares for only those foreign firms that paid less than the statutory tax rate.      In the right

panel of Table 3-1, we include sector-level output shares for foreign-invested firms that paid the

full rate. The trends show a steady increase in the share of subsidized foreign investment



                                                    18
between 1998 and 2007.      In 1998, at the beginning of the sample period, subsidized FDI

accounted for less than to 8 percent of sectoral output, while foreign firms without any sort of tax

holidays accounted for nearly 12 percent of sectoral output. By the end of the sample period,

while the share of output represented by foreign-invested firms with no tax holidays remained

virtually unchanged, the output share represented by foreign investors receiving some form of

tax holiday had grown to nearly 14 percent.

    Figure 3 shows the distribution of income taxes on profits paid by different types of

enterprises for the year 2004.   We calculated these effective tax rates using reported income

taxes paid as a share of profits, as reported in our dataset.    The top left-hand side quadrant

shows that a large share of domestically-owned firms, both SOEs and non-SOEs, paid the 33

percent tax rate.   In principle, foreign firms received a 15 percent tax subsidy.     As shown in

Figure 3, only a small minority of foreign-invested firms paid the statutory rate, as indicated by

the bottom right-hand side quadrant.     In 2004, seven percent of foreign-invested firms paid the

statutory rate, compared to almost 40 percent for domestically-owned enterprises; a considerable

proportion of the foreign-invested firms appear to have paid corporate tax rates of 20 percent or

more.

    Table 3-2 reports the percentage of firms that reported subsidies on their valued added taxes,

which are reported separately from income taxes on profits.        We were also able to calculate

actual effective tax rates for value added, since firms separately reported value added taxes paid

as well as value-added.    Relative to the proportion of firms receiving subsidies on their income

taxes, fewer firms receive subsidies in the form of exemptions on value-added taxes. These

exemptions increased until 2003, then declined.        It is clear from these tables that income tax

holidays were a more pervasive form of incentives until the 2008 tax reform.



                                                  19
                                    V. Estimation Strategy and Results



    Below, we describe our estimation strategy, the baseline estimation results based on

Equation (1), and several variations on that basic regression model for the purpose of examining

various interaction effects among the industrial policies under study. Our estimation strategy

also tests for the implications of firm heterogeneity within our sample.     We also describe our

robustness checks.

    A. Estimation strategy.     We first compute estimates of total factor productivity (TFP) for

each firm and each year observation. We divide the sample into two ownership sub-samples.

These are (a) all firms and (b) domestic, private firms, which exclude foreign owned enterprises

and SOEs. These subsamples and the relevant estimation results are shown in Table A-1.

    The earlier literature on the estimation of production functions shows that the use of OLS

may be inappropriate, since this method treats labor, capital and other input variables as

exogenous. As Griliches and Mairesse (1995) argue, factor inputs should be considered

endogenous, since their choice is affected by the firm’s productivity.     Firm-level fixed effects

alone will not solve the problem, because time-varying productivity shocks can affect a firm’s

input decisions.   Using OLS can therefore bias estimates of the relevant coefficients. To solve

the simultaneity problem, we employ the procedure suggested by Olley and Pakes (1996)

(henceforth OP), which uses investment as a proxy for unobserved productivity shocks.

    Table A-1 reports comparisons of the coefficient estimates using the OP approach.        As a

robustness check, we also employ the procedure suggested by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)

(henceforth LP), which uses intermediate inputs as a proxy for unobserved productivity shocks.

Applying these two-stage procedures, both OP (1996) and LP (2003), one would anticipate that



                                                 20
the coefficient on labor and intermediate inputs should decrease relative to the OLS fixed effects

estimator, while the coefficient on capital should increase.                     To save on space we only report the

results using the OP, not the LP procedure or OLS with firm fixed effects.                            The results are

qualitatively similar using both the OP and LP approaches, but LP suffers from the fact that the

efficiency of material input use is ignored.                The results are generally consistent with these

predictions across ownership classes.                Relative to OLS with firm fixed effects the coefficient on

capital inputs is higher using OP across all specifications.                    We also generally find that the

coefficient on the labor shares and material shares are lower with OP compared to OLS.

     One notable feature across all specifications is that the labor estimate is relatively small,

compared to estimates for other countries, while the coefficient for material inputs is rather high.

As a robustness check, we performed a test in which we use various variables within our data set

to compute labor’s factor income share.                 Although the estimation procedure shown in Table A-1

does not impose these restrictive conditions of perfect competition with constant returns to scale,

the coefficients on the factor inputs in our estimating equations sum to 0.904, close to constant

returns to scale.       Hence, the factor income shares computed from the data in our data set should

be similarly comparable to the factor output elasticities shown in Table A1.                            Using the data for

the full sample, we compute an average factor income share for 1998-2007 as equal to 0.105.

While this is somewhat larger than 0.086, the OP estimate reported in Table A-1, the difference is

small.       Moreover, if our estimate of TFP deviates from the true TFP level by a constant

time-invariant scalar, the fixed effects procedure that we use in the second stage should wash out

the difference.21

      B. Baseline results. The baseline results are presented in Table 4.                            In all the results


21
      Moreover, if our estimate of TFP deviates from the true TFP level by a constant time-invariant scalar, the fixed effects
procedure that we use in the second stage should wash out the difference.

                                                                21
which follow, we separate firms into foreign-invested firms—those with some positive foreign

ownership—and domestically-owned firms—defined as enterprises with zero foreign ownership.

We first examine the impact of horizontal and vertical FDI spillovers.

    FDI spillover estimates.    The results for “All firms” are shown in column (1) of Table 4;

those for foreign invested firms appear in column (2), and those for domestically-owned firms

are shown in column (3).     For the samples including all firms (column 1) and domestic firms

only (column 3), the coefficients on the state’s share in equity are negative and statistically

significant, indicating that increases in state-invested shares are associated with lower

productivity. We discuss the different effects of spillovers across more detailed ownership

categories in subsection C below. The results for the state share are consistent with the

expectation of rising productivity for privatizing enterprises.

    Table 4 shows a divergent pattern of results for horizontal and vertical FDI spillovers.

Backward spillovers are largest in magnitude across all three samples. Seemingly, with higher

proportions of FDI firms downstream, both foreign-invested and domestic upstream suppliers

need to be more productive to prosper as suppliers.     Our estimated coefficient on backward

linkages implies that a one percentage point increase in backward FDI is associated with a 0.8 to

1.1 percentage point increase in TFP. These magnitudes are twice as large as those found by

Blalock and Gertler (2008) for Indonesia but smaller than Javorcik’s (2004) findings for

Lithuania.   The results are also somewhat smaller than the robust backward spillover estimates

reported by Lin et al (2009), although their paper does not break out the sample by foreign and

domestic firms.

    For horizontal, intra-industry spillovers, our results show robust results for foreign firms but

not for domestic firms.    Presumably domestic firms, at lower levels on the technology frontier,



                                                  22
are less able to capture productivity enhancing impacts from foreign firms within the same

industry. By comparison, the forward spillovers show that domestic firms that are downstream

from FDI suppliers appear to benefit more than their foreign counterparts.       This finding

suggests that domestic-owned firms are more likely to purchase and benefit from upstream

inputs supplied by foreign firms than other foreign firms.

    The impact of tariff protection/liberalization. The coefficients on both the final goods tariffs

and input tariffs in Table 4 are positive but not statistically significant. There are several reasons

why the negative impact of input or final goods tariffs on productivity may be attenuated in

China.   A large fraction of firms, particularly exporters, are granted exemptions from paying

tariffs; without additional information on which firms pay input tariffs, it is difficult to identify

the negative effect of tariffs on inputs for individual firms. Second, tariffs may be imposed for

a number of reasons.    If tariffs are successfully imposed in sectors where there are externalities

in production, then the average effect of tariffs may reflect both (beneficial) targeting and

(harmful) disincentives associated with x-inefficiency.

     Third, to the extent that Melitz (2003) is correct, many of the productivity gains associated

with trade reform may occur through reallocating production towards more efficient firms, rather

than within-firm productivity increases associated with greater exposure to international

competition.    The framework for this paper explicitly measures only the within firm impact of

productivity changes associated with tariff reforms, not the cross-firm reallocation that could

occur as the least efficient firms exit and the more efficient firms acquire greater market share.

Nevertheless, recent estimates for both India and China suggest that during this sample period, as

much as 95 percent of productivity increases in manufacturing were due to within firm

productivity increases, not reallocation towards more productive firms (Harrison, Martin, and



                                                  23
Nataraj (2013), Aghion et al (2014)). This suggests that reallocation of production is not the

driving force behind productivity growth in China.

     In contrast to the insignificant effects of tariff changes on within-firm productivity changes,

the coefficient on the WTO dummy is positive and significant across all subsamples, but is much

smaller for foreign invested enterprises (FIEs).    The positive and significant point estimates

suggest that China’s entry into the WTO at the end of 2001 was accompanied by a very large

increase in within-firm productivity. These large and significant effects of WTO entry stand in

contrast to the insignificant and positive tariff effects. Taken together, these results suggest that

market access for Chinese exporters and overall changes in the post-WTO membership period

led to enormous productivity gains, even if internal tariff reforms by themselves did not.

     Table 4 and this section yield several robust findings. These are the pattern of backward

FDI spillovers controlling for tariffs across ownership types, the differential impacts of

horizontal spillovers appearing to benefit FIEs and SOEs only, and forward spillovers

advantaging all enterprises.    In addition, we find evidence that the tariffs on final goods and

inputs had no significant impact, but that WTO entry led to a large and significant increase in

performance across all firms.    From this baseline, we now explore different policy and

ownership interactions to enhance the gains from FDI spillovers.



     C. The Role of Ownership and FDI Spillovers



     In Table 4, we saw that the coefficient on the state’s share in equity is generally negative

and statistically significant, indicating that higher levels of state-invested shares are associated

with lower levels of productivity.   The coefficient estimate, which was -0.017 in column (1) of



                                                   24
Table 4, suggests that after controlling for other factors, moving from 100 percent SOE to 100

percent private would be associated with a productivity gain of nearly two percentage points.

Now we will explore how other factors, including FDI spillovers and trade policy, vary by

ownership type.

     In Table 5, we divide the samples of foreign-invested and domestic firms into two groups,

SOEs and non-SOEs, to test whether the formal ownership structure and the composition of asset

ownership matter for FDI spillover effects and trade policies.     As in Table 4, all of the

regressions are estimated with firm-level fixed effects and year effects, and robust standard

errors are clustered at the sector level.   The results in columns (1) and (2) include all SOEs and

all non-SOEs, with and without foreign-equity participation.      Columns (3) and (4) show the

results using the sample of foreign-invested firms, and columns (5) and (6) present the results

using the sample of the domestically-owned firms with zero foreign equity participation.

     The first two columns allow us to compare the impact of firm-level equity participation by

foreign investors on the productivity of SOEs relative to non-SOEs. The coefficient on foreign

participation from foreign investors outside of Greater China (HKMT) for SOEs is 0.007 and

significant relative to 0.05 and not significant for non-SOEs. This result suggests that foreign

equity participation is associated with an improvement in productivity which is greater for SOEs.

The larger and statistically significant coefficient associated with foreign equity participation in

SOEs is consistent with the hypothesis that firms with foreign equity have played an important

role in improving SOE performance.

     Comparing FDI spillover impacts on SOEs and non-SOEs, forward spillovers are

significant and robust for all types of enterprises.    As shown in the fourth column, SOEs with

some foreign-investment appear to be most effective at capturing productivity benefits from both



                                                   25
upstream and downstream FDI clusters.       Some of this estimated benefit may result from flows

of capital and technology from downstream FDI users to their upstream SOE suppliers and from

upstream FDI suppliers to their downstream SOE buyers.

     With respect to horizontal spillovers, among the six estimates, we only see evidence of

significant spillovers to other FIEs or to SOEs.    Among the population of firms in our sample,

this set of firms may best exhibit the combination of a significant technology gap and capacity to

absorb the relevant technologies to narrow the gap.        Private or non FIE invested enterprises may

not exhibit a substantial gap with foreign invested firms or they may not have the absorptive

capacity to effectively capture these proximate intra-industry technologies.      This result is

broadly consistent with the findings of the three papers reviewed in our literature review, which

find negligible, or negative, intra-industry FDI spillover impacts.

    Concerning the matter of tariffs and trade liberalization, Table 5 shows significantly different

responses to tariffs across SOEs and non-SOEs.          Relative to non-SOEs, in the face of higher

final goods tariffs, SOEs exhibit significantly lower productivity, particularly in the

foreign-invested sector.   The point estimates on final goods tariffs, which are -0.076 for SOEs

with foreign investment and -0.052 for those with no foreign assets, suggests that a one percent

reduction in tariffs (ceteris paribus) would increase productivity by 0.076 to 0.052 percent

respectively.   The relative responsiveness of productivity to tariff reduction in the state sector

suggests that the persistence of tariff protection for SOEs may have created or sustained more

inefficiency in the state enterprises that could not be sustained in the face of increased final

goods competition.

    In Table 5, we also distinguish between the effects of WTO entry across ownership types.

While WTO entry was associated with significant increases in productivity across all ownership



                                                   26
types, important differences emerge. The benefits from WTO entry were smallest for foreign

invested enterprises, which is consistent with those firms being closest to the technology frontier

and benefiting least from increasing market access and global competition.      In constrast, the

benefits were greatest for domestic enterprises.    The coefficient for domestic, non-SOEs was

0.315, compared to 0.026 for FIEs without state ownership. This suggests that gains from

WTO entry were 15 times larger for domestic relative to foreign enterprises.

     The F-tests listed at the bottom of the Table 5 identify whether vertical and horizontal

spillovers from FDI were significantly different across SOEs and non-SOEs. Across all subsets

of enterprises, spillover differences from FDI exhibit a markedly different pattern for SOEs

relative to private enterprises.   Backward spillovers were three times as large for SOEs with

foreign partners relative to private firms with foreign partners.   Forward spillovers were also

significantly larger for SOEs with foreign partners relative to non-SOEs.     However, for SOEs

without foreign partners, spillovers were significantly smaller than for other domestic enterprises.

The results suggest that the benefits to SOEs from foreign externalities were largest when those

SOEs also had foreign partners.     Due to these ownership differences, in the rest of the paper we

further differentiate categories of ownership by reporting the separate effects of horizontal and

vertical spillovers for SOEs, private, and joint venture enterprises.



     D. Trade Policy Changes and FDI Spillovers.          While there is a large literature which

investigates the impact of FDI on productivity, as well as an even larger literature that explores

the relationship between trade policies and productivity (for an overview of both these topics, see

Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare (2010)), we are not aware of any study that examines how

changing levels of protection affect the magnitude of FDI spillovers.     In this section, we explore



                                                   27
how FDI spillovers changed with a discrete change in trade policy: China’s entry into the WTO.

     Specifically, we explore changes in FDI spillover impacts before and after China’s

ascension to the WTO in 2001. We know that China’s 2001 WTO ascension led to a substantial

decline in tariffs. Table 2, for example, shows that for over 71 industry categories, during 1998

to 2007, China’s average manufacturing final goods tariff was 12.7 percent.          By 2007, the

average final goods tariff in that year had declined by 8.9 percent to just 30 percent of the

average for the sample period.        Our question, therefore, is whether this across the board

reduction in tariffs during 1998-2007 affected the magnitude or direction of China’s FDI

spillovers.

     We explore how trade policy changes affected FDI spillovers through two different

specifications. First, in Table 6A, we add an interaction term for WTO entry and FDI at the

vertical and horizontal level.    This means that we add three interaction terms: Horizontal*WTO,

Backward*WTO, and Forward*WTO.                In Table 6B, we instead interact our FDI measures with

tariffs. To the extent that trade policy affects the magnitude of FDI spillovers, we would expect

the interactions to be significant.     If greater trade liberalization positively affects spillovers, we

would expect the interactions with the WTO dummy variable to be positive and the interactions

with tariffs to be negative.

     In Table 6A, we explore how vertical and horizontal linkages varied before and after

China’s WTO entry at the end of 2001.         With China’s entry into the WTO in the middle of the

sample period, domestic content rules became illegal and tariffs were significantly reduced.

The results in Table 6A indicate that vertical backward linkages were strengthened during the

second half of the sample period, when tariffs were lowered and domestic content restrictions

relaxed.      Among the three spillover directions, the most dramatic change is the set of backward



                                                     28
spillover estimates for which the number of robust estimates rises. The interaction between

Backward FDI and WTO is significant for all subsamples except for SOEs partnering with

foreign enterprises. The coefficient estimates suggest that backward linkages shifted from

negative to large, positive and significant post-WTO entry.

     Table 6B confirms the findings from Table 6A, using actual tariff levels instead of the WTO

dummy to measure the interaction with sectoral FDI linkages.       Once we take into account the

possible interaction with tariffs, we find large, significant, and positive effects of backward

linkages across all types of enterprises. Horizontal linkages generally become small in

magnitude and insignificant across all types of enterprises.   Forward linkages remain significant

for foreign-invested SOEs, but not for other types of firms.    The interaction between tariffs and

backward linkages is significant and negative, indicating that higher tariffs reduce backward

spillovers, across all ownership types.

      Hence, the most dramatic impact of China’s WTO ascension on FDI spillover outcomes is

evident in our backward linkage estimates.     As shown in Tables 6A and 6B, the increase in

backward spillover impacts is notable for each of the four distinct ownership types we explore:

foreign-invested SOEs and non-SOEs and domestic-owned SOEs and non-SOEs. The

across-the-board tariff reductions appear not to have affected the efficacy of horizontal and

forward linkages. The increase in the robustness of backward linkages is likely to reflect the fact

that the combination of tariff reductions and reductions in domestic content restrictions required

upsteam suppliers to improve the efficiency and quality of the inputs they supplied to cost and

quality-conscious downstream foreign invested firms. With the reduction in barriers to trade,

downstream foreign producers could choose to alternatively source from overseas foreign

suppliers to substitute for established upstream producers that had benefited from pre-WTO trade



                                                 29
barriers. The threat of alternative suppliers and the reduction in trade distortions together led to

significant increases in backward linkages across all ownership categories of enterprises.

      E. The Effects of Tax Incentives on FDI Spillovers.                          In Tables 7 and 8 we explore the

extent to which subsidized foreign investment exerts a differential impact on spillovers relative

to unsubsidized foreign investment.                While the standard income tax rates across all firms during

the sample period 1998-2007 was 33 percent, a large share of foreign-owned firms was granted

tax subsidies and faced tax rates that were significantly lower.                      We are able to calculate the

extent of subsidies by calculating for each enterprise their effective tax rate, defined as taxes on

corporate profits divided by net profits. The difference between the corporate tax rate and the

actual tax rate paid is how we define the extent of the establishment-specific subsidy. Since the

data separates out income taxes paid and value-added taxes paid by the enterprise, we are able to

separately calculate tax holidays on both income tax and VAT obligations.

      The summary statistics reported in Tables 3-1 and 3-2 suggest that the majority of foreign

investment in China during the sample period benefited from income tax subsidies and a

significant fraction benefited from subsidies on value-added taxes.                          To the extent that the

Chinese government successfully targeted sectors and firms more likely to convey positive

externalities, we would expect more robust spillovers effects emanating from the firms and

sectors benefitting from subsidies. To test for the possibility of differential spillover effects, we

split our sector-level foreign share variables into two groups: one is calculated based on foreign

investment being subsidized (those paying less than the statutory tax rate)22 and the other series

is computed based on non-subsidized foreign investment.

      The results, summarized in Table 7, once again show that much of the action centered on


22
  As discussed earlier, the statutory tax rate in China is 33%. However, foreign-invested firms receive a preferential tax break of
15%. In this paper, we use the cut-off of a 20% tax rate to distinguish whether a foreign-invested firm is being subsidized.

                                                                30
backward spillovers. For subsidized FDI in downstream industries, our estimated spillovers are

both notably large and consistently robust at the one percent level across five out of six

ownership types. For unsubsidized FDI, the backward spillovers become insignificant or even

negative for all firms except SOEs with foreign investment.      The F-tests at the bottom of Table

7 are only significant for subsidized FDI, suggesting that on average, tax holidays did indeed

target sectors with greater externalities.   By comparison, horizontal spillovers show no notable

difference for intra-industry FDI that is subsidized or unsubsidized. The robust forward

spillovers for foreign invested firms, whether SOEs or not, persist in about the same degree with

and without subsidies to upstream industries.

     The results in Table 7 suggest that when subsidized downstream FDI appears to have more

impact than unsubsidized FDI. While these results are consistent with smart tax policies, our

results cannot at this point be interpreted as causal.   What is evident, however, is that

foreign-owned buyers of upstream domestic inputs were more likely to generate spillovers when

they also received tax holidays. Downstream subsidized FDI may have attracted different kinds

of downstream producers than unsubsidized investors. This issue deserves further research.

What Table 7 does indicate is that tax holidays to downstream foreign firms were more likely to

be associated with positive externalities than tax holidays to upstream foreign firms.

     In Table 8, we test whether the results differ when we explore tax holidays on value-added

taxes as a form of fiscal incentive rather than the income tax holidays examined above.      In

Table 8, we redefine subsidized firms on the basis of lower value-added taxes instead of lower

corporate income taxes.     We define firms as subsidized when they are exempted altogether from

paying value-added taxes.     Overall, the results in Table 8 are consistent with differences in the

effects of foreign investment based on income tax incentives, i.e. the provision of subsidies is



                                                  31
associated with larger, more robust spillovers.    However, the composition of the spillover

effects of VAT holidays differs somewhat from reductions in corporate income taxes.           Here

much of the action focuses on horizontal spillovers.     The non-subsidized horizontal FDI

seemingly creates fewer or no spillovers; by contrast, the horizontal spillovers associated with

firms that enjoy VAT subsidies are consistently large and robust at the one percent level of

significance.

     The evidence presented in Tables 7 and 8 suggests that across both corporate taxes and VAT

obligations, tax holidays were consistently associated with higher externalities from FDI.       In the

case of corporate tax holidays, most of the differences were in the magnitude of backward

linkages.   For VAT obligations, most of the differences were in intra-industry spillovers.

While we cannot identify the causal linkages, the evidence is consistent with an industrial policy

such as China’s “technology for market” program, where foreign firms that agreed to make

accessible aspects of their technology may have received, in return, corporate income tax

holidays or VAT subsidies for their investment and production.

    F.   Robustness Tests.      Since our dependent variable is firm-level productivity and the

focus of the analysis is on how sector-level foreign investment affects domestic firm productivity,

endogeneity is unlikely to be an issue. To the extent that foreign investment might be attracted

to sectors where suppliers or users are more productive, this condition is accounted for by the use

of firm-level fixed effects.   Furthermore, where foreign investment is drawn to sectors that

exhibit either high or low tariffs (or possibly systematically high or low productivity levels), the

inclusion of the tariff variable will control for this potential source of omitted variable

endogeneity bias.




                                                  32
            However, some might argue that foreign investors are drawn to sectors where they

expect higher productivity growth in the future.         To address this potential source of endogeneity,

we also applied instrumental variables (IV) techniques which are available upon request from the

authors. We used future tariffs (tariffs at time t+1) as instruments. For backward linkages for

domestic non-SOEs, the point estimates were magnified, confirming the importance of the

linkages between domestic suppliers and foreign-owned buyers of their inputs.           However, the

coefficients on horizontal linkages became negative across all subsamples, but not statistically

significant.     The negative coefficient on the horizontal variable is consistent with our evidence

suggesting lack of significant intra-industry spillovers to domestic non-SOEs in this paper as

well as previous work by Aitken and Harrison (1999) and others suggesting that foreign firms

take away market share from domestic competitors in the same industry.



                                     VI.     Concluding Comments



     In this paper, we investigate how tax and tariff policies affect FDI spillovers in Chinese

industry.      Is it possible to enhance the externalities from FDI through trade policies or tax

holidays?      We find that the answer is yes. We also explore how externalities from FDI, tariffs,

and tax holidays vary across China’s heterogenous ownership structure.           To our knowledge, this

is the first study to examine whether targeted subsidies for FDI are associated with stronger

linkages from FDI to domestically-owned and/or foreign-invested firms.            To identify the

interactions between FDI spillovers and trade policies, we examine the role of both tariff

reductions and China’s entry into the WTO.

     By taking into account trade policy changes and interactions between trade and FDI, our



                                                    33
results indicate significantly higher effects of backward linkages in China.    In fact, prior to

China’s entry into the WTO backward linkages appear to be negative and the very large and

significant backward externalities only emerge once we take into account the impact of trade

reforms on FDI. The positive impact of backward linkages which emerges post-trade reform is

consistent with the early literature on immiserizing FDI, which posited negative effects of FDI in

highly protected economies.

     Across a variety of specifications, we find that backward and forward linkages increased

the productivity of Chinese and joint venture enterprises. Horizontal linkages, however, were

generally restricted to FIEs and SOEs.    In other words, positive externalities within the same

sector were restricted to public enterprises or to other joint ventures. During our sample period,

all of these spillover channels, particularly the vertical linkages, were affected by industrial

policy associated with tariff reductions and the deployment of corporate income and VAT

subsidies.

    Exploiting the exogenous change in trade policies with China’s entry into the WTO at the

end of 2001, we investigate the impact of China’s substantial tariff liberalization on the

magnitude and direction of FDI productivity spillovers. We do this in two ways. First we

interact tariff changes with our measures of sectoral FDI. Second, we interact WTO entry with

sectoral FDI. Using both approaches shows that trade liberalization was accompanied by

significant increases in FDI linkages, particularly for backward linkages. Since China’s entry into

the WTO created pressure to phase out domestic content rules (in order to comply with the

WTO), we might have expected to find a reduction in backward linkage spillovers.         Instead,

backward linkages became stronger after WTO entry, possibly because the additional

competition forced domestic suppliers to improve their efficiency and quality.      The increase in



                                                  34
vertical linkages from FDI following the reduction in trade distortions is consistent with an

earlier academic literature that posited welfare losses from FDI attracted by tariff distortions.

     Finally, we explore the spillover implications of tax subsidies that have been targeted to

foreign investment within certain sectors and by certain firms. We find strong evidence that

subsidized foreign investment generates greater productivity spillovers than unsubsidized

investment.     The estimates imply that a one percent increase in the share of foreign investment

in downstream sectors raises the supplying firm’s productivity by 2 to 3 percentage points.

Across our sample spanning a ten year period, vertical linkages accounted for an important

source of productivity gains for all types of enterprises.

     One advantage of incorporating different industrial policy instruments into a single

framework is that it allows us to compare the effectiveness of these different approaches on firm

productivity.    If a central goal of China’s industrial policy has been to raise firm productivity,

we find that the use of different instruments has had notable positive effects but also some

perverse impacts.     High tariffs, particularly high final goods tariffs, were associated with

depressed productivity for SOEs.      FDI spillovers are moderate to robust, with vertical backward

and forward spillovers particularly strong. China’s entry into the WTO also substantially

strengthened the impacts of vertical FDI spillovers. FDI subsidies through the use of tax

corporate income subsidies were associated with significantly larger backward FDI linkages;

VAT subsidies have most strengthened the positive impact of horizontal spillovers.        During the

period of our study, 1998-2007, China’s industrial policy has generally served to enhance the

impacts of these spillovers.




                                                   35
REFERENCES

Amiti, M., and Konings, J. (2007), “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs and Productivity.”
American Economic Review, 97(5), 1611-1638

Arnold, J., Javorcik, B. and Mattoo, A. (2008), “Do Manufacturing Firms Benefit from Foreign
Direct Investment in Services Industries? Evidence from the Czech Republic.” Mimeo.

Aitken, B. J. and Harrison, A.E. (1999), “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Venezuela.” American Economic Review, 89 (3), 605-18.

Aitken, B.J., Harrison, A. E., and Lipsey, R.E. (1996), “Wages and Foreign Ownership. A
comparative study of Mexico, Venezuela and the United States.” Journal of International
Economics, (40), 345-371.

Brandt, L., Van Biesebroeck J., Wang L.H., and Zhang Y.F. (2012), “WTO Accession and
Performance of Chinese Manufacturing Firms,” CEPR Discussion Paper, no. 9166.

Brecher, R., and Dias Alejandro, C. (1977), “Tariffs, Foreign Capital and Immiserizing Growth.”
Journal of International Economics, (7), 317-322.

Blalock, G. and Gertler, P.J. (2008), "Welfare Gains from Foreign Direct Investment through
Technology Transfer to Local Suppliers" Journal of International Economics, 74(2), 402–421.

Blomstrom, M., “Foreign Investment and Productive Efficiency: The Case of Mexico.” (1986),
Journal of Industrial Economics, 1986 (35), 97-110.

Ethier, W. (1982). “National and International Returns to Scale in the Model Theory of
International Trade.” American Economic Review, 72, 389-405.

Goldbert, P. K. and Pavcnik , N. (2007), “Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing
Countries,” Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1) 39-82.

Griliches, Z. and Jacques M. (1995), “Production Functions: The Search for Identification.”
National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 5067, March
1995.

Haddad, M. and Harrison, A.E. (1993). “Are There Positive Spillovers from Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Panel Data for Morocco.” Journal of Development Economics, 42
(1), 51-74.

Harrison, A.E. and Rodriguez-Clare, A. 2010, “Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy
for Developing Countries,” in Handbook of Development Economics, 5, edited by Dani R. and
Mark R. pp. 4039-4214.

Hu, A. and Jefferson, G.H. (2002) "FDI Impact and Spillover: Evidence from China's Electronic


                                               36
and Textile Industries", World Economy, 25 (8) 1063-76.

Jefferson, G.H. and Ouyang, M. (2014), “FDI Spillovers in China: Why Do the Research
Findings Differ So Much?,” Journal of Chinese Economic and Business Studies, 12.1: 1-27.

Javorcik, J. B. (2004). "Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic
Firms? In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages," American Economic Review, 94 (3),
605-627.

Lin, P., Liu, Z.M., Zhang, Y.F. (2009), “Do Chinese Domestic Firms Benefit from FDI Inflow?
Evidence of Horizontal and Vertical Spillovers”, China Economic Review, 20, pp. 677-691.

Khandelwal, A. and Topalova P. (2011), “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: the Case of
India”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3): 995-1009.

Kokko, A. (1999), “Technology, Market Characteristics and Spillovers.” Journal of Development
Economics, 43, 279-93.

Levinsohn J., and Petrin, A. (2003), “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control
for Unobservables.” Review of Economic Studies, 70), 317-41.

Lin, P., Liu, Z.M, and Zhang Y.F. (2009), “Do Chinese domestic firms benefit from FDI inflow?
Evidence of horizontal and vertical spillovers?” China Economic Review, 20, 677-691.

Morisset, J. and Pirnia, N. (1999), “How Tax Policy and Incentives Affect Foreign Direct
Investment,” World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper, published November 1999.

Moulton, B. R. (1990), “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
Variables on Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 72 (2), pp. 334-38.

Nataraj, S. (2011). “The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity: Evidence from India’s
Formal and Informal Manufacturing Sectors,” Journal of International Economics, 85,
292–301.

Naughton, B. (1996), “China’s Emergence and Prospects as a Trading Nation”, Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 27(2), 273-304.

Naughton, B. (2007). The Chinese Economy: Transition and Growth, MIT Press.

Solis, Otton, (2011) “Subsidizing Multinational Corporations: Is That a Development Policy?”
Kellogg Institute, Working Paper #381, November 2011.

Trefler, D. (2004). “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement”, The
American Economic Review, 94 (4), 870-895.

Yu, M.L. (forthcoming), “Processing Trade, Tariff Reductions, and Firm Productivity: Evidence
from Chinese Products”, Economic Journal.

                                                37
                                Table 1. Summary Statistics for All Years, 1998-2007

                                      Levels                                 Growth Rates

                                    Number of                                  Number of
                                                     Mean     Std. Dev.                        Mean     Std. Dev.
                                   observations                               observations
logY                                 1,545,626      10.015     1.343           1,086,616       0.135      0.563
logL                                 1,545,626       4.808     1.152           1,086,616       0.013      0.503
logK                                 1,545,626       8.468     1.719           1,086,616       0.107      0.753
lnTFP                                1,545,626       1.828     0.367           1,086,616       0.056      0.308
Foreign share (contributed by
HK-Taiwan-Macau                      1,545,626       0.089     0.267           1,086,616       0.012      0.377
investors)
Foreign share (contributed by
                                     1,545,626       0.079     0.249           1,086,616       0.000      0.146
other investors)
Stateshare                         1,545,626        0.089       0.272           1,086,616      -0.007      0.147
Horizontal FDI                     1,545,626        0.254       0.142           1,086,616       0.004      0.046
Backward FDI                       1,545,626        0.077       0.046           1,086,616       0.002      0.015
Forward FDI                        1,545,626        0.103       0.173           1,086,616       0.004      0.066
Tariff on final goods              1,545,626       12.691       6.600           1,086,616      -0.869      2.295
Tariffs on inputs                  1,545,626        9.185       4.064           1,086,616      -0.359      2.066
Notes: We define firm-level foreign share according to its different sources. Foreign share contributed by
HK-Taiwan-Macau is defined as the share of firms’ total equity owned by investors from
HK-Taiwan-Macau. Foreign share contributed by other countries is defined as the share of firms’ total
equity owned by investors outside HK-Taiwan-Macau, principally from OECD countries. State share is
defined as the proportion of the firm’s state assets to its total equity. Horizontal captures the intra-industry
FDI spillover while backward and forward represent inter-industry FDI spillovers. We define horizontal,
backward, and forward in equation (2), (3), and (4) respectively. The unit for the tariff variable is
percentage.




                                                       38
                        Table 2: Summary Statistics on Tariffs (By Sector)
                                                     Final Goods Tariff         Input Tariffs
                                                           Difference Between
Industry names                                 Mean           1998 and 2007        Mean

1.Grain mill products                         41.002           -18.290            19.799
2.Forage                                      13.501            -7.871             1.932
3.Vegetable oil refining                      19.852           -21.772             8.796
4.Sugar manufacturing                         37.101            10.710            14.656
5.Slaughtering and meat processing            18.949            -4.510            15.193
6.Fish and fish products                      16.052           -12.419            10.698
7.All other food manufacturing                22.206           -13.238            12.642
8.Wines, spirits and liquors                  27.569           -34.290             4.384
9.Soft drink and other beverages              28.916           -20.560             1.328
10.Tobacco products                           49.584           -24.000
11.Cotton textiles                            14.963           -13.881            14.558
12.Woolen textiles                            14.963           -13.881            11.505
13.Hemp textiles                              14.961           -13.884             8.632
14.Textiles products                          17.674           -15.005            12.958
15.Knitted and crocheted fabrics and
                                              20.082           -17.936            13.452
articles
16.Wearing apparel                            21.997           -16.212            11.568
17.Leather, fur, down and related products    19.176            -8.271             3.691
18.Products of wood, bamboo, cane, palm,
                                               8.849            -8.346             8.130
straw
19.Furniture                                  11.701            -18.51            12.740
20.Paper and paper products                   11.975           -12.734            13.265
21.Printing, reproduction of recording
                                              13.584           -14.950            15.092
media
22.Stationary and related products            18.112            -5.306             9.624
23.Toys, sporting and athletic and
                                              12.120           -14.198             1.494
recreation products
24.Petroleum and nuclear processing            6.499            -0.930            11.159
25.Coking                                      5.479            -0.080             7.447
26.Basic chemicals                             6.848            -3.131            10.513
27.Chemical fertilizers                        7.511             3.152             2.418
28.Chemical pesticides                         8.974            -2.071             1.169
29.Paints, varnishes and similar coatings,
                                               9.242            -3.710            10.096
printing ink
30.Man-made chemical products                 10.043            -6.108            11.981
31.Special chemical products                  12.661            -5.804            10.784
32.Chemical products for daily use            16.088           -11.882             7.675
33.Medical and pharmaceutical products         6.535            -4.599             1.817
34.Chemical fibers                             9.825           -12.423            11.829
35.Rubber products                            16.167            -3.752            12.782
36.Plastic products                           12.583            -8.299            12.860
37.Cement, lime and plaster                   11.811            -2.741             9.913


                                               39
38.Glass and glass products                   15.457    -4.890   10.669
39.Pottery, china and earthenware             18.236   -12.031    6.928
40.Fireproof materials                         9.777    -3.671    7.751
41.Other nonmetallic mineral products         10.030    -2.355    8.187
42.Iron-smelting                               6.601    -3.760    7.720
43.Steel-smelting                              6.601    -3.760    9.424
44.Steel pressing                              6.601    -3.760   11.368
45.Alloy iron smelting                         6.601    -3.760    6.282
46.Nonferrous metal smelting                   6.189    -2.382    7.897
47.Nonferrous metal pressing                   5.630    -2.331   11.921
48.Metal products                             12.788    -4.814   12.599
49.Boiler, engines and turbine                10.081    -4.635   10.693
50.Metalworking machinery                     10.978    -5.201    8.637
51.Other general industrial machinery         10.869    -6.203   11.131
52.Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry
                                              8.253    -5.070    1.163
and fishing machinery
53.Other special industrial equipment          9.871    -5.426   9.798
54.Railroad transport equipment                4.082    -1.340   2.403
55.Motor vehicles                             29.126   -26.921   7.771
56.Parts and accessories for motor vehicles
                                              17.584   -18.570   13.769
and their engines
57.Ship building                               7.365    -1.151    2.488
58.Other transport equipment                  25.944    -9.094    3.349
59.Generators                                 10.725    -6.465    9.195
60.Household electric appliances              18.441    -7.963    7.640
61.Other electric machinery and equipment     15.103    -5.202   12.144
62.Telecommunication equipment                10.992   -13.480    4.279
63.Electronic computer                         8.422    -14.87    5.235
64.Other computer peripheral equipment         8.352   -14.828    7.261
65.Electronic element and device               4.912    -7.010   10.988
66.Radio, television and communication
                                              21.374   -13.97    5.635
equipment and apparatus
67.Other electronic and communication
                                              9.528    -5.450    5.169
equipment
68.Instruments, meters and other measuring
                                              10.097   -5.150    8.603
equipment
69.Cultural and office equipment              10.460   -9.548    4.231
70.Arts and crafts products                   16.980   -7.374    6.483
71.Other manufacturing products               19.324   -5.036    9.855
Average (all sectors)                         12.691   -8.862    9.185




                                              40
                Table 3-1. Summary Statistics for Subsidized and non-Subsidized Spillover Variables (calculated based on income tax)

                                                  Subsidized                                                        Non-subsidized
                         Horizontal             Backward                  Forward                Horizontal             Backward               Forward
        Number of
                                                                                                                                   Std.                 Std.
Year     Observa-      Mean Std. Dev.           Mean      Std. Dev.     Mean     Std. Dev.    Mean Std. Dev.          Mean                   Mean
                                                                                                                                  Dev.                  Dev.
           Tions
1998      95,879       0.076      0.060         0.022       0.015       0.024      0.047      0.112       0.068       0.033       0.018      0.038     0.050
1999      103,945      0.083      0.067         0.025       0.018       0.027      0.056      0.125       0.069       0.040       0.020      0.046     0.064
2000      102,465      0.096      0.072         0.029       0.020       0.033      0.070      0.130       0.070       0.041       0.021      0.049     0.068
2001      114,461      0.102      0.075         0.031       0.020       0.034      0.057      0.130       0.067       0.039       0.021      0.052     0.083
2002      122,218      0.107      0.080         0.035       0.025       0.041      0.091      0.128       0.066       0.037       0.018      0.047     0.059
2003      138,158      0.110      0.078         0.034       0.023       0.042      0.083      0.131       0.069       0.039       0.021      0.053     0.080
2004      202,551      0.132      0.090         0.041       0.027       0.054      0.110      0.129       0.063       0.038       0.020      0.051     0.070
2005      194,120      0.132      0.096         0.041       0.028       0.055      0.110      0.131       0.064       0.039       0.021      0.058     0.092
2006      216,924      0.138      0.094         0.043       0.028       0.057      0.101      0.126       0.061       0.039       0.020      0.057     0.097
2007      254,905      0.138      0.089         0.044       0.026       0.062      0.111      0.119       0.061       0.036       0.021      0.054     0.086
Notes: Table 3-1 reports trends in subsidized and non-subsidized foreign investment. In the left panel of Table 3-1, we redefine our sector-level foreign
share variables by restricting them to only those foreign firms who paid less than the statutory tax rate. In the right panel of Table 3-1, we redefine
sector-level foreign share to restrict it to those firms who paid the full rate.




                                                                             41
             Table 3-2. Summary Statistics for Subsidized and non-Subsidized Spillover Variables (calculated based on value added tax)
                                                  Subsidized                                                   Non-Subsidized
                          Horizontal             Backward                Forward              Horizontal          Backward               Forward
        Number of
Year                   Mean Std. Dev.         Mean      Std. Dev.   Mean      Std. Dev. Mean Std.Dev. Mean Std.Dev. Mean                    Std.Dev.
       Observations
1998      95,879       0.053      0.062       0.014      0.011      0.009       0.018     0.151    0.078      0.045     0.024     0.059      0.085
1999      103,945      0.049      0.056       0.013      0.012      0.007       0.012     0.169    0.089      0.052     0.027     0.069      0.107
2000      102,465      0.049      0.053       0.013      0.011      0.009       0.019     0.182    0.094      0.058     0.030     0.076      0.118
2001      114,461      0.049      0.050       0.013      0.011      0.008       0.017     0.187    0.095      0.057     0.029     0.080      0.123
2002      122,218      0.063      0.064       0.017      0.014      0.008       0.016     0.178    0.088      0.055     0.028     0.081      0.127
2003      138,158      0.070      0.075       0.018      0.018      0.013       0.038     0.177    0.083      0.056     0.027     0.085      0.130
2004      202,551       n.a.       n.a.        n.a.        n.a.      n.a.        n.a.      n.a.     n.a.       n.a.      n.a.      n.a.       n.a.
2005      194,120      0.061      0.058       0.017      0.015      0.014       0.035     0.207    0.102      0.064     0.034     0.101      0.162
2006      216,924      0.054      0.054       0.015      0.014      0.015       0.045     0.214    0.103      0.069     0.034     0.102      0.153
2007      254,905      0.047      0.056       0.013      0.015      0.012       0.038     0.214    0.097      0.068     0.032     0.105      0.159
Notes: In Table 3-2, we redo the exercise in Table 3-1 based on value-added tax information. The tax data are not available for 2004.




                                                                        42
Table 4 Olley and Pakes Regressions with Contemporaneous Spillover Variables and Tariff Controls: all firms,
                       foreign-invested, domestic firms with zero foreign investment

                                                                                        Domestic firms (0 foreign
                                            All firms      Foreign-invested firms
                                                                                                 share)

                                             -0.00379            0.000847
Foreignshare (by HK-Taiwan-Macau)
                                            (0.00312)            (0.00550)
                                            0.00716**            0.0131**
Foreignshare (by other countries)
                                            (0.00342)            (0.00526)
Stateshare                                 -0.0170***             0.00545                       0.000450
                                            (0.00346)            (0.00870)                      (0.00351)
Horizontal                                    0.449**             0.403**                          0.396
                                              (0.189)              (0.192)                        (0.246)
Backward                                        0.989             1.152**                          0.867
                                              (0.644)              (0.556)                        (1.004)
Forward                                     0.427***             0.410***                       0.744***
                                              (0.129)              (0.105)                        (0.224)
lnTariff                                       0.0535             0.0800*                         0.0562
                                             (0.0483)             (0.0411)                       (0.0683)
lnTariff on Inputs                             0.0212              0.0354                         0.0214
                                             (0.0139)             (0.0240)                       (0.0147)
WTO Dummy                                   0.376***             0.0263***                      0.315***
                                             (0.0393)            (0.00515)                       (0.0288)
Constant                                    1.268***             1.299***                       1.196***
                                              (0.151)              (0.141)                        (0.173)
Observations                                1,540,823             347,201                       1,070,523
R-squared                                       0.165               0.180                          0.161

Notes: Robust clustered standard errors, clustered at the sector level, are presented in parentheses. The
dependent variable lnTFP. Each regression includes firm-fixed effects and year dummies. The dummy is
defined as 1 if firm i has non-zero foreign share at period t, 0 otherwise. A * indicates significance at the 10
percent level, a ** indicates significance at the 5 percent level, and a *** indicates significance at the 1 percent
level.




                                                           43
Table 5 Olley and Pakes Regressions with Contemporaneous Spillover Variables and Tariff controls: non-SOEs vs. SOEs (with the sample of
                                 all firms, foreign-invested, and domestic firms with zero foreign share)
                                                                                                        Domestic firms (zero foreign
                                                 All firms                Foreign-invested firms
                                                                                                                   share)
                                        Non-SOEs             SOEs        Non-SOEs            SOEs       Non-SOEs           SOEs
Foreign share (by                        -0.00392            0.0252       0.00113           -0.0691
HK-Taiwan-Macau)                        (0.00310)          (0.0545)      (0.00555)         (0.0744)
                                        0.00698**            0.0553      0.0131**            0.0698
Foreign share (by other countries)
                                        (0.00340)          (0.0427)      (0.00531)         (0.0708)
State share                              0.000622       -0.0233***        0.00483           -0.0112      0.000450           -0.0239***
                                        (0.00291)         (0.00397)      (0.00896)         (0.0351)      (0.00351)           (0.00399)
Horizontal                                0.448**         0.435***        0.408**            -0.603         0.396            0.448***
                                          (0.197)           (0.129)        (0.193)          (0.491)        (0.246)             (0.128)
Backward                                   0.996             0.611        1.139**          3.592***         0.867               0.569
                                          (0.660)           (0.580)        (0.558)          (0.966)        (1.004)             (0.581)
Forward                                  0.441***           0.306**      0.410***          0.674***      0.744***             0.329**
                                          (0.133)           (0.116)        (0.105)          (0.236)        (0.224)             (0.125)
lnTariff                                   0.0676          -0.0525*       0.0815*         -0.0755**        0.0562              -0.0515
                                         (0.0511)          (0.0310)       (0.0414)         (0.0373)       (0.0683)            (0.0312)
ln Input Tariff                            0.0190        0.0411***         0.0353          0.0700**        0.0214            0.0406***
                                         (0.0145)          (0.0136)       (0.0240)         (0.0282)       (0.0147)            (0.0136)
WTO                                      0.144***         0.309***       0.0264***         0.203***      0.315***            0.310***
                                         (0.0327)          (0.0234)      (0.00518)         (0.0323)       (0.0288)            (0.0234)
Constant                                 1.242***         1.425***       1.295***          1.603***      1.196***            1.419***
                                          (0.161)          (0.0740)        (0.142)          (0.115)        (0.173)            (0.0745)
Observations                            1,415,341           125,482       344,818            2,383       1,070,523            123,099
R-squared                                  0.170             0.098          0.180            0.239          0.161               0.097
Horizontal*ownership                               -0.024                           -0.369                            -0.030
                                                  (0.109)                          (0.199)                           (0.109)
                                                    0.05                           3.43                               0.08
F-stat (Horizontal * ownership = 0)
Prob>F                                              0.827                          0.069                             0.7825
Backward*ownership                                 -0.430                          0.465                              -0.408
                                                  (0.280)                         (0.380)                            (0.274)


                                                                           44
                                                      2.36                             1.50                               2.23
F-stat (Backward * ownership = 0)
Prob>F                                                 0.130                           0.226                             0.141
Forward*ownership                                     -0.123                           0.062                             -0.140
                                                     (0.065)                          (0.103)                           (0.066)
                                                      3.66                             0.36                               4.57
F-stat (Forward * ownership = 0)
Prob>F                                               0.061                             0.549                             0.037

                                                      8.97                            6.08                                8.14
F-stat (interaction terms jointly zero)
Prob>F                                               0.0001                          0.011                               0.0001
Notes: Robust clustered standard errors are presented in parentheses. The dependent variable for all regression is lnTFP. All regressions
include firm fixed effects and year dummies. Ownership is a dummy variable, which equals one if a firm is a SOE and zero otherwise.




                                                                               45
                             Table 6A: Interaction between Trade and FDI Spillovers Using WTO Entry as Measure of Trade Policy
                                                       All                             Foreign-invested firms                       Domestic firms
                                          Non-SOEs                SOEs           Non-SOEs                  SOEs            Non-SOEs                SOEs
Horizontal FDI                             0.430**              0.379***           0.426**                 -0.751              0.338
                                            (0.181)              (0.112)           (0.198)                (0.532)             (0.208)
Backward FDI                                 0.499                -0.259            0.486               2.977***               0.486
                                            (0.734)              (0.551)           (0.682)                (1.070)             (1.035)
Forward FDI                                0.427**                 0.272            0.325*               0.638**            0.848***
                                            (0.197)              (0.183)           (0.164)                (0.262)             (0.272)
Horizontal*WTO                              0.0317                 0.104          -0.00297                0.399*              0.0685               0.105
                                           (0.0671)             (0.0816)          (0.0653)                (0.231)            (0.0856)            (0.0824)
Backward*WTO                              0.516***              0.812***         0.647***                0.00441              0.441*             0.824***
                                            (0.190)              (0.215)           (0.177)                (0.392)             (0.228)             (0.223)
Forward*WTO                                0.00870                0.0164            0.0800                 -0.101              -0.113             0.00580
                                           (0.0883)             (0.0993)          (0.0801)                (0.113)            (0.0875)             (0.100)
WTO                                       0.106***              0.233***           -0.0359              0.130***            0.279***             0.234***
                                           (0.0295)             (0.0260)          (0.0231)               (0.0299)            (0.0314)            (0.0263)
Observations                              1,415,341              125,482           344,818                  2,383           1,070,523             123,099
R-squared                                    0.171                 0.101            0.182                   0.250              0.161               0.100
Notes: All specifications include firm fixed effects and year dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at sector level. WTO is a dummy equal to 1 from 2002
onwards. Interaction terms are sectoral FDI measures interacted with the WTO dummy. Other controls also included from previous tables but not reported here
(firm level FDI and SOE shares, input and final goods tariffs).




                                                                            46
                               Table 6B: Interaction between Trade and FDI Spillovers Using Tariffs as Measure of Trade Policy
                                                      All                            Foreign-invested firms                       Domestic firms
                                       Non-SOEs                SOEs             Non-SOEs                 SOEs             Non-SOEs               SOEs
 Horizontal FDI                            0.299                0.480              0.499                 -0.418             -0.0708               0.524
                                          (0.408)             (0.361)             (0.401)               (0.536)             (0.483)             (0.368)
 Backward FDI                            1.843***            2.332***             1.434**              5.067***            3.162***            2.222***
                                          (0.588)             (0.725)             (0.632)               (0.966)             (0.685)             (0.745)
 Forward FDI                               0.381                0.562              0.562                0.945**              0.0878               0.499
                                          (0.599)             (0.560)             (0.485)               (0.362)             (0.783)             (0.581)
 WTO                                     0.133***            0.308***           0.0262***              0.201***            0.313***            0.310***
                                         (0.0316)            (0.0236)            (0.00503)             (0.0327)            (0.0297)            (0.0236)
 Tariff*Horizontal FDI                    0.0700              -0.0163             -0.0342               -0.0830              0.211              -0.0296
                                          (0.128)             (0.138)             (0.132)               (0.122)             (0.156)             (0.140)
 Tariff*Backward FDI                       -0.423            -0.957**              -0.210             -1.023***             -1.068*            -0.916**
                                          (0.446)             (0.382)             (0.442)               (0.238)             (0.583)             (0.384)
 Tariff*Forward FDI                       0.0401               -0.139             -0.0820                -0.174              0.339               -0.101
                                          (0.303)             (0.254)             (0.238)               (0.130)             (0.405)             (0.262)
 Constant                                1.284***            1.399***            1.245***              1.509***            1.307***            1.390***
                                          (0.200)            (0.0840)             (0.187)               (0.128)             (0.208)            (0.0844)

 Observations                            1,415,341             125,482              344,818               2,383               1,070,523            123,099
 R-squared                                 0.171                0.099                0.180                0.251                 0.164               0.099

Notes: All specifications include firm fixed effects and year dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at sector level. WTO is a dummy equal to 1 from 2002
onwards. Interaction terms are sectoral FDI measures interacted with tariffs. Other controls also included from previous tables but not reported here (firm level
FDI and SOE shares, input and final goods tariffs).




                                                                               47
Table 7 Olley and Pakes Regressions for Grouped Data with Contemporaneous Subsidized and non-Subsidized Spillover Variables and Tariff Controls:
                         non-SOEs vs. SOEs (All firms, foreign-invested, and domestic firms with zero foreign investment

                                                                   All                        Foreign-Invested Firms              Domestic Firms
                                                     Non-SOEs              SOEs             Non-SOEs             SOEs      Non-SOEs              SOEs
horizontalS                                             0.347*            0.367**               0.268            -0.636       0.384             0.373**
                                                       (0.206)            (0.164)             (0.195)           (0.543)      (0.247)            (0.164)
backwardS                                               1.287*           2.193***               0.780          3.807***      1.838**           2.115***
                                                       (0.701)            (0.707)             (0.564)           (0.905)      (0.908)            (0.727)
forwardS                                               -0.0673             0.0322              0.0651           0.672**      -0.0875             0.0513
                                                       (0.323)            (0.264)             (0.253)           (0.277)      (0.399)            (0.272)
horizontalNS                                          0.520**              0.271*             0.547**            -0.545       0.336              0.290*
                                                       (0.228)            (0.146)             (0.221)           (0.397)      (0.289)            (0.147)
backwardNS                                               0.889             -0.991               1.931           2.949**      -0.0909             -0.941
                                                       (1.358)            (0.864)             (1.205)           (1.327)      (1.687)            (0.864)
forwardNS                                               1.030*             0.716*             0.803**          0.618***      1.694**             0.741*
                                                       (0.543)            (0.385)             (0.391)           (0.218)      (0.790)            (0.394)
Observations                                         1,415,341            125,482             344,818            2,383      1,070,523           123,099
R-squared                                                0.172             0.098                0.182            0.239        0.164               0.098
F-stat (HS=HNS)                                           0.67              0.23                 2.27             0.09         0.03                0.16
Prob>F                                                   0.416             0.635                0.138            0.768         0.86               0.687
F-stat (BS=BNS)                                           0.06              8.36                 0.64             0.57         1.17                7.42
Prob>F                                                    0.81             0.005                0.427            0.454        0.284               0.008
F-stat (FS=FNS)                                           1.71              1.23                 1.44             0.05         2.41                1.21
Prob>F                                                   0.196             0.272                0.236            0.821        0.126               0.276
F-stat (three conditions jointly)                         2.11              4.29                 3.24              0.2         1.58                 3.9
Prob>F                                                   0.109             0.008                0.028            0.895        0.205              0.0131
Notes: Robust clustered standard errors at the sector level are presented in parentheses. The dependent variable for all regressions is lnTFP. Controls
included but not reported in the Table include the log of Final Tariffs and the log of input tariffs, as well as a WTO dummy equal to 1 after China entered
the WTO. All regressions include firm fixed effect and year dummy variables. HS = subsidized horizontal, and HNS = non-subsidized horizontal; BS =
subsidized backward, and BNS = non-subsidized backward; FS = subsidized forward, and FNS = non-subsidized forward.




                                                                                48
 Table 8 Olley and Pakes Regressions for Grouped Data with Contemporaneous Subsidized and non-Subsidized Spillover Variables (calculated based on
                         value added tax) and Tariff Controls: non-SOEs vs. SOEs (all firms, foreign-invested, domestic firms)

                                                                All firms                   Foreign-invested firms                    Domestic firms
                                                     non-SOEs              SOEs           non-SOEs             SOEs          non-SOEs              SOEs
horizontalS                                            0.727**           0.856***          0.590**             -0.601           0.797*           0.892***
                                                       (0.303)            (0.267)           (0.236)           (0.470)          (0.454)            (0.270)
backwardS                                               -0.690             0.533             -0.377          3.234***           -0.866             0.440
                                                       (1.145)            (0.961)           (0.854)           (1.069)          (1.815)            (0.991)
forwardS                                                0.229              0.424*             0.499          0.669***          -0.0625             0.394*
                                                       (0.425)            (0.235)           (0.349)           (0.216)          (0.490)            (0.228)
horizontalNS                                            0.275            0.299***             0.267            -0.624            0.175           0.308***
                                                       (0.167)            (0.112)           (0.183)           (0.530)          (0.191)            (0.112)
backwardNS                                             1.813**             0.334           1.928**            3.195**            1.659             0.293
                                                       (0.817)            (0.664)           (0.784)           (1.309)          (1.065)            (0.668)
forwardNS                                              0.485**             0.258           0.385**            0.676**        0.929***              0.292
                                                       (0.228)            (0.179)           (0.179)           (0.285)          (0.331)            (0.187)
Observations                                          1,222,322           116,138          298,385             2,308          923,937             113,830
R-squared                                               0.184              0.105              0.203            0.228             0.170             0.104
F-stat (HS=HNS)                                          3.44               4.71                4.1             0.01              2.54               4.9
Prob>F                                                  0.069              0.0341           0.0473              0.93             0.116             0.031
F-stat (BS=BNS)                                          3.37               0.03               3.66               0               1.96              0.02
Prob>F                                                  0.0714             0.854              0.061             0.98             0.167             0.896
F-stat (FS=FNS)                                          0.17               0.19               0.05               0               1.01              0.07
Prob>F                                                  0.683              0.663              0.817             0.98              0.21             0.786
F-stat (three conditions jointly)                       20.02               4.27               3.15               0               1.02                4
Prob>F                                                  0.121              0.009              0.031             0.99             3.884             0.012
Notes: Robust clustered standard errors are presented in parentheses. The dependent variable for all regressions is lnTFP. All regressions include firm fixed
effect and year dummy variables. Since the information on value added is missing for the year of 2004, we exclude the year of 2004 from regressions. HS =
subsidized horizontal, and HNS = non-subsidized horizontal; BS = subsidized backward, and BNS = non-subsidized backward; FS = subsidized forward,
and FNS = non-subsidized forward.




                                                                               49
                                   Table A-1. Summary of Estimated Coefficients on Input Variables using the Olley Pakes Two Stage Procedure
                                                                                                           All Enterprises            Domestic, Private Establishments Only
                                                                                                 Labor        Materials Capital        Labor        Materials     Capital
Foodstuffs                                                                                       0.063648 0.795382 0.039528              0.046787      0.846505     0.037731
Manufacture of beverages                                                                         0.062011 0.797568 0.039427              0.060272      0.783996     0.038303
Manufacture of Tobacco                                                                           0.072545 0.793483         0.00697       0.108622      0.699906     0.006198
Manufacture of Textiles                                                                          0.057483       0.8192 0.041548          0.047518      0.834871     0.048671
Manufacture of textile wearing apparel, footwear                                                 0.097813 0.706444 0.056324              0.073357      0.742437     0.060367
Manufacture of leather, fur, feather                                                             0.082379 0.795421 0.043285              0.065043      0.844919     0.042856
Processing of timber, manufacture of wood, bamboo                                                0.056418 0.814447 0.041392              0.041642      0.859254     0.039784
Manufacture of furniture                                                                         0.110771 0.761009 0.050201               0.10054      0.774004     0.053424
Manufacture of paper and paper products                                                          0.056664 0.808117 0.048015              0.048811      0.812315     0.055325
Manufacture of articles for culture, education and sports                                        0.109501 0.727006 0.033724              0.067636       0.79291       0.02737
Processing of petroleum, coking, nuclear fuel                                                      0.10447 0.774527         0.0155       0.092348      0.784275     0.005467
Manufacture of raw chemical materials, chemical products                                         0.067949 0.790304 0.033636              0.065466      0.792625     0.036906
Manufacture of medicines                                                                         0.086851 0.762153 0.070223                 0.0884     0.763997     0.079882
Manufacture of chemical fibers                                                                   0.053973 0.892586 0.035822              0.065075      0.906072     0.018944
Manufacture of Rubber                                                                            0.092509 0.718883 0.057499              0.077012      0.723723       0.06136
Manufacture of Plastics                                                                          0.126058 0.697807 0.038696              0.106281      0.696002     0.054243
Manufacture of non-metallic mineral products                                                     0.050259 0.814683         0.03636       0.043229      0.821056     0.042961
Smelting and pressing of non-ferrous metals                                                      0.041025 0.862236 0.029997              0.041844      0.863016     0.033199
Smelting and pressing of metals                                                                    0.10535 0.750012 0.013021             0.110405       0.73531     0.007556
Manufacture of metal products                                                                    0.115651 0.683249 0.051367               0.10836         0.6673    0.055312
Manufacture of special purpose machinery                                                         0.075696 0.786973 0.046593              0.072163      0.806896     0.052035
Manufacture of transport equipment                                                                 0.09118 0.792991 0.066821             0.082191      0.814969     0.070575
Manufacture of electrical machinery and equipment                                                0.106034 0.774765 0.046943              0.086655      0.796434     0.051404
Manufacture of communication, computers and other electronic equipment                           0.207143      0.70811 0.046657          0.159348      0.729829     0.042883
Manufacture of measuring instruments, machinery for cultural activity, office work               0.135264 0.726912 0.042837              0.089397      0.764966     0.052725
Manufacture of artwork and other manufacturing                                                   0.072451 0.778526 0.034818              0.056781      0.804089     0.035706
Total: Across All Sectors                                                                        0.085971 0.773345 0.043454              0.071651      0.789283     0.047174

                                                                                     50
Figure 1




  51
Figure 2




           52
                      Figure 3. Tax Rate Distribution with Groups of firms (2004)

                        Group 1: Non-SOEs                                                       Group 2: SOEs




                                                                          .25
           .3




                                                                            .2
Fraction




           .2




                                                      Fraction



                                                                          .15
                                                                            .1
           .1




                                                                          .05
            0




                                                                                0
                0     .2     .4      .6        .8                1                  0       .2     .4      .6        .8     1
                    income taxpayable/total profits                                       income taxpayable/total profits


                     Group 3: Domestic firms                                            Group 4: Foreign-invested firms
           .4




                                                                            .2
           .3




                                                                          .15
Fraction




                                                      Fraction
           .2




                                                                            .1
                                                                          .05
           .1
            0




                                                                                0
                0     .2     .4      .6        .8                1                  0       .2     .4      .6        .8     1
                    income taxpayable/total profits                                       income taxpayable/total profits




                                                                     53
Figure 4. Initial Tariffs and Subsequent Tariff Changes




                          54
55
