                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   IS IT WHOM YOU KNOW OR WHAT YOU KNOW? AN EMPIRICAL ASSESSMENT
                      OF THE LOBBYING PROCESS

                                       Marianne Bertrand
                                       Matilde Bombardini
                                        Francesco Trebbi

                                       Working Paper 16765
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16765


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2011




The authors would like to thank Allan Drazen, Keith Krehbiel, Ken Shepsle, and seminar participants
at the Korean Development Institute, the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Columbia
Graduate School of Business, University of California Berkeley Haas School of Business, University
of Minnesota, the 2010 Wallis Conference on Political Economy, and Stanford Graduate School of
Business. David Wood provided outstanding research assistance. Financial support from the Initiative
on Global Financial Markets is kindly acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Marianne Bertrand, Matilde Bombardini, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is It Whom You Know or What You Know? An Empirical Assessment of the Lobbying Process
Marianne Bertrand, Matilde Bombardini, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 16765
February 2011
JEL No. D72,H7,P48

                                              ABSTRACT

What do lobbyists do? Some believe that lobbyists’ main role is to provide issue-specific information
and expertise to congressmen to help guide the law-making process. Others believe that lobbyists mainly
provide the firms and other special interests they represent with access to politicians in their “circle
of influence” and that this access is the be-all and end-all of how lobbyists affect the lawmaking process.
This paper combines a descriptive analysis with more targeted testing to get inside the black box of
the lobbying process and inform our understanding of the relative importance of these two views of
lobbying. We exploit multiple sources of data covering the period 1999 to 2008, including: federal
lobbying registration from the Senate Office of Public Records, Federal Election Commission reports,
committee and subcommittee assignments for the 106th to 110th Congresses, and background information
on individual lobbyists. A pure issue expertise view of lobbying does not fit the data well. Instead,
maintaining connections to politicians appears central to what lobbyists do. In particular, we find that
whom lobbyists are connected to (through political campaign donations) directly affects what they
work on. More importantly, lobbyists appear to systematically switch issues as the politicians they
were previously connected to switch committee assignments, hence following people they know rather
than sticking to issues. We also find evidence that lobbyists that have issue expertise earn a premium,
but we uncover that such a premium for lobbyists that have connections to many politicians and Members
of Congress is considerably larger.


Marianne Bertrand                                    Francesco Trebbi
Booth School of Business                             University of British Columbia
University of Chicago                                1873 East Mall
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                           Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z1
Chicago, IL 60637                                    Canada
and NBER                                             and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu                   ftrebbi@interchange.ubc.ca

Matilde Bombardini
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and CIFAR and RCEA
and also NBER
matildeb@interchange.ubc.ca
    1. Introduction

At the intersection between the political and the economic spheres lays the lobbying industry.
Trillions of dollars of public policy intervention, government procurement, and budgetary items
are constantly thoroughly scrutinized, advocated, or opposed by representatives of special
interests. The sheer relevance of the 4 billion dollars federal lobbying industry has become
evident in any aspect of the 2008-2009 financial crisis, including emergency financial market
intervention (the TARP), financial regulation, countercyclical fiscal policy intervention, and
healthcare reform1. Notwithstanding its perceived fundamental role in affecting economic policy,
very little systematic empirical research about the lobbying industry is available to economists
and political scientists alike. For both sets of scholars what lobbyists do is a question without a
definitive answer.

A large part of the academic theoretical literature on interest groups has painted the lobbying
process as one of information transmission: informed interest groups send cheap or costly signals
to uninformed politicians.2 This literature identifies a potentially welfare-enhancing role for the
lobbying process, but has not produced substantial evidence in support of this mechanism. In this
paper we take an indirect approach to this task by studying the intermediary between interest
groups and policy makers, namely lobbyists. Stylized models of informational lobbying do not


1
  See for instance Birnbaum (2008): “A key provision of the housing bill now awaiting action in the Senate -- and
widely touted as offering a lifeline to distressed homeowners -- was initially suggested to Congress by lobbyists for
major banks facing their own huge losses from the subprime mortgage crisis[…]” [Vital Part of Housing Bill Is
Brainchild of Banks, 6/25/2008, The Washington Post] or Pear (2009): “In the official record of the historic House
debate on overhauling health care, the speeches of many lawmakers echo with similarities. […] Statements by more
than a dozen lawmakers were ghostwritten, in whole or in part, by Washington lobbyists working for Genetech, one
of the world’s largest biotechnology companies.” [In House Many Spoke With One Voice: Lobbyists’, 11/15/2009,
New York Times].
2
  Grossman and Helpman (2001) offer an exhaustive literature review. The basic idea is that interest groups,
although known to be biased, are credible to the politician if their preferences are sufficiently aligned with the
politicians’ or the information they send is costly (or if it can be verified). Among the most prominent contributions
are Crawford and Sobel (1982), Calvert (1985), Potters and Van Winden (1990, 1992, 1994), Austen-Smith (1992,
1993, 1994, 1995), Austen-Smith and Wright (1994, 1996). A few papers have looked at the interactions between
the two tools available to interest groups (information transmission and campaign support), e.g., Austen-Smith
(1995), Lohman (1995), and more recently, Bennedsen and Feldmann (2006).

                                                                                                                    2
account for the presence of the lobbying industry as an intermediary, but understanding the role
of the middlemen is important for two reasons. First it can offer some indirect evidence of how
much of lobbying is indeed about information transmission. Second, given the large and growing
size of the industry,3 lobbyists are likely to be more than just messengers, and understanding
what they do should inform theoretical models.

With the goal of understanding what lobbyists do and why they are paid, this study considers two
broad views of lobbying. Under one view, which resonates with the informational lobbying
literature, lobbyists are experts who provide information to legislators and help guide their
decision-making process. Such expertise might be particularly valuable when one considers that
legislators themselves may have neither the technical background nor the time to delve into the
detailed implications of all the pieces of legislation they are debating. This view is also
maintained by the American League of Lobbyists, which on its official website states “Lobbying
is a legitimate and necessary part of our democratic political process. Government decisions
affect both people and organizations, and information must be provided in order to produce
informed decisions.”4

This expertise view of lobbying stands in contrast with the view, held by many in the media and
on the street, that lobbyists’ main asset is not what they know but instead whom they know.5 In
interviews with insiders, McGrath (2006) reports “There are three important things to know
about lobbying: contacts, contacts, contacts.” What is valuable under this alternative view is not
lobbyists’ expertise, but instead their access to various members of Congress through personal,
and possibly also financial, connections.6 This perspective does not completely rule out a flow of


3
    See Appendix Table A1
4
    http://www.alldc.org/publicresources/lobbying.cfm
5
 See Salisbury et al. (1989) for an early discussion and test based on surveys of lobbyists and Apollonio, Cain and
Drutman (2008, section B), Drutman (2010) for a recent discussion.
6
 It is important to notice, however, that such a view of lobbyists does not necessarily imply (even though it could be
associated with) a quid-pro-quo aspect of the lobbying process. According to the “quid-pro-quo” view, politicians
either modify their electoral platform or implement policies when in office and receive in exchange valuable
campaign contributions that are used more or less directly to sway voters. A large number of models with different
                                                                                                                    3
information from interest groups to politicians, but excludes that lobbyists are the source of
expertise.

Sorting out these two views of lobbying is important because they differ in their implications for
the quality of the legislative output. With very few exceptions, mostly limited to specific
congressional studies, systematic evidence has eluded both political economists and political
scientists.7 Moreover, many of the existing studies report the lobbyists’ point of view on what
lobbyists do, being based on surveys of insiders (Esterling, 2004; Heinz et al., 1993), a
potentially biased representation relative to what lobbyists actually do.

In this paper, we combine multiple data sources that help us paint a picture of the lobbying
process over the last decade. This includes lobbying records as maintained by the Senate Office
of Public Records (SOPR), lobbyists’ campaign contribution donations from the Federal Election
Commission, and biographical information for a subset of lobbyists that we collect from an
online registry.

We first document basic facts about the expertise of lobbyists and connections between lobbyists
and politicians. We build measures of expertise by looking at the entire set of lobbying records
that are associated with a given lobbyist and evaluating how narrow or broad the range of issues
a lobbyist’s name is associated with is. While we cannot directly observe lobbyists’ contacts with
politicians, we propose to proxy for it with a count of the number of campaign contributions that
lobbyists make to various politicians and Members of Congress. 8 We remain agnostic as to what

objectives share this fundamental “quid-pro-quo” approach. A non-exhaustive list of papers that have employed this
approach includes Austen-Smith (1987), Baron (1989), Baron (1994), Snyder (1990), Snyder (1991), Grossman and
Helpman (1994, 1995, 1996), Dixit et al. (1997) and Besley and Coate (2001). Bombardini and Trebbi (2009)
explore the interaction between monetary support and direct votes promised by interest groups but essentially
maintain the quid-pro-quo approach. This strand of the literature has received a lot of attention from the empirical
point of view, in particular in its application to the literature on endogenous trade policy (Goldberg and Maggi,
1999; Gawande and Bandyopadhyay, 2000, Bombardini, 2008).
7
    Early related contributions include Langbein (1986), Salisbury et al. (1989), Wright (1990), Heinz et al. (1993).
8
  Wright (1990) is among the first to report a positive correlation between lobbying contacts and campaign
contributions, while Ainsworth (1993) underscores that “indeed, there is evidence that campaign contributions
appear to be most useful as predictors of access (Grenzke 1989; Herndon 1982; Langbein 1986).”

                                                                                                                        4
these connections represent and prefer to keep the view that they proxy for any kind of contact
between lobbyists and politicians. According to many scholars campaign contributions are
simply a way to gain access to time-constrained politicians, “a chance to ‘tell their story’”
(Sabato, 1985). The presence of such access costs is compatible with an informational view of
lobbying, where those groups that gain access communicate useful information to the politician.
But such connections could also represent personal relationships where the lobbyist’s expertise
plays no role.

We first establish some key trends in the data. In particular, we show that the steady growth in
the size of the lobbying industry over the last decade has been paralleled with an also somewhat
steady growth in the number of connections between lobbyists and politicians. Interestingly, the
growth in lobbying has been almost exclusively driven by external lobbying, not in-house
lobbying, with external lobbyists being those that maintain generally more ties to politicians (at
least through individual campaign contributions). Furthermore, while connections to politicians
appear on the rise among all types of lobbyists, the prevalence of issue expertise among lobbyists
has been quite stable over the last decade.

An important facet of the current media and policy debate surrounding lobbying has centered on
the revolving door between positions on the Hill and positions in lobbying. On the one hand,
revolving door lobbyists could be a key source of issue expertise, and restricting the ease with
which these individuals can move from offices in Congress or government to the lobbying sector
may result in the loss of valuable knowledge. On the other hand, this group might be particularly
powerful in influencing current lawmakers due to overlapping social networks. Contrary to the
first view, we establish unambiguously that revolving door lobbyists are not those with deeper
issue expertise; what distinguishes them from other lobbyists is a much higher number of
connections to politicians and current lawmakers.

Simply counting the number of legislators a given lobbyist makes campaign contributions to
obviously falls short of establishing that such connections play a role in the lobbying process.
Indeed, a lobbyist may give campaign contributions to a set of politicians for reasons that are
purely personal, and unrelated to his or her professional activities.
                                                                                                5
We therefore next dig deeper into understanding whether and how connections between lobbyists
and politicians (through campaign contributions) matter for their job. We show that whom
lobbyists make campaign contributions to is systematically related to what they work on.
Specifically, a lobbyist that works on, say health care-related issues is systematically more likely
to be connected (through campaign contributions) to legislators whose committee assignments
include health care. Lobbyists’ donations are not given for purely personal reasons. The evidence
rather hints at campaign contributions proxying for the lobbying activity of lobbyists, likely a
tell-tale of the otherwise unobservable connection between lobbyists and congressmen.

In what we see as one of the main contributions of the paper we attempt to disentangle whether
whom or what lobbyists know drives their activity. We find evidence that lobbyists switch issues
in a predictable way as the legislators they were previously connected to through campaign
donations switch committee assignments. Hence, for example, a lobbyist that is connected to a
legislator whose committee assignment includes health care in one Congress is more likely to
cover defense-related issues in the next Congress if the legislator he or she is connected to is re-
assigned to defense in the next Congress. In other words, part of what lobbyists do appears to be
a function of whom they know and have access to, rather than what they know. We however also
see some evidence of lobbyists establishing connections to politicians that are entering a
lobbyist’s prior area of activity due to a change in committee assignment. Hence, lobbyists’
connections operate as an exogenous driver of what issues they work on, but are also in part
endogenously created to facilitate the transmission of knowledge and expertise to the relevant
lawmakers. We view the first type of connections as representing underlying long-standing ties,
while the second type reflects temporary links established in order to communicate the relevant
information.

In a complementary analysis, we ask what makes lobbyists more valuable, using the dollar value
attached to the lobbying reports. We investigate what makes hiring the lobbying team on a given
report expensive and find that, while having at least an expert on the team is important, having
connected lobbyists brings twice as large a premium. This confirms the relevance of the first type
of connections discussed above: the positive premium we estimate for connected lobbyists
suggests that some political contributions by lobbyists might be best understood as a
                                                                                                  6
manifestation of deeper, harder to replicate, personal ties. The barriers to entry into establishing
the type of connections of politicians we measure in the data (campaign contributions below
$2,400) are very low compared to the premium they command; so what earns a premium is the
relationship between lobbyists and politicians that certain campaign contributions embody.
Also, to approximate the value of an individual lobbyist, we use some residual measure of the
dollar value of the lobbying reports he or she is assigned to. Is the lobbyist’s value coming from
his or her expertise in specific technical areas? Or is it coming from the connections that the
lobbyist maintains with politicians and lawmakers? This additional analysis confirms that
connections rather than issue expertise might be the relatively scarce resource lobbyists are
bringing to the table. Finally, we check for changes in premia associated with “issue cycles”, that
is whether returns respond to an issue becoming popular. We find no evidence that the return of a
specialized lobbyist moves with the issue cycle, and it seems that most of the adjustment during
a boom is through additional entry of non-specialists who start lobbying on that issue.
Analogously to the issue cycle, we check for evidence of “political cycles” in the returns to
lobbyists, and find an increase in the returns to lobbyists associated to a given party when that
party is in a position of power.

Can our findings rule out that lobbyists are experts or that they convey information? The
evidence points to a relatively small role played by technical expertise,9 but is consistent with a
scenario where lobbyists connected to a given politician are valuable because they have a deep
knowledge of that politician’s constituency,10 and have built a relationship of trust and credibility
vis-à-vis that politician. They could be communicating information, but their returns are
seemingly more related to the complementary asset they bring to the table and to their role as
intermediaries in the transmission of information.

9
  Incidentally, it is easy to verify that large lobbying firms like Patton Boggs LLP or Cassidy and Associates employ
very few individuals with background that points to specific technical training, even when the lobbying covers
technical issues such as biotechnology or nuclear energy. See Table A-3 where report information extracted from the
biographies of lobbyists posted online by the lobbying firms.
10
  Hansen (1991) suggests that “Lawmakers operate in highly uncertain environments. They have an idea of the
positions they need to take to gain reelection, but they do not know for sure. Interest groups offer to help . . . They
provide political intelligence about the preferences of congressional constituents.”

                                                                                                                          7
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. We first describe the pool of lobbyists and present
some summary statistics on their professional background (Section 2). We then define our
measures of expertise and connections, and discuss trends in those over the last decade (Section
3). Section 4 briefly looks into which specific asset lobbyists are particularly endowed with
(issue expertise or connections). We then move to more detailed tests of whether and how
connections to politicians affect what lobbyists work on (Section 5). Section 6 presents our
analysis of the premia associated with issue expertise, connections and past experience on the
Hill or in government offices, along with an analysis of returns over “issue cycles” and “political
cycles”. We conclude in Section 7.

     2. The Lobbyists

We use lobbying registration information from the Senate Office of Public Records (SOPR) to
build a database of lobbyists for the period 1999 to 2008.11 Each of the records filed with SOPR
contains not only the name of the reporting firm and the name of the client firm or organization,
but also the names of the individual lobbyists that were involved in this specific lobbying case. It
is therefore possible to construct, starting with the lobbying records, a database that contains the
names of all lobbyists that were active at the federal level over the last decade.12 We identify


11
  Data on lobbying expenditures from the Senate Office of Public Records has been previously employed in a very
small number of papers, some of which utilize only a very limited subset of the available information. Ansolabehere,
Snyder and Tripathi (2003) focus on the link between campaign contributions and lobbying and show that the two
are correlated, consistently with a view that campaign contributions are a way for interest groups to buy access to
politicians. Once access is gained lobbyists have a chance to voice the interests of their clients. The paper also shows
that the pattern of campaign contributions varies according to the intensity of lobbying of a given group.
Baumgertner and Leech (2001) offer a partial analysis of the distribution of lobbyists across issues, finding high
concentration in some issues and very low in others. Bombardini and Trebbi (2008) study trade association lobbying
in international trade, while Igan, Mishra and Tressel (2009) and Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2010) study lobbying by
home mortgage firms during the US housing market expansion. In an interesting and related paper Blanes-i-Vidal,
Draca, and Fons-Rosen (2010) employ SOPR data to assess the drop in revenues occurring to a subset of lobbyists
with past experience as senatorial aides when their Senator leaves office.
12
  Any type of information provision and research activity related to contacts to politicians requires registration.
From the Office of the Clerk, Lobbying Disclosure Act Guidance: ‘Lobbying activity is defined in Section 3(7) as
"lobbying contacts and efforts in support of such contacts, including . . . background work that is intended, at the
time it is performed, for use in contacts, and coordination with the lobbying activities of others." If the intent of the
work is to support ongoing and future lobbying, then it would fall within the definition of lobbying activities.’ Any
                                                                                                                            8
about 37,000 individual lobbyists between 1999 and 2008. The Center for Responsive Politics
lists on average 13,024 unique lobbyists per year between 1998 and 2010, varying from 10,404
in 1998 to 14,869 in 2007.

The SOPR data also allows us to separate the lobbyists into two sub-groups based on whether
they are in-house lobbyists (these are the cases where the registering firm is the same as the
client firm in the lobbying report) or whether they work for a lobbying firm that is representing
another organization (the cases where the registering firm is different from the client firm). In
what follows, we refer to the former group as the “internal” (or in-house) lobbyists and to the
latter group as the “external” lobbyists.13 We can also use the SOPR data to compute, for each
lobbyist*year observation: number of years of experience (with the caveat of the right-tail
truncation), and number of records the lobbyist name is attached to in a given year. Furthermore,
we can compute how many years a given lobbyist appears as active over the sample period (10
years at most).

We rely on www.lobbyists.info to obtain additional time-invariant background information about
the lobbyists we identify in the lobbying records. This website, which was originally derived
from the directory “Washington Representatives” and is maintained by Columbia Books &
Information Services (CBIS), is the best information source we are aware of for federal
lobbyists. Often included on the website are short biographies that allow us to further profile the
lobbyists. In particular, we searched for specific strings in this online directory to build a set of
background experience indicators, such as whether a lobbyist has “Republican” or “Democrat”
associations, whether the lobbyist has “House” or “Senate” or “White House” experience, or
whether the lobbyist is referred to as “Hon.” (the explicit title for former members of




individual paid to perform such activities in excess of 20% of his work time and who establishes more than one
lobbying contact with a politician over a quarter has to register as lobbyist.
13
  If a lobbyist ever appears as both internal and external in a given year, we arbitrarily categorize her as external in
that year. When we collapse the panel data at the lobbyist level, we also categorize as external a lobbyist that
appears both as internal and external in different sample years.

                                                                                                                      9
Congress).14 Not all lobbyists identified in the SOPR data appear on www.lobbyists.info; in
practice, we found about 14,000 of the 37,000 lobbyists identified in the SOPR data in
www.lobbyists.info.15

Table 1 summarizes the lobbyist-level data; the unit of observation is a lobbyist and all lobbyists
are equally weighted to compute these summary statistics. About 40 percent of lobbyists work
in-house. The average lobbyist appears in the data for about four years and has nearly two years
of experience; he/she is associated with about 5 lobbying records in a typical active year. Among
those lobbyists that we can find in www.lobbyist.info, 97 percent have some biographical
information associated with their name. Among those, about 11 percent have some association to
the Republican party and about 9.8 percent to the Democratic party. A bit more than 1 percent of
the lobbyists for which we could find biographical information are former members of
Congress.16 About 2 percent of the biographies mention some experience in the White House.
There is also a large representation of former “aides” (11 percent) and individuals with
experience in senators’ offices (around 10 percent).17

Table 2 shows how lobbyists’ background has changed over the years. The most dramatic
change over time appears to be in the share of in-house lobbyists, which has declined from
nearly 60 percent at the beginning of the sample period to less than 40 percent by the end. In

14
  To be specific, we first downloaded the whole directory by running a blank search on the database. Second, we
run a series of searches conditional on matching certain strings of text in the bio, like "senate" or "house" or
"Democrat", etc. Third, we merged together every single list against the whole set of lobbyists, generating a dummy
conditional on the matching being successful (i.e. you get Democrat=1 if you are in the output of that search). Prior
to converging on this coding method, we run about 200 manual spot searches to check that the method was
producing reliable results.
15
  Maybe not surprisingly given that we downloaded the directory information in 2009, we are more successful at
identifying lobbyists that were active in the later part of the sample period than lobbyists that were active at the first
few years. The match rate varies between the upper 30 percents at the beginning of the period to the mid 60 percents
towards the end. Those lobbyists that can be identified in www.lobbyists.info typically have more years of
experience and are associated with more lobbying records in each active year. See Table 1.
16
  A majority of those are ex-House Representatives, and about equal shares come from the right and left wings of
the political spectrum (.7 percent and .6 percent, respectively).
17
     Of course, these two groups can overlap.

                                                                                                                       10
fact, as can be seen in Appendix Table A1, the rapid growth in total lobbying expenses over the
last decade (about a 30 percent increase) can be almost exclusively accounted for by a growth of
external lobbying, which doubled over the sample period. In-house lobbying instead, while up in
the first part of the last decade, was back down to its starting level by the end of the decade.
While this is not the central topic of this paper, this does suggest that building an understanding
of the recent growth of lobbying expenses should start with identifying the key drivers of the
external lobbying process. In what follows, we make sure to present separate analysis for
external and internal lobbying.18

Now, despite an active media coverage that might have suggested the contrary, there is no
systematic evidence (at the individual lobbyist level at least) that the revolving door is more open
today than it was in the past. The share of active lobbyists in 2008 that were, for example, former
members of Congress, is smaller by 2008 than it was in 1999. Similarly, there are fewer (in
percentage terms) active lobbyists in 2008 that have experience in the White House or
experience as “aide” or in a senate office than there was in 1999. Much of the decline in the
share of revolving door lobbyists appears to be concentrated in the second half of the sample
period.

     3. Expertise and Connections

     3.A. Expertise

One of the prevailing views of what lobbyists do is that they support overly burdened legislators
(and regulators) with much needed expertise on often complicated topics, and therefore provide
valuable guidance in the lawmaking and rulemaking processes. In this section, we construct
measures of expertise (or specialization) at both the lobbyist and lobbying firm levels; we also
describe trends in those measures over time.

18
  A widely held view of internal lobbyists is of watchdogs monitoring the day-to-day activity of Congress flagging
potential issues of interests for their company (and calling in the professional external lobbyists when necessary).
Such activity does not appear to require any particular expertise or connections. Hrebenar and Morgan (2009)
highlight how many of the in-house lobbyists are also not full-time lobbyists and often volunteer or amateur
lobbyists, especially with regard to groups dealing with moral, environmental, or religious issues.

                                                                                                                  11
We propose to measure the extent to which lobbyists are experts by assessing how narrow or
broad the range of issues they are assigned to is. This can be done with the SOPR data.
Associated with each report is a checklist of all the issues a given report is covering. (The full list
of issues is reported in Appendix A1. A sample report is presented in Appendix A2.) More
precisely, consider a report r at time t. The report lists a number of issues Irt (where Irt is bound
between 1 and 76 possible issues), the name of all Lrt lobbyists employed and the dollar amount
paid for lobbying services on those issues Irt at time t, Vrt. Let us assume that the report value is
divided symmetrically across all lobbyists, so that the service of each lobbyist l in the report is
valued            . If we impute this value symmetrically to all issues, then the dollar amount for

issue i and lobbyist l on report r at time t is             . If lobbyist l works on      reports then

we can indicate by       the value of lobbying on issue i so that            ∑         . We sum
across all active years for lobbyist l to obtain       . Using these dollar values as weights, we
compute for each lobbyist l an issue-based Herfindahl Index (HHI) that measures how
concentrated this lobbyist’s assignments are across all possible issues I:



                                        HHI



where        ∑       . Hence, a lobbyist whose name is attached to only one issue across all
lobbying records over the last decade would be assigned an HHI of 1. As a complementary
measure, we also generate a dummy variable called “specialist” that equals 1 if a lobbyist spends
(in dollar terms) at least a quarter of his assignments in each active year on the same issue. We
call a “generalist” a lobbyist that never spends (i.e. in no active year) more than a quarter of his
assignments on the same issue.

The measures of specialization we propose are subject to both downward and upward sources of
bias. First, there are typically multiple lobbyists assigned to a given lobbying report (the mean
across reports is 3; the median is 2), and it is possible that not all the lobbyists whose names is
listed on a report cover all the issues associated with the report. Because we do not observe when

                                                                                                    12
such within-report specialization occurs, we cannot account for it; this will lead us to
underestimate how specialized a given lobbyist is. Second, because lobbyists typically do not
work for many years in our data (the average number of active years is about 4), our proposed
specialization measures may mistakenly classify as specialists those lobbyists that appear on only
a very limited number of reports or work for a very limited number of years; this will lead us to
overestimate the degree of specialization.

Table 3 presents means and trends over time in the average level of expertise in the unbalanced
panel of lobbyists (e.g. a panel that includes only lobbyists in the years in which they are active).
All lobbyist-year observations are equally weighted in the construction of these statistics. Across
all years and all lobbyists (Table 3, Panel A), our expertise measures lead us to qualify about a
quarter of lobbyists as specialists and about another quarter as generalists; the average issue-
based HHI in the lobbyist panel is .34. There is no monotonic trend over time in the share of
specialists or the HHI measure; if anything, the share of specialists seems to have gone down in
the first half of the decade and back up in the second half. Panel B replicates the same statistics
but restricts the panel to the subset of lobbyists that appear in the lobbying data for at least 4
years. As we had anticipated, the share of specialists drops somewhat in this subsample (19
percent across all years, respectively); the HHI measure is basically unchanged. In this
subsample, we again see no systematic trend in expertise over the sample period.

Panels C and D report means and trends in specialization for external and internal lobbyists,
respectively. External lobbyists are more likely to be specialists than internal lobbyists (mean of
.3 vs. .2 across all years) and less likely to be generalists (mean of .13 vs. .4 across all years). In
neither of these two subsamples do we observe systematic trend in issue expertise over time.

Figure 1A displays the distribution of the share of specialists across lobbying entities for the
entire sample period. Our motivation for looking at such distribution is the possibility that a
subset of lobbying firms might want to differentiate by “specializing in specialization.” Under
this view, one might expect multiple modes when plotting the distribution of the specialist share
across firms. We can easily compute this firm-level measure from the SOPR data as it links


                                                                                                    13
every lobbyist to the firm he or she is working for.19 The distribution of specialist share in
professional lobbying organizations does appear bimodal, with a large mode around 0 and
another much smaller mode around 1; the distribution for in-house lobbying teams does not
display any mode at 1.

3.B. Connections

In contrast with the view that lobbyists add issue expertise to the law- and rulemaking process is
the view that lobbyists’ main asset is their social network and, in particular, their personal
relations to lawmakers. In the words of Hon. John Boehner “many of the lobbyists who enter our
offices every day to represent their clients are, for all practical purposes, complete mysteries to
us. Yet for the House to function, some degree of trust is necessary. Many lobbyists are of the
highest integrity and feel as much of a duty to the House as a democratic institution as they do to
their clients. But there’s every incentive for those with more questionable ethics to shortchange
us and the House. And absent our personal, longstanding relationships, there is no way for us to
tell the difference between the two.” 20

While investigative journalism has given us detailed accounts of relationships between
legislators and lobbyists, these accounts only provide spotty pictures that cannot be generalized
to the entire lobbying industry or lawmaking group. A clear difficulty in terms of painting a more
complete picture is to build a systematic measure of connections. We propose to exploit
information on campaign contributions lobbyists make to politicians to construct such a measure.
Specifically, we search the campaign contribution records kept by the Federal Election
Commission to identify all campaign contributions made by the lobbyists identified in the SOPR
data. For each lobbyist, we can measure whether he or she has made at least one contribution to a




19
  In computing this measure, we weigh each lobbyist-firm observation by the number of records he or she was listed
on across the entire sample period and restrict ourselves to the sample of organizations that employ at least two
lobbyists over the entire sample period.
20
     John Boehner: For a Majority That Matters (January 9, 2006).

                                                                                                               14
campaign over the sample period21; we can count a lobbyist’s average number of contributions in
any given Congress; and we can also tag those lobbyists that make “many” campaign
contributions in any given Congress (we arbitrarily define “many” as five or more).

One clear concern about this measure is that it may systematically miss strong connections
between lobbyists and politicians, as such connections may not require campaign contributions.
To build some sense of how much of a concern this is, we considered a group of 50 lobbyists
with family members serving in Congress (source: Public Citizen, 2007). There is arguably no
connection stronger than family ties. Were campaign contributions just a weak substitute for
closer ties, we would expect to see no connections as we measure them (e.g. through political
donations) between these lobbyists and their family members in Congress. In fact, we found that
30 percent of these 50 lobbyists make campaign contributions to their family members. As an
additional check, we also made use of a list of 21 lobbyists and public affairs consultants with
strong ties to Republican Congressman John A. Boehner published by the New York Times22.
Cross-checking with FEC individual campaign contribution data we were able to recover 52
percent of the connections. Hence, our connection measure, while certainly noisy, will arguably
correlate with strong ties.23

Another concern about this measure could be that, while a lobbyist may be connected to a
politician, it is really the client hiring the lobbyist that is paying the campaign contributions to
the politician, and not the lobbyist directly. This alternative concern may be partially addressed
by considering the relationship between the campaign contributions received by politicians from
lobbyists and from their clients respectively. While it is particularly cumbersome to explore any
possible client-lobbyist-congressman connection in the data, the Center for Responsive Politics
(CRP) presents lobbyist-client clusters of donations to members of Congress between January
21
 FEC disclosure requires indicating the individual name, occupation and employer of the donor, allowing a precise
match to SOPR data.
22
     Lipton (2010) [A GOP Leader Tightly Bound to Lobbyists, 09/11/2010, New York Times].
23
  On second thought, this might be intuitive. While it is reasonable to assume that politicians certainly allow
communication without payment from closely connected lobbyists, the strong ties are also the first to be pulled
when politicians need funds.

                                                                                                                  15
2007 and June 2009.24 Clients must be members of the health care/health insurance industry and
have hired at least ten outside lobbyists who display some campaign contribution to the same
Congressmen as the clients contributed to. Under the view requiring clients to carry the bulk of
the campaign donations relative to their lobbyists, the amount of campaign contributions
received by congressmen from clients should vastly exceed the lobbyists’ donations. Quite the
contrary, for 52 out of 61 congressmen identified by the CRP as recipients of lobbyist-client
bundles the amount of lobbyists’ contributions exceeds what paid by clients. The lobbyist-client
difference is large and statistically significant with lobbyists contributing on average $14,642
more than their clients, an average relative difference of about +50.4%.

Table 4 reports means and trends for the campaign contributions measures. The unit of
observation is a given lobbyist in an active year and all observations are equally weighted when
computing the statistics. Across all lobbyist-year observations (Panel A), the fraction of lobbyists
with at least one donation is 27 percent; about 8 percent make contributions to more than 5
politicians in the average year they are active as lobbyists. The trends analysis reveals an upward
swing in both the frequency and number of donations, with maybe a bit of a slowdown in the last
sample year. When we focus on lobbyists with staying power (those active in lobbying for at
least 4 years between 1999 and 2008 – Panel B), the pattern of increased connectivity over time
between lobbyists and politicians becomes even clearer: for example, while only about 9 percent
of lobbyists active in 1999 are of the type that makes campaign contributions to 5 politicians or
more in a given Congress, that fraction goes up to 13 percent by 2007/2008.

A comparison of panels C and D reveals a large difference between in-house and external
lobbyists. Connections through campaign contributions are much more common among external
lobbyists than among those that work in-house. For example, while we categorize about 14
percent of external lobbyists as with “many connections”, 3 percent of in-house ones fall into this
category. Figure 1B displays the distribution of the share of lobbyists with “many connections”
across lobbying entities for the entire sample period. As for Figure 1A, our motivation for
looking at such distribution is the possibility that a subset of lobbying firms might want to

24
     http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/lm_health.php

                                                                                                 16
differentiate by “specializing in connections.” Under this view, one might expect multiple modes
when plotting the distribution of the share of very connected lobbyists across firms. As for
Figure 1A, we compute the share of very connected lobbyists in a firm by weighing each
lobbyist-firm observation by the number of records he or she was listed on across the entire
sample period and we restrict ourselves to the sample of organizations that employ at least two
lobbyists over the entire sample period. The distribution of the share of connected lobbyists
appears to be very spread out among professional lobbying firms. There is a large mode around
0, but also two smaller modes around .5 and 1.

     4. Background Determinants of Expertise and Connections

Table 5 relates specialization to lobbyist’s biographical information.25 The unit of observation is
a lobbyist and all lobbyists are equally weighted in these OLS regressions. We present
regressions both for all lobbyists (odd columns) and for those with at least 4 years of presence in
the SOPR data (even columns). The dependent variable in the first 6 columns is the “specialist”
dummy; the dependent variable in the last 6 columns is the issue-based HHI. The main theme
that emerges from this Table is that lobbyists with prior political experience or political
affiliations are less likely to be experts. For example (column 2), lobbyists with prior association
with the Republican or Democratic party are about 5 percentage points less likely to be
specialists; former members of Congress are about another 3 percentage points less likely to be
specialist (not statistically significant); those lobbyists with experience in some White House
offices are another 5 percentage points less likely to be specialist. There is also some evidence
(especially apparent with the more continuous HHI measure in Panel B) that expertise tends to
be a more common asset for older lobbyists (e.g. those whose biographies go back to the 1960s
and 1970s). The patterns above appear to be more systematic and more precisely estimated
among external lobbyists.

In summary, the regressions in Table 5 appear to contradict the view that expertise on specific
technical issues is the main asset being transferred through the revolving door between Capitol
25
  The sample here is of course smaller, e.g. limited to the subset of lobbyist we could identify in www.lobbyist.info
and for whom detailed biographical data was available.

                                                                                                                  17
Hill or offices in the executive branch and the lobbying world. Of course, it could be other forms
of expertise that this selected group of lobbyists is bringing to the table, such as some general
knowledge of the law-making process. Our results do however contradict the view that revolving
door lobbyists bring specific knowledge of complex topics such as, say, health care policy or the
economics of financial markets.

Following the same format as Table 5, Table 6 relates lobbyists’ contacts to politicians to their
biographical information. Again, the unit of observation in this Table is a lobbyist and all
lobbyists are equally weighted. There is unambiguous evidence that past experience on the Hill
or in the White House is associated with more connections to politicians through campaign
contributions. Consider the last 6 columns, where the dependent variable is a dummy variable
that equals 1 if the lobbyist makes campaign contributions to at least 5 politicians in the average
Congress we observe him in the lobbying records. We find (column 7) that lobbyists with
associations with the Republican or Democratic parties are respectively 10 and 14 percentage
points more likely to fall in this “many connections” category. Former members of Congress and
those with some prior experience around the White House are respectively another 14 and 10
percentage points more likely to maintain many connections to politicians.

Table 7 provides some evidence on which lobbyists make campaign contributions to which
politician. We perform this analysis separately by Congress and present results for the 107th and
108th Congresses. Within each Congress, we restrict ourselves to the subset of lobbyists for
whom we could find background information on www.lobbyist.info and are active during that
term and to the subset of politicians that are Members of Congress during that term. We then
create all possible lobbyist-lawmaker pairs (by cross-matching the list of lobbyists with the list of
Congressmen and women) and create a dummy variable that equals 1 if the lobbyist in a pair has
made a campaign contribution to the lawmaker in that pair, 0 otherwise. We perform the analysis
both with and without lobbyist and lawmaker fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
lobbyist level. Maybe not surprisingly, whether a given lobbyist contributes to a given
politician’s campaign is systematically related to whether the lobbyist and the politician share the
same political ideology.

                                                                                                  18
     5. Are Connections to Politicians Related to What Lobbyists Do?

The empirical approach we have followed so far to measure how connected a given lobbyist is
has consisted in counting the number of politicians the lobbyist makes campaign contributions
to. However, there is nothing in the way we constructed this measure that systematically
establishes a link between these campaign contributions and the lobbyists' main professional
activities. Lobbyists, like any other individuals, may decide to express their personal support for
a political candidate by giving to their political campaign. Such personal taste would be
consistent with our findings in Table 7 where lobbyists’ campaign donations follow ideological
lines. Yet, in this section, we show that there is more to the campaign contributions than just a
private showing of political support. Whom lobbyists give to (and most likely whom lobbyists
know) is systematically related to what issues they work on. In fact, we will show later in this
section evidence for a much stronger result: lobbyists appear to change issues in a predictable
way as the legislators they are connected to (through campaign contributions made in the past)
change committee assignments.

The nature of the empirical exercise we perform in Table 8 is as follows. As in Table 7, we
perform our analysis separately by Congress and present for now results for the 107th and 108th
Congress. (We obtained qualitatively similar results for the other sessions of Congress covered in
our sample time period). We start with the pool of all Senators and House Representatives in a
given Congress. We then use committee assignment information to determine the specific
lobbying issues26 each of these Members of Congress are particularly tied to in that Congress.27
For instance, the powerful House Appropriations committee maps into the lobbying Budget issue
(BUD). As we did for Table 7, we then create a dataset that includes all possible lobbyist-
legislator pairs in a given Congress by crossing the pool of active lobbyists with the pool of
lawmakers.


26
  For the full list see SOPR instructions for Lobbying Disclosure files (line 11) available at
http://www.senate.gov/reference/resources/pdf/LD1_Instructions.pdf
27
  Appendix A3 reports the correspondence matrix between House and Senate committees and lobbying issues. The
data on committee assignments is from Stewart and Woon (2009).

                                                                                                         19
For each lobbyist-legislator pair, it is possible to construct some measures of the “issue overlap”
between the legislator and the lobbyist in the pair. The first measure we propose simply counts
the number of issues a given legislator is assigned to (given his or her committee position in that
Congress), that also appear in at least one of the lobbying records associated with the lobbyist
during that session of Congress. We also define a dummy variable that equals 1 for a lobbyist-
legislator pair if the lobbyist’s records during that session of Congress cover all the issues
assigned to the legislator in that Congress, 0 otherwise.

In this sample of all possible lobbyist-legislator pairs in a given Congress, we then test whether
the issue overlap between the lobbyist and legislator in the pair is systematically larger when the
pair actually exists in the campaign contribution data, e.g. when the lobbyist made a campaign
contribution to that legislator in any of the two years that Congress was in session.

The first four columns of Table 8 focus on the 108th Congress, the last four on the 107th
Congress. Reported in each column is the estimated coefficient on a dummy variable that equals
1 if the lobbyist made a campaign contribution to the legislator, 0 otherwise. Note that for each
overlap measure and Congress we report the results of two regressions: one with legislator fixed
effects and one with lobbyist fixed effects; such fixed effects are important since, for example,
the overlap measures we have defined may largely vary across legislators simply based on
whether they are assigned to narrowly-focused committees or committees with broader
mandates. Also, standard errors are clustered at the lobbyist level.

There is systematic evidence across all Congresses that the existence of a campaign contribution
connection between a lobbyist and a legislator is associated with a higher likelihood that the
lobbyist and legislator work on the same issues. For example, the likelihood of a perfect issue
overlap between a lobbyist and a legislator (e.g. the lobbying records associated with that
lobbyist during that session of Congress cover all the issues associated with the legislator's
committee) in a random pair in the 108th Congress is 11.5 percent. The likelihood increases by
2.9 percentage points, or about 25 percent if the lobbyist made a campaign contribution to that
legislator (column 3, Table 8), controlling for whether the lobbyist and legislator share political
orientation or house or senate affiliations.
                                                                                                20
The evidence put forward in Table 8 suggests that campaign contributions are not simply a
reflection of the lobbyists’ personal political tastes; instead, lobbyists’ campaign contributions
are systematically related to the lobbyists’ professional engagements.

Before exploring different mechanisms that might explain this evidence, we take a first step
towards understanding better how connections between lobbyists and politicians relate to their
respective work assignments by replicating the analysis from Table 8 on various relevant
subsamples of the data. Again, we report results only for the 107th and 108th Congress but have
obtained qualitatively similar results for other time periods. A few consistent patterns emerge
from the heterogeneity analysis presented in Table 9. First, it appears that the correlation
between issue overlap and campaign contributions is limited to the set of external lobbyists. For
in-house lobbyists, we do not seem able to predict what issues they work on based on whom they
make campaign contributions to. This is obviously likely related to the fact that campaign
contributions by in-house lobbyists are a much rarer occurrence (Table 5).28 Interestingly, the
association between campaign contributions and issue overlap is quantitatively stronger among
expert lobbyists than among non-experts, even though a statistically significant association exists
for both groups.

The statistical associations we have isolated in Tables 8 and 9 imply a relationship between
whom lobbyists know and what they work on. There are however many different ways to
interpret such a relationship. We are particularly interested in separating two possible
interpretations. The first interpretation is that what determines what a lobbyist works on is whom
he or she knows: because a lobbyist knows a given politician (as proxied for by making
contributions to that politician’s campaign), he or she has influence on that politician and
therefore is particularly effective in affecting outcomes related to the issues this politician’s
committee covers. In a sense, under this first interpretation, whom a lobbyist knows comes first
and this determines in great part what he or she works on. A second interpretation is that what a


28
  It is possible though that, for in-house lobbyists, we are missing a big part of the connections to politicians as
those may occur through campaign contributions directly made by the firms and organizations that employ those
lobbyists, rather than by the lobbyists themselves.

                                                                                                                       21
lobbyist knows determines which politician he or she is more likely to establish some
connections with. Under this second interpretation, lobbyists are defined by what they know
more than whom they know. However, there is some friction in the communication of this
expertise, maybe because of lawmakers’ overburdened schedule and limited attention span.
Campaign contributions are then a way to get politicians’ attention; they serve as some grease in
the transmission of information and expertise between lobbyists and lawmakers. In Tables 10
and 11, we present a concrete attempt at parceling out these two mechanisms.

In Tables 10A, B and C, we present an empirical test of whether lobbyists “stick to” the people
they know when it comes to what issues they work on. If lobbyists essentially provide companies
with access to politicians in their “circle of influence,” one would expect lobbyists’ job
assignments to be determined by the identity of the politicians in charge, independent of the
specific issues being decided upon; hence a lobbyist should “follow” a congressman that he or
she knows as the congressman moves from one committee assignment to another.

To perform that test, we isolate the subset of Congressmen that switch committee assignments
between Congress t and Congress t+1. Such switches can be safely assumed exogenous to the
lobbyist’s decision, as mostly driven by congressmen’s tenure and idiosyncratic electoral shocks
to members of the committee. We form all the possible pairs between a given Congressman and
the lobbyists in our sample and create issue overlap in the pair at t as previously defined (the
number of issues that the politician works on at time t that are covered by the lobbyist at time t).
Because of computational constraints we cannot consider all the lobbyists in the sample, so we
adopt the strategy of keeping only those that work on similar issues as the politician before the
reassignment. For this group it is easier to establish whether the lobbyist follows the
Congressman given a common point of “departure”. We therefore keep the 1000 lobbyists (and
therefore pairs) that are closest to the Congressman in terms of issue overlap at time t. The data
set is formed by appending 1000 pairs for each “switcher” for each Congress. Notice that there
are 513 Congressman that switch assignment at some point in the period considered, so we have
513,000 pairs. For each pair we create a connection dummy variable that is one if the lobbyist
and the Congressman are actually connected through campaign contributions.

                                                                                                 22
We then ask in Table 10A whether the overlap of issues covered by the lobbyist and the
Congressman in t+1 can be predicted by whether the pair was connected in Congress t. The
dependent variable is the number of new issues29 that both lobbyist and politician work on at
time t+1. As a control, the overlap between the lobbyist in Congress t and Congressman in
Congress t+1 captures the fact that the lobbyist may be already working on the issues the
legislator takes up as new assignment.

In all columns of Table 10A we find evidence that lobbyists follow the lawmakers that they have
connections with, as those lawmakers switch committee assignments. Specifically, we find a
larger overlap in Congress t+1 when the lobbyist had previously made campaign contributions to
the politician in the pair. Starting from column 1 where we only include Congress fixed effects,
the results are qualitatively unchanged if we add Congressman fixed effects (column 2), controls
for the lobbyist characteristics (column 3), lobbyist fixed effects (columns 6 to 8), issue overlap
at t, or if we limit our analysis to the lobbyist.info sample (columns 4 and 5). In columns 6 to 8,
the analysis based on within lobbyist variation confirms that, given a lobbyist, he is more likely
to follow a politician when he is connected to him. At a mean 1.3 overlap of new issues at t+1
the estimated effect ranges between about 8 and 28 percent additional overlap for connected
lobbyists.

In Table 10B we look at possible heterogeneity of this finding across relevant subsamples of
lobbyists and lawmakers. First, we see that the relationship we have uncovered only applies to
external lobbyists. Moreover, the relationship between prior connections and future work
assignments seem to exist only for non-specialists.

In Table 10C we repeat the analysis in the sample of freshmen, i.e. Congressmen that enter
Congress at t+1. Notice that we still observe contributions during the campaign stage and
therefore all variables of interest, except for issue overlap at t, can be defined for this sample.
Since we are including all lobbyists, table 10C performs the analysis separately for sets of
Congresses, for computational reasons. The results are largely confirmed: as freshmen are

29
     New from the Congressman point of view, i.e. the set of issues that the Congressman works on at time t+1

                                                                                                                23
elected and are assigned to given committees, lobbyists who gave them campaign contributions
start working on the same issues (controlling for whether the lobbyist was already working on
those issues).

An alternative and simple, although indirect, way of quantifying the degree to which lobbyists
enter new issues as politicians switch to new committee assignments is to relate the amount of
churning for these two groups. More specifically, for each issue and congress we calculate the
fraction of new congressmen assigned to the issue and the share of dollars spent on the issue
coming from lobbyists that did not work on the issue in the prior congress. When weighting by
dollar amount attached to the issues, the correlation between the two “entry” variables is 40%.
This implies that, if all congressmen were new to an issue, then 40% of lobbyists in dollars terms
would be new to the issue. This figure is 80% if we limit the analysis to those issue-congress
observations that are above the median in terms of the share of Congressmen that have at least
one connection to lobbyists.

Table 11 provides evidence that connections to politicians are also endogenously created by
lobbyists as new lawmakers enter their area of expertise. We again restrict the sample to the
subset of lawmakers that switch committee assignments between two consecutive sessions of
Congress. We form all pairs of these politicians with every lobbyist in Congress t+1 and for
computational reasons we analyze only two Congresses (107th and 108th). The dependent
variable is now a dummy that equals 1 if the lobbyist made at least one campaign contribution to
the lawmaker in the pair in Congress t+1. The independent variable of interest is a measure of
issue overlap between the lobbyist at t and the Congressman at time t+1. More specifically we
define a ‘lead’ issue overlap as the number of issues covered by Congressman at time t+1 that
are covered by the lobbyist at time t. The question we ask is whether, as the ‘lead’ issue overlap
increases, i.e. a politician moves at t+1 into issues coinciding with those already covered by the
lobbyist at time t, the lobbyist is more likely to establish a connection with that politician. We
control for whether a connection was already established at time t and for issue overlap at time t.
We find a significant effect of lead issue overlap on connection at time t. The coefficients in the
full sample range are positive and statistically significant, implying a higher propensity to
contribute to congressmen entering the area of activity of the lobbyist. The coefficient estimates
                                                                                                24
range between 0.00069 and 0.00059 (Table 11 reports coefficients in x1000 units), so that a one
unit increase in lead issue overlap increases the probability of a connection being established by
29.5% to 34.5% relative to the average probability of a connection (0.2%). The heterogeneity
analysis in the remaining columns of Table 11 suggests again that the relationship we observe
mostly extends to the pool of external lobbyists.

The evidence in Tables 10 and 11 suggests that there are two broad types of connections. Some
connections are long-standing and come first in determining what a lobbyist works on. Other
connections are created as politicians enter the area of activity of a lobbyist.

     6. What Makes a Lobbyist Valuable?

     6.A. Report-level Analysis

Our analysis so far suggests that lobbyists’ personal access to lawmakers, as proxyied for by the
campaign contributions they make to these lawmakers, might be a consequential driver of what
issues they work on. A complementary approach to assess the relative importance of access
versus issue expertise in the lobbying process might consist in asking how much these two assets
are valued. Who is paid more? Is it a lobbyist with lots of connections to politicians, or a lobbyist
that masters the intricate details of health care policy or financial market reforms? Unfortunately,
we do not have any information on lobbyists’ income.30 But we do observe the price tag
associated with each lobbying report. It is therefore possible to assess how the characteristics of
the lobbyists that are assigned to a report relate to how much was spent on that report. We
perform this analysis in Table 13. Because of computational constraints and because the previous

30
  Concerning payment structures: “There are several fee structures on K Street, from annual retainers and lump
sums for specific projects to monthly and even hourly rates. […]. Some firms with stellar reputations for gaining
access to high levels of government charge annual fees and usually take on whatever lobby efforts, large or small,
are required during the term of the contract. Sometimes, when things are heating up in Washington, clients will
often drop big money to make sure that their Washington representatives have the pedal to the floor until the race is
run. But it is most common to find clients paying a monthly rate. Universities, local and municipal governments, and
companies that are most closely focused on the appropriations process pay fees of between $5,000 and $30,000 a
month. […] Several lobbyists say prices are negotiable, depending on the length of the lobbying relationship, the
intensity of the work, and the client's perceived ability to pay […]."” [LobbySearch: The Who, When, and How
Much of Hiring a Lobbyist].

                                                                                                                  25
patterns we have documented are much more pronounced for external lobbyists we limit our
analysis to this group. An obvious limitation of this empirical approach is that we cannot isolate
the contribution of an individual lobbyist to a given report (recall that most report have more
than one lobbyist assigned to it). In Table 14, we will present an alternative approach where we
try to get at individual lobbyists’ value-added to a given report by estimating a vector of lobbyist
fixed effects.

Before discussing the record-level analysis in Table 13, we report in Table 12 the total dollar
decomposition of lobbying aggregate amounts by category of lobbyists. Connected lobbyists and
lobbyists with multiple connections not only command a very large share of the industry in terms
of aggregate revenues, but also stand out in terms of amounts per lobbyists (connected lobbyists
cover 42 percent of the revenues but are only 25 percent of the industry population). Specialists
command substantially lower shares, even if they represent 25 percent of the population. For
external lobbyists the patterns are even more pronounced.

The disproportionate returns accruing to lobbyists with connections in this simple decomposition
is a recurring theme in the remainder of this section. We have documented the existence of two
types of connections through campaign donations. One conforms to the standard “pay to play”
view of campaign contributions: a link is temporarily established by a lobbyist to access the
relevant politician (Sabato, 1985). The other stands in for deeper and hard-to-replicate ties.
However, only the latter can command a premium in excess of what is necessary to pay for
access, i.e. individual campaign donations (currently capped at $2,400 by the FEC). The high
returns to connectedness estimated below largely exceed such amount, lending support to the
hypothesis that a significant fraction of the observed connections stand in for deeper and long-
standing relationships.

The prominence of premia to connections over expertise is evident in the report-level analysis of
Table 13. The unit of analysis is an external lobbying record, as defined in the SOPR data. The
dependent variable is the logarithm of the dollar amount attached to that report, ln(Vrt). All
regressions reported in Table 13 include a vector of year dummies, a vector of dummies for
report type (e.g. end-of-year report or mid-year report), and a vector of dummy variables for the
                                                                                                 26
issues that are being covered in the report. We also control non-parametrically for the number of
lobbyists included on the report (with separate indicator variables for all numbers –from 1 to 62).
Finally, all regressions include controls for the average tenure of the lobbyists assigned to the
report, as well as the average number of active years among these lobbyists over the entire
sample period and the average number of reports per lobbyist on the team per year. For ease of
interpretation we construct two dummy variables. The first one equals 1 if there is at least one
specialist in one of the issues covered by the report. The second dummy equals 1 if there is at
least a lobbyist on the report that is connected to a politician that works on an issue in that report.

We find qualitatively similar results across all specifications. Specifically, everything else equal,
we find a premium of about 3 to 5 percent for a lobbying report that has a relevant specialist,
while that premium is about 8 to 10 percent for a report with a relevant connected lobbyist.
Overall, having a specialist on the team comes at a premium, but having connected lobbyists
commands a premium twice as large. Given an average report amount Vrt of $63,200, this
implies a per-report premium of $5,056-$6,320 per connected lobbyist31.

The last column of Table 13 introduces a number of characteristics of the lobbyists on the report.
We find additional premia for most of the variables that describe the political background of the
lobbyists on the team. Everything else equal, staffing a lobbying case exclusively with former
Members of Congress increases its price by about 12 percent. Teams composed of lobbyists with
Democratic and especially Republican affiliations cost more. The largest premium we observe is
for lobbyists with past experience in the White House.

         6.B. Lobbyist-Level Analysis

The report-level analysis above suggests interesting patterns that can be further investigated
moving to an individual lobbyist analysis. As indicated above, one of the difficulties with the
report-level analysis is that we cannot zero in on the value added of a specific lobbyist. Hence,

31
  The premium is computed per report and thus needs to be further multiplied by the number of reports on which a
lobbyist typically works on (between 23 and 45 per year on average and assuming that a connected lobbyist works
on reports where he is connected to a politician that works on an issue in that report) to obtain a yearly connection
premium. This places the value of a connection in excess of $116,000 per year.

                                                                                                                    27
we can only estimate premia at the working team level. For a subset of lobbyists that can be
observed working with diverse set of co-workers, though, it is possible to estimate fixed effects
in the dollar amount associated with having their name attached to a lobbying report.

Specifically, we start with a dataset where the unit of observation is at lobbyist*lobbying report
level. We define as the dependent variable the logarithm of the total dollar amount associated
with that lobbying report ln(Vrt) (the same dependent variable as in Table 13, ln(Vrt) is now
replicated for each lobbyist in the report). We then estimate lobbyist fixed effects in a regression
that also includes year dummies, a vector of indicator variable for all issues or topics, and non-
parametric controls for the number of lobbyists associated with the report Lrt (e.g. dummies for
each possible size of the lobbying team).

Intuitively, it should be clear that such lobbyist fixed effects cannot be estimated for all
individuals. To fix ideas, consider a pair of lobbyists that always work together. It will be
impossible to separately estimate separate fixed effects for each of them. Instead, we will only be
able to compute fixed effects for those lobbyists that we observe as part of changing teams across
lobbying reports. Because the estimation of such individual fixed effects (and the standard errors
associated with them) is quite computationally intensive, we for now restrict the sample to
external lobbyists that are active in at least 6 years over the entire sample period. Furthermore,
this condition guarantees lower measurement error in the fixed effect estimates.32

Once we have computed the lobbyist’s fixed effects, we can then relate them to each lobbyist's
level of expertise, connections and past professional experience. We do this in Table 14, where
the unit of observation is a lobbyist and the dependent variable is the estimated lobbyist fixed
effect derived from the regression outlined above. We estimate median regressions, which allow
us to better address outlier concerns; we also weigh each observation by the inverse of the
standard error associated with the estimated fixed effect for that lobbyist/observation further
accounting for noise in the estimation.

32
  For estimating each fixed effect at least six observations are available. For a related discussion Besley and Preston
(2007) who discuss the issue of consistency of the individual-specific fixed effects in the case of assessing bias of
local authorities with small T.

                                                                                                                    28
Before moving to the regression results, we discuss Figures 2 and 3, which graphically show
how the distribution of lobbyist fixed effects relate to both their expertise and their level of
connections. In Figure 2, we see that the distribution of fixed effects for specialists and non-
specialists are almost identical. When we separate lobbyists into those with high (>.33) and low
issue-based HHI, we find the distribution of fixed effects for the high HHI group to be more
spread out and with more mass towards low fixed effects compared to the distribution of fixed
effects for the low HHI group. Hence we observe no premium associated with issue expertise. If
anything, those lobbyists that concentrate on fewer issues appear to come at a discount. Figure 3
plots the distributions of lobbyist fixed effects for those with no political connection and those
with at least one connection (top), as well as for those with 5 connections or more in any given
Congress and those with less than 5 connections (bottom). In both cases, it is very clear that the
distribution of fixed effects for those with some or many connections is shifted to the right
compared to the distribution for those with no or few connections.

The regression analysis in Table 14 qualitatively confirms the patterns we observed in Figures 3
and 4. Issue experts do not receive any premium; if anything, a higher level of issue
concentration carries a discount. 33

In contrast, there is a positive and significant premium associated with having more political
connections through campaign contributions. The premium appears to be especially large for
those lobbyists that entertain many connections to politicians (6 to 10 percent). Even after
controlling for connections, we still find a large premium associated with some of the political
background characteristics. In particular, everything else equal, past experience in the White
House increases a lobbyist fixed effect by 12 to 15 percent. The premium associated with
affiliation to the Republican party is larger and more precisely estimated than the premium
associated with the Democratic party. The estimated coefficient for former Member of Congress



33
  This evidence can be reconciled with the report-level results: the fixed effect analysis provides a measure of the
average return to a specialist, which is revealed to be lower than for non-specialists. This is not in contrast with the
fact that when they work on issues on which they are experts, specialists may receive a higher than average
compensation.

                                                                                                                       29
is quantitatively smaller (2 to 8 percent) and less precisely estimated here than in the report-level
analysis in Table 13.34

     6.C. Issue Cycles and Political Cycles

In this section we perform alternative exercises aimed at measuring whether premia associated to
issue expertise or to connections change with, respectively, the ‘issue cycle’ and the ‘political
cycle’. More specifically in our first exercise we ask whether a lobbyist that has affiliation to a
specific party sees his average return increase as this party moves to a position of power.

Figure 4 presents evidence that connections to politicians matter for lobbyists’ professional
activities and particularly for their average revenue. In computing those measures, we assign to
each lobbyist on the report the average per lobbyist dollar amount on that report Vrlt, aggregate
over each year and take logs. Figure 4 reports the Republican lobbyist revenue premium in
percentage terms relative to a Democratic lobbyist (benchmarked at zero) based on total per-
lobbyist per-year amount reported in the SOPR data. Republican lobbyists tally higher revenues
during Republican Congresses and Republican administrations (up to 30% more during the first
year of Bush’s second term).35 The political cycle is not driven by specific issues being more
likely to be associated to certain parties. Revenue premia are virtually unchanged running the
specification issue-by-issue in the vast majority of issues. This estimated revenue cycle can be
attributed to a decrease in the value of connections when political allies are out of office. In this
sense this result is very much in line with the finding of Blanes-i-Vidal, Draca, and Fons-Rosen
(2010) that assess a 20% drop in revenues occurring to lobbyists with past experience as
senatorial aides when their connected Senator leaves office.


34
  In regressions not reported here, we also tested for the possibility that expertise might only be valuable when
combined with connections, a possibility that seemed in keeping with some of the patterns we observed in Table 9.
We tested for this hypothesis in both the report-level analysis and the lobbyist fixed effect analysis. We did not find
this interaction term to be economically or statistically significant.
35
  The picture also clearly emphasizes the success of the so-called K-Street Project implemented by the Republican
party leadership during the first part of the 2000’s. The project was a “database intended to track party affiliation,
hill experience and political giving of every lobbyist in town.” [Confessore (2003), Welcome to the Machine,
03/07/2003, Washington Monthly] with the explicit aim of selectively assigning political access to GOP lobbyists.

                                                                                                                     30
In Appendix Table A2, we also report, by year, total lobbying expenses associated with lobbyists
with a Republican affiliation and total expenses associated with lobbyists with a Democratic
affiliation. We also report, by year, number of active lobbyists with Republican or Democratic
affiliations. The patterns in this data match political cycles. In particular, the Republican-
Democratic gaps (columns 3 and 6) appear smallest in the very first years of the sample
(Democratic President) and the last few years (Democratic Congress). Hence, Republican
(Democratic) lobbyists seem to be professionally more active when political power in
Washington moves to the right (left).

In our second exercise we ask whether the average return to an issue-specialist increases in
periods where that issue becomes more popular and spending on that issue increases overall
(perhaps because a relevant piece of legislation is being discussed in Congress or at the
committee level). We construct our measure of issue cycle as follows. Consider the value            of
report r at time t, and divide it by the number of issues on that report         . This generates an
average value per issue i on report r,     . Then we sum across all the reports that contain issue i
at time t,   to obtain    , the total amount spent on issue i at time t:




For each lobbyist l we construct a variable that captures whether the issue in which the lobbyist
is an expert is booming. Define the set of issues for which lobbyist l is a specialist as    and then
construct a lobbyist-specific issue cycle measure     :




In Table 15B the dependent variable is the average return for lobbyist l at time t,         (previously
defined). The results show that the average return to a lobbyist does not seem to respond to an
expansion, in dollar terms, of the issues in which a lobbyist is specialized. In Table 15A we show
that the adjustment during a boom is mainly in terms of non-specialists entering a given issue.

                                                                                                    31
More specifically the first panel shows that the total number of lobbyists working on a given
issue increases when the issue expands, while the second panel shows that the share of issue-
specialists declines during an issue boom, hinting to the fact that entry is primarily by non-
experts. This seems to point to relatively low barriers to entry in a specific issue.

In summary, assuming one takes the analysis in Tables 12, 13, 14, and 15B as evidence of what
lobbyists' characteristics are most prized, we find weak support to the view that issue expertise is
what makes a lobbyist “special.” Instead, the lobbyists that appear to earn a premium are those
that have connections to many politicians and to the ruling political party. At first glance, the
barriers to entry in establishing connections to politicians of the type we track here appear quite
low (the average donation to a campaign is just a few thousand dollars). Such low barriers to
entry seem inconsistent with the view that “connected” lobbyists would maintain a sustainable
comparative advantage of the magnitude we measure here. What is likely going on is that the
campaign contributions are a symptom of deeper connections between lobbyists and politicians,
which cannot as easily be replicated by others. In contrast, it appears that the barriers to entry
into issue expertise are either indeed quite low (maybe the experts do not need to be the lobbyists
themselves but can be brought in from industry or academia) or that issue expertise is really not
necessarily instrumental to “winning” a lobbying case.

       7. Conclusions

Our objective in this paper is to provide some guidance on what lobbyists actually do. We were
motivated by two opposite views of lobbying that have been discussed both in the policy and
media circles and in the academic literature36. The first view considers lobbyists as issue experts
who can contribute valuable information to the law- and rule-making process; the second view
considers them more as sources of access to lawmakers, because of their personal ties and
knowledge of those lawmakers. The lively debate surrounding what lobbyists actually do has
been made particularly relevant by the dramatic growth of the lobbying industry over the last
decade and their recent prominence as actors in the policy debate during the 2008-09 crisis.

36
     Heinz et al. (1993); Salisbury et al. (1989).

                                                                                                 32
There are also some direct policy implications to this debate when it comes to recent proposals
and attempts to totally or partially shut the revolving door between jobs on the Hill (or in other
top government offices) and jobs in lobbying. On the one hand, revolving door lobbyists might
be those that have the most issue expertise due to their prior experience; on the other hand,
revolving door lobbyists might be those with the most personal contacts and the most influence
on lawmakers.

This paper combines some purely descriptive analysis with some more ambitious attempts to get
inside the black box of the lobbying process. The main takeaway from our analysis is that a pure
issue expertise view of lobbying does not fit the data well. Instead, maintaining connections to
politicians appears central to what lobbyists do. Such connections however need not necessarily
raise a flag about unethical or illegal practices. We do see evidence of lobbyists' prior knowledge
and expertise driving whom they decide to connect to, maybe a sign that connections are needed
for efficient communication between informed lobbyists and time- and attention-constrained
lawmakers. But we do also see evidence of lobbyists' job assignments being driven by whom
they know rather what they know. This finding is mirrored in the returns to connections being
larger than returns to expertise.

One might wonder whether, even if our results do not support an expertise view of what
lobbyists do, the evidence is compatible with a scenario in which lobbyists, not experts
themselves, report to politicians the information produced by expert researchers working for the
lobbying firm. Such view of lobbyists as mere “messengers” is, we believe, incompatible with
the large fees assessed for their services. The price tag attached to lobbyists services suggest that
they bring to the table a complementary resource, perhaps reputation, credibility or political
savvy, in the transmission of information.37 We believe the mechanism by which information
and reputation combine in creating value in the services of lobbyist is intriguing and deserves
attention in future theoretical research.


37
  Birnbaum (2005): “Starting salaries have risen to about $300,000 a year for the best-connected aides eager to
‘move downtown’[to K street in 2005] from Capitol Hill or the Bush Administration.” [The Road to Riches Is
Called K Street, 6/22/2005, The Washington Post]

                                                                                                                  33
References

Ainsworth, Scott (1993) “Regulating Lobbyists and Interest Group Influence” Journal of Politics,
Vol. 55(1), pp. 41-56.

Apollonio, Dorie, Bruce E. Cain and Lee Drutman (2008). “Access and Lobbying: Looking
Beyond the Corruption Paradigm”. Hastings Constitutional Law Quarterly, Volume 36, issue 1.

Ansolabehere, S., J. Snyder, and M. Tripathi (2003). “Are PAC contributions and lobbying
linked? New Evidence from the 1995 Lobby Disclosure Act”. Business and Politics 4(2):131-
155.

Austen-Smith, David (1987). "Interest Groups, Campaign Contributions and Probabilistic
Voting." Public Choice 54(2): 123-39

Austen-Smith, David (1993). "Information and Influence: Lobbying for Agendas and Votes."
American Journal of Political Science 37:799-833.

Austen-Smith, David (1994). “Strategic Transmission of Costly Information”, Econometrica 62,
pp. 955–963.

Austen-Smith, David (1995). "Campaign Contributions and Access." American Political Science
Review 89:566-81.

Austen-Smith, David, and J.S. Banks (2002). “Costly signaling and cheap talk in models of
political influence”, European Journal of Political Economy 18: pp. 263–280.

Austen-Smith, David and John R. Wright (1994). "Counteractive Lobbying." American Journal
of Political Science 38(1): pp. 25-44.

Austen-Smith, David and John R. Wright (1996). "Theory and Evidence for Counteractive
Lobbying." American Journal of Political Science 40(2): pp. 543-564.

Baron David P. (1989) "Service-induced campaign contributions and the electoral equilibrium",
Quarterly Journal of Economics 104(1), pp. 45–73

Baron, David P. (1994). "Electoral competition with informed and uninformed voters",
American Political Science Review 88(1), pp. 33–47.

Baumgartner, F.R. and B. Leech (2001) " Interest Niches and Policy Bandwagons: Patterns of
Interest Group Involvement in National Politics" Journal of Politics 63 (4), pp. 1191-1213.

Bennedsen, M. and S.E. Feldmann, Lobbying legislatures, Journal of Political Economy 110
(2002) (4), pp. 919–948.


                                                                                             34
Besley, Tim, and Steve Coate (2001) "Lobbying and welfare in a representative democracy",
Review of Economic Studies 68, pp. 67–82.

Besley, Tim, and Ian Preston (2007) “Electoral Bias and Policy Choice: Theory and Evidence”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), pp. 1473-1510.

Blanes-i-Vidal, Jordi, Mirko Draca, Christian Fons-Rosen (2010) “Revolving Door Lobbyists”,
mimeo LSE.

Bombardini, M. (2008). "Firm Heterogeneity and Lobby Participation." Journal of International
Economics, 75 (2), pp.329-348

Bombardini, M. and F. Trebbi (2009) "Votes or Money? Theory and Evidence from the US
Congress" mimeo University of British Columbia.

Bombardini, M. and F. Trebbi (2008) " Competition and Political Organization: Together or
Alone in Lobbying for Trade Policy?" mimeo University of British Columbia.

Calvert, R.L. (1985) "The value of biased information: a rational choice model of political
advice", Journal of Politics 47, pp. 530–555.

Crawford,V., and J. Sobel, "Strategic Information Transmission", Econometrica 50, pp. 1431–
1451.

Dixit, A., G.M. Grossman and E. Helpman (1996) “Common agency and coordination: general
theory and application to government policy making”, Journal of Political Economy 105 (4), pp.
752–769.

Drutman, Lee J. (2010) “The Business of America is Lobbying: The Expansion of Corporate
Political Activity and the Future of American Pluralism” PhD Thesis, Berkeley.

Gawande, K. and U. Bandyopadhyay (2000). "Is Protection for Sale? Evidence on the Grossman-
Helpman Theory of Endogenous Protection." Review of Economics and Statistics 82(1): 139-52.

Goldberg, P. K. and G. Maggi (1999). "Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation."
American Economic Review 89(5): 1135-55.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1994). "Protection for Sale." American Economic Review
84(4): 833-50.

Grossman, G.M. and E. Helpman (1995) "Trade Wars and Trade Talks" Journal of Political
Economy 103, pp. 675-708.

Grossman G.M., and E. Helpman, (1996) "Electoral competition and special interest politics",
Review of Economic Studies 63 (2), pp. 265–286.

                                                                                           35
Grossman G.M. and E. Helpman, Special Interest Politics, MIT Press, Cambridge (2001).

Grenzke, J. M. (1989). "PAC’s and the Congressional Supermarket: The Currency Is Complex."
American Journal of Political Science 33:1-24.

Hall, Richard L., Frank W. Wayman (1990) “Buying Time: Moneyed Interests and the
Mobilization of Bias in Congressional Committees” The American Political Science Review
Vol. 84, No. 3, pp. 797-820

Hansen, J. M. (1991) “Gaining Access: Congress and the Farm Lobby, 1919-1981”. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Heinz, John P., Edward O. Laumann, Robert L. Nelson, Robert H. Salisbury (1993) “The Hollow
Core: Private Interests in National Policy Making” Harvard University Press

Herndon, J. F. (1982) "Access, Record and Competition as Influences on Interest Group
Contributions to Congressional Campaigns." The Journal of Politics 44:996-1019.

Hrebenar, Ronald and Bryson Morgan (2009) “Lobbying in America” ABC-Clio Inc. Santa
Barbara, California.

Igan D., Mishra P., Tressel T. (2009), "A Fistful of Dollars: Lobbying and the Financial Crisis",
IMF WP/09/287.

McGrath, Conor, (2006) “The Ideal Lobbyists: Personal characteristics of effective lobbyists”
Journal of Communication Management Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 67-79

Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi and Francesco Trebbi (2010), “The political economy of the subprime
mortgage credit expansion”, NBER WP 16107.

Langbein, L. I. (1986) "Money and Access: Some Empirical Evidence." The Journal of Politics

48:1052-62.

Lohmann, S. (1995) “Information, access, and contributions: a signaling model of lobbying”,
Public Choice 85 (1995) (3-4), pp. 267–284.

Potters, J. and F. Van Winden (1990) "Modeling Political Pressure as Transmission of
Information" European Journal of Political Economy 6, pp. 61-88

Potters, J. and F. Van Winden (1992). "Lobbying and asymmetric information" Public Choice
74(3), pp. 269-292

Salisbury, Robert H., Paul Johnson, John P. Heinz, Edward O. Laumann and Robert L. Nelson.
1989. “Who You Know versus What You Know: The Uses of Government Experience for
Washington Lobbyists” American Journal of Political Science Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 175-195
                                                                                              36
Snyder, James M. (1990). "Campaign Contributions as Investments: The House of
Representatives, 1980-1986." Journal of Political Economy 98(6): 1195-227.

Snyder, James M. (1991) "On buying legislatures", Economics and Politics 3 (2), pp. 93–109.

Stewart, Charles III and Jonathan Woon. 2009. Congressional Committee Assignments, 103rd to
111th Congresses, 1993—2009.

Strömberg, D. (2008) "How the electoral college influences campaigns and policy: the
probability of being Florida" American Economic Review 98 (3), 769-807.

Wright John R. (1990) “Contributions, Lobbying, and Committee Voting in the U.S. House of
Representatives” The American Political Science Review, Vol. 84, No. 2, pp. 417-43




                                                                                              37
                                 Table 1: The Lobbyists
                                  Summary Statistics
Variable                                              Obs     Mean    Std.

In-house lobbyist                                     36982   0.416   0.493
Number of lobbying records/year                       36982   4.692   9.755
Number of active years                                36982   3.898   2.880
Tenure                                                36982   1.709   1.605

Any biographical information on
www.lobbyists.info                                    13720   0.940   0.238

Republican                                            13720   0.106   0.308
Democrat                                              13720   0.092   0.289

Former Member of Congress                             13720   0.012   0.109
Of wich:
                                       Republican     13720   0.006   0.079
                                        Democrat      13720   0.006   0.074
                                          Senate      13720   0.003   0.056
                                          House       13720   0.010   0.099
Past Experience in/as:
                                     White House      13720   0.023   0.149
                                             Aide     13720   0.110   0.314
                                             Clerk    13720   0.014   0.119
                                          Counsel     13720   0.077   0.267
           House (but not as house representative)    13720   0.007   0.082
                       Senate (but not as senator)    13720   0.103   0.304

Experience in the:
                                            1960s     13720   0.014   0.116
                                            1970s     13720   0.048   0.213
                                            1980s     13720   0.068   0.251
                                            1990s     13720   0.081   0.273
                                            2000s     13720   0.063   0.243
                                                     Table 2: Trends in Lobbyists' Background Characteristics



                                                Former
                                                Member of
Year           In House Republican   Democrat   Congress  Of Which:                                      Experience in/as:
                                                                                                        White
                                                          Republican   Democrat   Senator    House Rep. House      Aide      Clerk     Counsel   House     Senate
 Sample: All

1999             0.491       0.118     0.108      0.017       0.008       0.009      0.004      0.015      0.033     0.134     0.019     0.114     0.026     0.130
2000             0.595       0.119     0.109      0.018       0.008       0.009      0.005      0.015      0.030     0.136     0.019     0.110     0.027     0.130
2001             0.563       0.122     0.115      0.018       0.009       0.009      0.004      0.015      0.032     0.139     0.019     0.109     0.027     0.132
2002             0.561       0.122     0.112      0.019       0.010       0.009      0.004      0.016      0.033     0.139     0.016     0.105     0.026     0.131
2003             0.555       0.122     0.113      0.018       0.010       0.008      0.004      0.015      0.032     0.135     0.015     0.101     0.024     0.128
2004             0.556       0.125     0.110      0.016       0.009       0.007      0.003      0.014      0.030     0.136     0.014     0.097     0.022     0.127
2005             0.558       0.128     0.107      0.015       0.008       0.007      0.004      0.013      0.028     0.135     0.013     0.091     0.021     0.127
2006             0.425       0.125     0.104      0.014       0.007       0.006      0.004      0.012      0.027     0.130     0.013     0.088     0.020     0.123
2007             0.359       0.119     0.104      0.013       0.006       0.006      0.003      0.011      0.025     0.125     0.013     0.083     0.019     0.119
2008             0.379       0.114     0.102      0.012       0.006       0.006      0.003      0.010      0.023     0.121     0.012     0.077     0.017     0.114

Sample: External Lobbyists

1999                         0.147     0.144      0.026       0.012       0.014      0.006      0.022      0.046     0.173     0.030     0.161     0.039     0.175
2000                         0.158     0.166      0.032       0.014       0.017      0.009      0.025      0.047     0.194     0.035     0.184     0.047     0.196
2001                         0.160     0.169      0.034       0.017       0.017      0.008      0.028      0.052     0.188     0.034     0.177     0.049     0.192
2002                         0.168     0.169      0.034       0.018       0.017      0.008      0.029      0.054     0.192     0.028     0.171     0.046     0.192
2003                         0.172     0.167      0.031       0.016       0.015      0.008      0.026      0.051     0.187     0.028     0.164     0.041     0.189
2004                         0.176     0.160      0.028       0.014       0.014      0.006      0.024      0.047     0.190     0.026     0.156     0.038     0.190
2005                         0.185     0.153      0.026       0.013       0.013      0.007      0.022      0.043     0.187     0.023     0.143     0.036     0.190
2006                         0.159     0.131      0.019       0.010       0.009      0.005      0.016      0.036     0.163     0.019     0.120     0.027     0.160
2007                         0.146     0.129      0.017       0.009       0.008      0.005      0.014      0.032     0.153     0.017     0.109     0.023     0.150
2008                         0.141     0.127      0.015       0.008       0.008      0.004      0.013      0.030     0.148     0.017     0.100     0.022     0.144

Sample: In-House Lobbyists

1999                         0.076     0.056      0.005       0.003       0.002      0.001      0.004      0.015     0.077     0.005     0.047     0.008     0.065
2000                         0.084     0.057      0.005       0.003       0.002      0.001      0.005      0.014     0.084     0.005     0.042     0.008     0.070
2001                         0.084     0.062      0.003       0.002       0.001      0.001      0.003      0.013     0.093     0.005     0.044     0.006     0.075
2002                         0.078     0.057      0.004       0.002       0.001      0.001      0.004      0.012     0.086     0.004     0.041     0.007     0.071
2003                         0.074     0.060      0.004       0.003       0.002      0.001      0.004      0.014     0.083     0.003     0.040     0.008     0.067
2004                         0.076     0.063      0.005       0.003       0.001      0.001      0.004      0.014     0.085     0.003     0.041     0.008     0.067
2005                         0.074     0.063      0.004       0.003       0.002      0.001      0.004      0.013     0.085     0.003     0.040     0.007     0.067
2006                         0.070     0.060      0.005       0.002       0.002      0.001      0.004      0.012     0.075     0.002     0.036     0.010     0.063
2007                         0.064     0.055      0.004       0.002       0.002      0.001      0.004      0.011     0.070     0.003     0.033     0.010     0.059
2008                         0.065     0.056      0.005       0.002       0.002      0.001      0.005      0.011     0.072     0.002     0.033     0.009     0.060
                                                                  Table 3: Trends in Lobbyists' Expertise
                                      Panel A: All                                                                 Panel B: At Least 4 Active Years
                                                                                                                                            Number of
                                                     Number of Issues                                                           Issue-        Issues of
Year               Specialist     Issue-Based HHI    of Specialization       Generalist        Year               Specialist  Based HHI Specialization      Generalist
1999                 0.24               0.33               0.33                 0.32           1999                 0.17         0.32          0.19            0.23
2000                 0.22               0.33               0.29                 0.29           2000                 0.17         0.32          0.20            0.23
2001                 0.22               0.35               0.27                 0.25           2001                 0.18         0.33          0.21            0.23
2002                 0.22               0.34               0.26                 0.25           2002                 0.19         0.33          0.22            0.23
2003                 0.23               0.35               0.28                 0.24           2003                 0.19         0.34          0.23            0.22
2004                 0.23               0.35               0.29                 0.24           2004                 0.20         0.33          0.23            0.22
2005                 0.24               0.35               0.31                 0.25           2005                 0.20         0.33          0.24            0.22
2006                 0.26               0.35               0.34                 0.26           2006                 0.20         0.33          0.23            0.21
2007                 0.28               0.34               0.36                 0.27           2007                 0.19         0.32          0.22            0.21
2008                 0.29               0.34               0.40                 0.29           2008                 0.19         0.32          0.21            0.21
Across all years     0.25               0.34               0.32                 0.27           Across all years     0.19         0.33          0.22            0.22


                                Panel C: External Lobbyists                                                         Panel D: In-House Lobbyists
                                                                                                                                            Number of
                                                  Number of Issues                                                               Issue-      Issues of
Year               Specialist     Issue-Based HHI of Specialization          Generalist        Year               Specialist   Based HHI   Specialization   Generalist
1999                 0.28               0.39               0.35                 0.19           1999                 0.20         0.28          0.30            0.46
2000                 0.29               0.43               0.33                 0.09           2000                 0.18         0.27          0.26            0.44
2001                 0.27               0.43               0.31                 0.07           2001                 0.18         0.28          0.24            0.39
2002                 0.27               0.42               0.30                 0.08           2002                 0.18         0.28          0.23            0.38
2003                 0.27               0.42               0.31                 0.07           2003                 0.19         0.29          0.26            0.37
2004                 0.28               0.42               0.31                 0.07           2004                 0.19         0.29          0.26            0.37
2005                 0.28               0.41               0.31                 0.09           2005                 0.22         0.30          0.31            0.38
2006                 0.28               0.38               0.33                 0.15           2006                 0.23         0.31          0.34            0.39
2007                 0.30               0.37               0.38                 0.18           2007                 0.22         0.30          0.34            0.42
2008                 0.31               0.36               0.39                 0.21           2008                 0.26         0.30          0.41            0.41
Across all years     0.29               0.40               0.34                 0.13           Across all years     0.20         0.29          0.29            0.40
               Table 4: Trends in Lobbyists' Connections (through Campaign Contributions) to Politicians
                         Panel A: All                                    Panel B: At Least 4 Active Years
Year                     Any     Number      Many (>=5)        Year                   Any      Number   Many (>=5)
1999                     0.22      1.04         0.06           1999                   0.29      1.49        0.09
2000                     0.22      1.05         0.07           2000                   0.28      1.38        0.09
2001                     0.24      1.19         0.07           2001                   0.28      1.41        0.09
2002                     0.24      1.18         0.07           2002                   0.27      1.34        0.08
2003                     0.30      1.49         0.09           2003                   0.33      1.70        0.11
2004                     0.30      1.44         0.09           2004                   0.33      1.66        0.10
2005                     0.28      1.48         0.09           2005                   0.32      1.78        0.11
2006                     0.27      1.47         0.09           2006                   0.34      1.91        0.12
2007                     0.32      1.58         0.10           2007                   0.39      2.11        0.13
2008                     0.29      1.41         0.09           2008                   0.39      2.10        0.13
Across all years         0.27      1.34         0.08           Across all years       0.32      1.69        0.11


                   Panel C: External Lobbyists                               Panel D: In-House Lobbyists
Year                     Any      Number      Many (>=5)       Year                     Any    Number Many (>=5)
1999                     0.31      1.66         0.10           1999                   0.13      0.39        0.02
2000                     0.35      1.98         0.12           2000                   0.14      0.42        0.03
2001                     0.36      2.15         0.14           2001                   0.15      0.44        0.02
2002                     0.37      2.12         0.14           2002                   0.15      0.45        0.02
2003                     0.44      2.65         0.17           2003                   0.19      0.55        0.03
2004                     0.43      2.60         0.17           2004                   0.19      0.52        0.03
2005                     0.42      2.72         0.17           2005                   0.16      0.49        0.03
2006                     0.37      2.23         0.14           2006                   0.15      0.43        0.02
2007                     0.39      2.18         0.14           2007                   0.19      0.51        0.03
2008                     0.36      1.99         0.12           2008                   0.18      0.46        0.02
Across all years         0.38      2.21         0.14           Across all years       0.16      0.47        0.03
                                                                              Table 5: Determinants of Lobbyists' Expertise
                                                       Dependent Variable: Specialist (Y=1)                                                           Dependent Variable: Issue-Based HHI

Sample:                                     All                         External                        In-House                       All                             External                         In-House
Restrict to at Least 4 Active
Years?                            No                Yes           No                Yes           No               Yes        No                Yes              No                 Yes          No                Yes
                                  (1)               (2)           (3)               (4)           (5)              (6)        (7)               (8)              (9)                (10)         (11)              (12)
Former Member of
Congress                           -0.02            -0.03          -0.06         -0.05             0.36         0.19         -0.01             -0.04            -0.03           -0.06             0.15           0.18
                                  [0.040]          [0.040]        [0.042]       [0.042]         [0.129]**     [0.142]       [0.028]           [0.030]          [0.030]         [0.031]          [0.093]        [0.112]
Republican                         -0.04            -0.04          -0.04         -0.05            -0.04        -0.04         -0.06             -0.08            -0.08           -0.10            -0.04          -0.04
                                 [0.016]*         [0.017]**      [0.018]*      [0.018]*          [0.036]      [0.044]      [0.012]**         [0.013]**        [0.013]**       [0.014]**         [0.026]        [0.035]
Democrat                           -0.05            -0.06          -0.06         -0.07            -0.01        -0.04         -0.07             -0.08            -0.09           -0.10            -0.03          -0.06
                                [0.017]**         [0.018]**     [0.019]**     [0.019]**          [0.042]      [0.051]      [0.012]**         [0.014]**        [0.013]**       [0.014]**         [0.031]        [0.040]
Experience in/as:
         House (not rep)           0.02              0.09           0.02          0.08             0.02         0.27          0.03              0.05              0.03               0.04        -0.02           0.18
                                 [0.048]           [0.047]        [0.051]       [0.049]          [0.136]      [0.178]       [0.034]           [0.036]           [0.036]            [0.036]      [0.099]        [0.141]
       Senate (not senator)       -0.01              0.03           0.00          0.04            -0.05        -0.02         -0.02             -0.01             -0.02              -0.01        -0.03          -0.04
                                 [0.016]           [0.016]        [0.017]      [0.018]*          [0.038]      [0.046]       [0.011]           [0.012]           [0.012]            [0.013]      [0.027]        [0.036]
               White House        -0.09             -0.05          -0.10         -0.06            -0.05         0.07         -0.04             -0.03             -0.05              -0.04        -0.05           0.02
                                [0.027]**         [0.026]*      [0.029]**      [0.027]*          [0.079]      [0.091]      [0.019]*           [0.020]          [0.020]*           [0.020]*      [0.058]        [0.072]
                         Aide      0.00              0.03          -0.01          0.04             0.03         0.01         -0.02              0.00             -0.04               0.00         0.03           0.01
                                 [0.016]          [0.016]*        [0.018]      [0.018]*          [0.039]      [0.045]       [0.011]           [0.012]         [0.013]**            [0.013]      [0.028]        [0.036]
                        Clerk      0.05             -0.03           0.05         -0.03            -0.04        -0.06          0.04              0.03              0.03               0.03        -0.05          -0.12
                                 [0.034]           [0.038]        [0.035]       [0.039]          [0.127]      [0.179]       [0.024]           [0.029]           [0.025]            [0.029]      [0.092]        [0.141]
                     Counsel      -0.02              0.00          -0.04          0.00             0.03        -0.02          0.02              0.03              0.01               0.02         0.00          -0.03
                                 [0.016]           [0.016]       [0.018]*       [0.018]          [0.044]      [0.052]       [0.012]          [0.012]*           [0.012]            [0.013]      [0.032]        [0.041]
Experience in:
                        1960s       0.07        0.07               0.06              0.06          0.05          0.14          0.08              0.08             0.08               0.07         0.13           0.08
                                  [0.036]    [0.036]*            [0.038]           [0.037]       [0.124]       [0.148]     [0.026]**         [0.027]**        [0.027]**           [0.028]*      [0.090]        [0.117]
                      1970s        -0.03        0.02              -0.03              0.02         -0.05         -0.02          0.03              0.04             0.04               0.04        -0.08          -0.06
                                  [0.021]     [0.021]            [0.022]           [0.022]       [0.068]       [0.075]      [0.015]*          [0.016]*         [0.016]*           [0.016]*      [0.049]        [0.059]
                      1980s        -0.03        0.00              -0.03             -0.01         -0.01          0.04          0.01              0.01             0.00               0.00         0.01           0.03
                                  [0.018]     [0.018]            [0.019]           [0.019]       [0.055]       [0.059]       [0.013]           [0.013]          [0.014]            [0.014]      [0.040]        [0.047]
                      1990s        -0.02        0.02              -0.03              0.01          0.01          0.06         -0.02              0.00            -0.02              -0.01         0.01           0.05
                                  [0.019]     [0.019]            [0.020]           [0.020]       [0.051]       [0.059]       [0.013]           [0.014]          [0.014]            [0.015]      [0.037]        [0.047]
                      2000s         0.05       -0.02               0.06             -0.01         -0.04         -0.14          0.01             -0.02             0.01              -0.01        -0.01          -0.06
                                 [0.020]*     [0.021]           [0.022]**          [0.023]       [0.050]      [0.061]*       [0.014]           [0.016]          [0.015]            [0.017]      [0.036]        [0.048]
R-Squared                           0.00        0.00               0.01              0.01          0.00          0.01          0.01              0.02             0.03               0.03         0.00           0.01
Observations                          13,720      8,004              9,325              5,788        4,395         2,216        13,720              8,004            9,325              5,788        4,395          2,216
The regressions also include an "experience" dummy.
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                            Table 6: Determinants of Lobbyists' Connections to Politicians (through Campaign Contributions)
                                              Dependent Variable: Any Connection? (Y=1)                           Dependent Variable: Many (>=5) Connections? (Y=1)

Sample:                                 All                       External                  In-House                 All                  External                 In-House
Restrict to at Least 4
Active Years?                     No            Yes         No               Yes      No               Yes     No          Yes         No            Yes       No             Yes
                                  (1)           (2)         (3)              (4)      (5)              (6)     (7)         (8)         (9)           (10)      (11)           (12)
Former Memb of
Congress                           0.12          0.10        0.10          0.09         0.15         0.05       0.14        0.12        0.13        0.12        0.16        0.04
                                [0.041]**      [0.048]*    [0.044]*      [0.049]      [0.124]      [0.174]   [0.024]**   [0.032]**   [0.029]**   [0.038]**   [0.036]**    [0.049]
Republican                         0.15          0.14        0.12          0.11         0.18         0.15       0.10        0.11        0.10        0.12        0.05        0.05
                                [0.017]**     [0.021]**   [0.019]**     [0.022]**   [0.035]**    [0.054]**   [0.010]**   [0.014]**   [0.012]**   [0.017]**   [0.010]**   [0.015]**
Democrat                           0.19          0.19        0.18          0.16         0.10         0.15       0.14        0.17        0.15        0.18        0.02        0.02
                                [0.018]**     [0.022]**   [0.020]**     [0.023]**    [0.041]*     [0.063]*   [0.010]**   [0.014]**   [0.013]**   [0.017]**    [0.012]     [0.018]
Experience in/as:
       House (not rep)              0.10         0.07         0.09         0.05        -0.08        -0.10        0.07        0.08        0.08       0.07       -0.02       -0.04
                                 [0.049]*      [0.057]      [0.053]      [0.058]      [0.131]      [0.219]    [0.029]*    [0.038]*    [0.035]*    [0.044]     [0.038]     [0.062]
    Senate (not senator)            0.09         0.08         0.08         0.07         0.07         0.13        0.04        0.05        0.05       0.05       -0.01        0.00
                                [0.016]**     [0.020]**   [0.018]**     [0.021]**     [0.036]     [0.056]*   [0.009]**   [0.013]**   [0.012]**   [0.016]**    [0.011]     [0.016]
            White House             0.18         0.17         0.15         0.13         0.23         0.26        0.10        0.11        0.10       0.10        0.07        0.03
                                [0.028]**     [0.032]**   [0.030]**     [0.032]**   [0.076]**     [0.112]*   [0.016]**   [0.021]**   [0.020]**   [0.025]**   [0.022]**    [0.032]
                         Aide       0.04         0.02         0.04         0.03        -0.04        -0.09       -0.01       -0.01        0.00      -0.01       -0.02       -0.02
                                 [0.017]*      [0.020]     [0.018]*      [0.021]      [0.037]      [0.055]     [0.010]     [0.013]     [0.012]    [0.016]     [0.011]     [0.016]
                     Clerk          0.05         0.03         0.02         0.01         0.05         0.03        0.00        0.01       -0.01      -0.01       -0.01        0.00
                                  [0.035]      [0.047]      [0.036]      [0.046]      [0.122]      [0.219]     [0.020]     [0.031]     [0.024]    [0.036]     [0.035]     [0.062]
                  Counsel           0.12         0.10         0.09         0.07         0.10         0.08        0.03        0.03        0.02       0.01        0.00        0.00
                                [0.017]**     [0.020]**   [0.018]**     [0.021]**    [0.042]*      [0.064]   [0.010]**    [0.013]*     [0.012]    [0.016]     [0.012]     [0.018]
Experience in:
                    1960s       0.07         0.06       0.05       0.05                0.12         0.06        0.08         0.10       0.08         0.10       0.06        0.07
                              [0.038]      [0.043]    [0.040]    [0.044]             [0.120]      [0.182]    [0.022]**   [0.029]**   [0.026]**   [0.034]**    [0.035]     [0.051]
                   1970s        0.12         0.11       0.10       0.10                0.04         0.09        0.04         0.04       0.04         0.04      -0.02       -0.01
                            [0.022]**     [0.025]** [0.023]** [0.025]**              [0.065]      [0.092]    [0.013]**    [0.017]*   [0.015]**     [0.020]    [0.019]     [0.026]
                   1980s        0.12         0.09       0.10       0.07                0.05         0.04        0.06         0.05       0.05         0.04      -0.02        0.00
                            [0.019]**     [0.021]** [0.020]** [0.022]**              [0.053]      [0.073]    [0.011]**   [0.014]**   [0.013]**    [0.017]*    [0.015]     [0.020]
                   1990s        0.11         0.08       0.09       0.07                0.09         0.08        0.04         0.03       0.04         0.03       0.00       -0.01
                            [0.019]**     [0.023]** [0.021]** [0.023]**              [0.050]      [0.073]    [0.011]**    [0.015]*   [0.014]**     [0.018]    [0.014]     [0.021]
                   2000s       -0.05        -0.04      -0.05      -0.03               -0.06        -0.06       -0.02        -0.02      -0.02        -0.01      -0.01       -0.02
                             [0.020]*      [0.026]   [0.022]*    [0.027]             [0.048]      [0.075]     [0.012]      [0.017]    [0.015]      [0.021]    [0.014]     [0.021]
R-squared                       0.09         0.08       0.08       0.08                0.03         0.03        0.08         0.08       0.07         0.07       0.02        0.01
Observations                  13,720        8,004      9,325      5,788               4,395        2,216      13,720        8,004      9,325        5,788      4,395       2,216
The regressions also include an experience dummy and a constant.
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                                     Table 7: Who Makes Campaign Contributions to Whom?
                                                             The Role of Party and House/Senate Links
                                   Dependent Variable: Lobbyist Makes at Least One Campaign Contribution to that Legislator in that Congress

Congress:                                                                                  108th                                                 107th
                                                                            (1)              (2)              (3)                  (4)            (5)             (6)

Republican Congressman                                                     -0.001                          -0.001                -0.0002                        -0.0002
                                                                        [0.0001]**                       [0.0001]**             [0.0001]*                      [0.0001]*
Republican Lobbyist                                                        -0.002           -0.002                                -0.002         -0.002
                                                                        [0.0003]**        [0.0003]**                           [0.0003]**      [0.0003]**
Republican Congressman*Republican Lobbyist                                 0.008             0.008          0.008                  0.007          0.007           0.007
                                                                        [0.0006]**        [0.0006]**     [0.0006]**            [0.0006]**      [0.0006]**      [0.0006]**
Democratic Lobbyist                                                         0.011            0.011                                 0.008          0.008
                                                                        [0.0008]**        [0.0008]**                           [0.0008]**      [0.0008]**
Republican Congressman*Democratic Lobbyist                                 -0.011           -0.011         -0.011                 -0.009         -0.009          -0.009
                                                                        [0.0008]**        [0.0008]**     [0.0008]**            [0.0007]**      [0.0007]**      [0.0007]**
Senator                                                                     0.004                           0.004                 0.002                           0.002
                                                                        [0.0002]**                       [0.0002]**            [0.0001]**                      [0.0001]**
Lobbyist Has Senate Experience                                            -0.0001           -0.0001                               0.0002          0.0002
                                                                          [0.0004]          [0.0004]                             [0.0004]        [0.0004]
Lobbyist Has House Experience                                               0.006             0.006                                0.007           0.007
                                                                        [0.0020]**        [0.0020]**                           [0.0022]**      [0.0022]**
Senator*Lobbyist Has Senate Experience                                      0.010             0.010         0.010                  0.009           0.009          0.009
                                                                        [0.0009]**        [0.0009]**     [0.0009]**            [0.0009]**      [0.0009]**      [0.0009]**
House Representative*Lobbyist Has House Experience                         -0.004            -0.004         -0.004                -0.004          -0.004          -0.004
                                                                         [0.0015]*         [0.0015]*      [0.0015]*             [0.0017]*       [0.0017]*       [0.0017]*
Congressman Fixed Effects                                                    No                Yes            No                    No              Yes             No
Lobbyist Fixed Effects                                                       No                No            Yes                    No              No             Yes
R-squared                                                                    0.00              0.02          0.02                   0.00            0.01           0.02
Observations                                                                 4,575,967      4,575,967      4,575,967               3,979,756       3,979,756      3,979,756
Standard errors are clustered at the lobbyist level.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                          Table 8: Do Connections through Campaign Contributions Predict Overlapping Issues between Lobbyists and Congressmen?



Congress                                                                                   108th                                                                107th
                                                                                                   Lobbyist Works on All the                                            Lobbyist Works on All the
                                                           Number of Issues Covered by the           Issues Covered by the       Number of Issues Covered by the          Issues Covered by the
                                                           Legislator in Congress (t) that the      Legislator in Congress (t)   Legislator in Congress (t) that the     Legislator in Congress (t)
Dependent Variable:                                        Lobbyists Covers in Congress (t)                  (Y=1)               Lobbyists Covers in Congress (t)                 (Y=1)
                                                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)             (4)           (5)                (6)                 (7)            (8)
Lobbyist made at least one campaign contribution to that
Congressman in Congress (t )? (Y=1)                           0.913              0.435                0.029       0.019             1.023              0.400               0.024         0.017
                                                           [0.0531]**         [0.0261]**           [0.0024]** [0.0031]**         [0.0670]**         [0.0361]**          [0.0027]**    [0.0039]**
Republican Lobbyist                                           0.576                                   0.014                         0.519                                   0.011
                                                           [0.0538]**                              [0.0018]**                    [0.0616]**                             [0.0018]**
Republican Congressman*Republican Lobbyist                    0.032              0.036                0.001       0.001             0.019              0.023                0.002         0.002
                                                           [0.0032]**         [0.0032]**           [0.0002]** [0.0002]**         [0.0028]**         [0.0028]**          [0.0003]**     [0.0003]**
Democratic Lobbyist                                           0.452                                   0.014                         0.521                                   0.013
                                                           [0.0542]**                              [0.0019]**                    [0.0641]**                             [0.0018]**
Republican Congressman*Democratic Lobbyist                    0.043              0.038                0.001       0.001             0.037              0.031                0.002         0.002
                                                           [0.0036]**         [0.0034]**           [0.0002]** [0.0002]**         [0.0034]**         [0.0031]**          [0.0003]**     [0.0003]**
Lobbyist Has Senate Experience                                0.045                                   0.004                         0.088                                   0.003
                                                            [0.0513]                                 [0.0023]                     [0.0589]                                [0.0022]
Senator*Lobbyist has Senate Experience                        0.299              0.304                -0.014     -0.014             0.326              0.331               -0.012        -0.012
                                                           [0.0334]**         [0.0336]**           [0.0020]** [0.0020]**         [0.0383]**         [0.0384]**          [0.0020]**     [0.0020]**
Lobbyist Has House Experience                                 0.312                                   -0.009                        0.205                                  -0.008
                                                            [0.1726]                               [0.0010]**                     [0.1767]                              [0.0010]**
House Representative*Lobbyist has House Experience           -0.277             -0.279                 0.010      0.010            -0.228             -0.230                0.010          0.010
                                                           [0.0781]**         [0.0782]**            [0.0046]*  [0.0046]*         [0.0795]**         [0.0798]**           [0.0042]*      [0.0042]*
Republican Congressman                                                           0.083                           0.019                                 0.056                              0.048
                                                                              [0.0010]**                      [0.0001]**                            [0.0008]**                         [0.0001]**
Senator                                                                          0.828                           -0.102                                0.850                              -0.101
                                                                              [0.0102]**                      [0.0007]**                            [0.0115]**                         [0.0007]**
Constant                                                      1.0338            0.9766                0.1116    0.1235              1.049             1.0088              0.1386         0.1342
                                                            [0.0138]**        [0.0027]**           [0.0006]** [0.0002]**         [0.0152]**         [0.0030]**          [0.0006]**     [0.0001]**
R-squared                                                      0.21               0.42                  0.76       0.04             0.23                0.39               0.81            0.03
Observations                                                4,575,967         4,575,967             4,575,967 4,575,967          3,979,756          3,979,756           3,979,756      3,979,756
Lobbyist F.E.s                                                  No                Yes                   No         Yes               No                 Yes                 No              Yes
Congressman F.E.s                                               Yes               No                    Yes        No                Yes                No                  Yes             No
Standard errors are clustered at the lobbyist level.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                 Table 9: Do Connections through Campaign Contributions Predict Overlapping Issues between Lobbyists and Congressmen?
                                                                   Heterogeneity of Effect Across Lobbyists and Congressmen
                                               Dependent Variable: Lobbyist Works on All the Issues Covered by the Legislator in Congress (t) (Y=1)
                                                                                                                         108th Congress
                                                                                                                                         Congressman is      Lobbyist is Connected
                                                           Lobbyist is a Former                                   Lobbyist is a        connected to at least to at least 5 Members
Sample:                                                    Member of Congress?       External Lobbyist?            Specialist?            40 Lobbyists?           of Congress?
                                                              Yes          No           Yes         No           Yes         No          Yes        No         Yes          No
                                                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)         (10)

Lobbyist made at least one campaign contribution to that
Congressman in Congress (t )? (Y=1)                          0.0373       0.0317        0.039      0.0057       0.0604       0.0256      0.034     0.0302     0.0202       0.0163
                                                           [0.0093]**   [0.0025]**   [0.0028]**   [0.0034]    [0.0066]**   [0.0024]** [0.0027]** [0.0031]** [0.0025]**   [0.0027]**
Congressman F.E.s                                              Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes

R-squared                                                    0.75          0.76         0.76         0.76      0.8            0.76      0.52        0.8       0.77          0.76
Observations                                                74,752      4,509,064    2,310,888    2,272,928 1,129,456      3,454,360   784,900   3,798,916   602,104     3,981,712

                                                                                                                 107th Congress
                                                                                                                                         Congressman is      Lobbyist is Connected
                                                           Lobbyist is a Former                                   Lobbyist is a        connected to at least to at least 5 Members
Sample:                                                    Member of Congress? External Lobbyist?                  Specialist?            40 Lobbyists?           of Congress?
                                                             Yes          No      Yes        No                  Yes         No          Yes         No        Yes          No

Lobbyist made at least one campaign contribution to that
Congressman in Congress (t )? (Y=1)                          0.0337       0.0252       0.0312      0.0057       0.0549       0.0185     0.0245     0.0277     0.0135       0.0125
                                                           [0.0087]**   [0.0028]**   [0.0030]**   [0.0044]    [0.0068]**   [0.0028]** [0.0029]** [0.0034]** [0.0026]**   [0.0033]**
Congressman F.E.s                                              Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes

R-squared                                                    0.81          0.81         0.81         0.81       0.84          0.81      0.73        0.82      0.81          0.81
Observations                                                74,054      3,925,469    2,027,987    1,971,536    943,885     3,055,638   494,175   3,505,348   452,822     3,546,701
Standard errors are clustered at the lobbyist level.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
             Table 10a: Do Lobbyists Follow Politicians They Are Connected to as Those Politicians Switch Committee Assignments?
                         Dependent Variable: Number of new issues for the legislator in Congress (t+1) that the Lobbyists covers in Congress (t+1)
                                                    (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)               (6)            (7) (8)
Lobbyists made at least one campaign
contribution to that Congressman in
Congress (t )? (Y=1)                                0.359     0.342     0.118            0.201           0.188          0.100          0.106         0.306
                                                  [0.046]** [0.047]** [0.043]**        [0.046]**       [0.044]**      [0.033]**      [0.033]**     [0.057]**
Number of new issues for the legislator in
Congress (t+1 ) that the Lobbyist covers in
Congress (t )                                        0.64        0.6         0.587         0.677          0.676          0.638          0.637
                                                  [0.009]**   [0.011]**   [0.011]**     [0.013]**      [0.013]**       [0.008]**      [0.008]**
Specialist                                                                  -0.249        -0.255         -0.245
                                                                          [0.033]**     [0.054]**      [0.055]**
Internal                                                                     0.063        -0.008          0.044
                                                                          [0.021]**      [0.025]        [0.028]
Number of active congresses                                                  0.21
                                                                          [0.007]**
Average Lobbyist Revenue                                                   0.00001
                                                                          [0.000]**
Lobbyist is Former Congressman                                                                           0.112
                                                                                                        [0.086]
Number of issues covered by the legislator
in Congress (t ) that the Lobbyists covers in
Congress (t )                                                                                                                           -0.007
                                                                                                                                      [0.001]**
Interactions Party Affiliat. * Party in Power
(Full Set)                                         No         No          No            No              Yes           No             No            No
Congress F.E.s                                     Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
Lobbyist F.E.s                                     No         No          No            No              No            Yes            Yes           Yes
Congressman F.E.s                                  No         Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes           No             No            No
Lobbyists.Info Sample                              No         No          No            Yes             Yes           No             No            No
Constant                                          0.025      0.137       -0.688        0.185           0.124          0.53          0.571         1.883
                                                 [0.019] [0.020]** [0.036]**         [0.031]**       [0.034]**     [0.028]**      [0.028]**     [0.019]**
R-squared                                          0.57      0.58          0.6          0.68            0.68          0.67           0.67          0.18
Observations                                     513,000 513,000 513,000              265,938         265,351       513,000        513,000       513,000
Sample is restricted to Congressmen that switch committee assignments between two consecutive Congresses.
Standard errors are clustered at the lobbyist level. For computational reasons for each politician a sample of the 1000 closest lobbyists is considered.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                                            Table 10b: Heterogeneity in Following Connected Politicians.
                        Dependent Variable: Number of new issues for the legislator in Congress (t+1) that the Lobbyists covers in Congress (t+1)
                                                                                      Congressman is                                                Congressman moves
                                         Lobbyist is a                              connected to at least               Congressman is a             into fewer than 20
Sample:                                   Specialist?            External Lobbyist?    40 Lobbyists?                        Senator?                    new issues?
                                        Yes        No             Yes        No        Yes        No                     Yes        No                 Yes        No
                                        (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)                    (7)        (8)                (9)        (10)
Lobbyists made at least one
campaign contribution to that
Congressman in Congress
(t )? (Y=1)                            0.028        0.105     0.101             0.175         0.104         0.04          0.106        0.115     0.094           0.046
                                      [0.106]     [0.034]** [0.034]**          [0.109]      [0.038]**      [0.053]      [0.043]*     [0.043]** [0.023]**        [0.184]
Number of new issues for the
legislator in Congress (t+1 ) that
the Lobbyist covers in Congress
(t )                                   0.486         0.648         0.633        0.646          0.64         0.632        0.621          0.64          0.603       0.271
                                     [0.035]**     [0.008]**     [0.011]**    [0.012]**     [0.008]**     [0.009]**    [0.010]**     [0.008]**      [0.007]**   [0.019]**
Number of issues covered by
the legislator in Congress (t )
that the Lobbyists covers in
Congress (t )                           -0.01      -0.006     -0.009         0         -0.011      -0.004      -0.015      -0.004      -0.002         -0.1
                                      [0.003]** [0.001]** [0.001]**       [0.001]    [0.001]** [0.001]** [0.001]** [0.001]** [0.001]** [0.009]**
Congress F.E.s                           Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
Lobbyist F.E.s                           Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
Constant                                0.556       0.572      0.58        0.548       0.564        0.596       0.691      0.535        0.446        4.892
                                      [0.091]** [0.029]** [0.042]** [0.034]** [0.028]** [0.030]** [0.031]** [0.029]** [0.017]** [0.186]**
R-squared                                0.59        0.68      0.68        0.67         0.68        0.68        0.68        0.68        0.63         0.79
Observations                           40,635     472,365    263,639      249,361     267,000     246,000     120,000     393,000     461,000       52,000
Sample is restricted to Congressmen that switch committee assignments between two consecutive Congresses.
Standard errors are clustered at the lobbyist level. For computational reasons for each politician a sample of the 1000 closest lobbyists is considered.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
  Table 10c: Do Lobbyists Follow Freshmen They Are Connected to as Those Politicians Are Elected and Gain Committee Assignments?
                     Dependent Variable: Number of issues for the legislator in Congress (t+1) that the Lobbyists covers in Congress (t+1)
                                                            Congresses 106-107                                               Congresses 108-109
                                            (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)               (6)             (7) (8)
Lobbyists made at least one campaign
contribution to that Congressman in
Congress (t )? (Y=1)                               0.52     0.331     0.319           0.296        0.403           0.23         0.165         0.097
                                                [0.046]** [0.042]** [0.056]**       [0.030]**    [0.034]**      [0.033]**     [0.037]**     [0.025]**
Number of issues for the legislator in
Congress (t+1 ) that the Lobbyist is already
covering in Congress (t )                         0.598        0.553      0.634       0.497        0.667           0.631          0.753        0.536
                                                [0.007]**   [0.006]**   [0.009]**   [0.006]**    [0.006]**      [0.006]**      [0.007]**     [0.004]**
Specialist                                                    -0.187      -0.311                                  -0.097         -0.216
                                                            [0.009]**   [0.015]**                               [0.007]**      [0.010]**
Internal                                                       0.021      0.014                                   -0.121          -0.05
                                                             [0.010]*    [0.016]                                [0.008]**      [0.011]**
Number of active congresses                                    0.172                                               0.141
                                                            [0.003]**                                           [0.003]**
Average Lobbyist Revenue                                      0.0001                                              0.0001
                                                            [0.000]**                                            [0.000]*
Lobbyist is Former Congressman                                            0.061                                                 -0.054
                                                                         [0.091]                                                [0.052]
Interactions Party Affiliat. * Party in Power
(Full Set)                                          No       No         Yes          No             No             No             Yes          No
Congress F.E.s                                     Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes
Lobbyist F.E.s                                      No       No         No           Yes            No             No             No           Yes
Congressman F.E.s                                  Yes       Yes        Yes          No             Yes            Yes            Yes          No
Constant                                          0.238     -0.319     0.402        0.477           0.18          -0.236         0.334        0.476
                                                [0.006]** [0.012]** [0.015]**     [0.010]**      [0.004]**      [0.012]**      [0.010]**    [0.008]**
R-squared                                          0.43      0.48      0.51          0.67           0.47            0.5           0.57         0.7
Observations                                    1,892,714 1,892,714 754,462      1,892,714       1,923,920      1,923,920       980,748     1,923,920
Sample is restricted to 106 and 107 Congresses and 108 and 109 separately for computational reasons.
Standard errors are clustered at the lobbyist level.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
             Table 11: Do Lobbyists Establish Connections (though Campaign Contributions) to Politicians as the Politicians are Assigned to the Lobbyists' Area of Expertise?
Dependent Variable:                                                                 Lobbyist made at least one campaign contribution to the Congressman in Congress (t+1) (Y=1)
                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)            (8)          (9)        (10)          (11)
                                                                                                                                                                                           Congressman is
                                                                                                                                                             Lobbyist is a Former       connected to at least 40
Sample:                                           All             All            All        Lobbyist is a Specialist?           External Lobbyist?           Member of Congress?             Lobbyists?
                                                                                                Yes              No              Yes             No             Yes            No          Yes           No

Number of issues covered by the
legislator in Congress (t+1 ) that the
Lobbyists covers in Congress (t )               0.6882          0.6510         0.5926      0.6282      0.5893      1.0569      0.1821      2.1665      0.8904                             0.8188       0.1616
                                             [0.04591]**     [0.04949]**    [0.04219]** [0.12558]** [0.04483]** [0.08654]** [0.02113]** [0.71017]** [0.07033]**                         [0.0618]**   [0.0426]**

Lobbyist made at least one campaign
contribution to that Congressman in
Congress (t )? (Y=1)                            0.2769          0.2762         0.2620          0.2992          0.2492          0.2723           0.2204         0.2951        0.2792       0.2432       0.3035
                                              [0.0058]**      [0.0058]**     [0.0058]**      [0.0117]**      [0.0066]**      [0.0065]**       [0.0124]**     [0.0298]**    [0.0071]**   [0.0062]**    [0.012]**
Number of issues covered by the
legislator in Congress (t ) that the
Lobbyists covers in Congress (t )                 0.1115         0.1393           0.0096       0.1228        -0.0009          -0.0605        0.0628         -1.0607      -0.0460        -0.2485          0.0287
                                               [0.03511]** [0.03800]**          [0.03541]     [0.11847]     [0.03711]        [0.07488]    [0.02085]** [0.72557]         [0.05787]     [0.0543]**        [0.0423]
Congress F.E.s                                      Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
Congressmen F.E.s                                   No             Yes              No           No             No              No             No             No           No             No               No
Lobbyist F.E.s                                      No             No              Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
R-squared                                          0.06            0.07            0.08          0.10          0.08             0.09          0.05            0.12         0.08           0.08            0.11
Observations                                      3,758,268      3,758,268       3,758,268     1,073,836     2,684,432        1,673,233      2,085,035        30,020     1,687,709      2,030,424       1,727,844
Sample is restricted to Congressmen that switch committee assignments between 107 and 108 Congresses for computational reasons.
Standard errors are clustered at the lobbyist level. Coefficients and s.e. for number of issues covered by the legislator in Congress (t+1 ) and (t ) that the Lobbyists covers in Congress (t ) are (x1000).
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
                         Table 12: Dollar Shares Across Lobbyists' Types
                                        Full Sample Shares
                                              Very               Not Connected Connected
Year      Total Lobbying    Connected                 Specialist
                                          Connected                 Specialist Not Specialist
 1999   $    1,650,000,000      37%           14%        22%          13%          28%
 2000   $    1,760,000,000      37%           13%        19%          12%          29%
 2001   $    1,820,000,000      38%           14%        19%          11%          30%
 2002   $    2,040,000,000      37%           14%        18%          11%          30%
 2003   $    2,430,000,000      42%           17%        18%          10%          34%
 2004   $    2,420,000,000      45%           18%        20%          11%          36%
 2005   $    2,850,000,000      43%           18%        21%          11%          34%
 2006   $    3,300,000,000      44%           17%        20%          11%          35%
 2007   $    3,360,000,000      47%           19%        23%          12%          37%
 2008   $    3,040,000,000      42%           16%        24%          15%          33%

                                   External Lobbyists Only Shares
 1999   $       909,000,000       48%         21%        24%                  13%   36%
 2000   $       698,000,000       57%         27%        27%                  13%   42%
 2001   $       777,000,000       58%         29%        27%                  12%   43%
 2002   $       856,000,000       57%         27%        26%                  12%   43%
 2003   $     1,060,000,000       65%         34%        26%                  11%   50%
 2004   $     1,130,000,000       65%         34%        28%                  12%   48%
 2005   $     1,330,000,000       63%         35%        28%                  12%   47%
 2006   $     2,090,000,000       56%         25%        23%                  11%   43%
 2007   $     2,330,000,000       56%         25%        26%                  12%   42%
 2008   $     1,910,000,000       54%         24%        26%                  13%   41%

Notes: Shares of total lobbying amount reported by different types of lobbyists.
           Table 13: Valuing Expertise and Connections - Lobbying Report Analysis
                                         External Lobbying Only
                                     Dependent Variable: Log (Amount)
                                                                          (1)       (2)          (3)
At Least One Specialist Matching an Issue                               0.033     0.035        0.051
                                                                      [0.004]** [0.004]** [0.004]**
At Least One Connection to a Politician Covering an Issue                0.08     0.097        0.087
                                                                      [0.004]** [0.004]** [0.005]**
Average Tenure                                                          0.001      -0.01       -0.01
                                                                       [0.002]  [0.002]** [0.002]**
Average Number of Active Years                                          0.008     0.023        0.025
                                                                      [0.001]** [0.002]** [0.002]**
Average Number of Reports Per Lobbyist                                  -0.001    -0.002      -0.002
                                                                      [0.000]** [0.000]** [0.000]**
Share Former Member of Congress
                                                                                               0.121
Share Republicans                                                                           [0.013]**
                                                                                                0.09
Share Democrats                                                                             [0.006]**
                                                                                               0.058
Share with Experience in/as:                                                               [0.007]**
                          House (but not as house representatives)                                0.016
                                                                                              [0.016]
                                        Senate (but not as Senators)                          -0.011
                                                                                              [0.006]
                                                       White House                             0.203
                                                                                            [0.010]**
                                                               Aides                          -0.004
                                                                                              [0.006]
                                                              Clerks                            0.03
                                                                                             [0.015]*
                                                           Counsels                             0.07
                                                                                            [0.006]**
                                         Any Distinctive Experience                           -0.136
                                                                                            [0.011]**
Fixed Effects for:
                    Number of Lobbyists Included on the Report           Yes        Yes         Yes
                                                       Report Type       Yes        Yes         Yes
                                        Issues covered by the report     Yes        Yes         Yes
                                                     Year of Report      Yes        Yes         Yes
R-squared                                                                0.25      0.25         0.26
Observations                                                           191,240   165,885     165,885
Clustered standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Also included are dummies for lobbyists' experience in the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, 1990s and 2000s.
Any dinstinctive experience indicates any experience detail reported in the Lobbyists.info records.
                                            Table 14: Valuing Expertise and Connections - Lobbyist-Level Analysis
                                               External Lobbyists with at least 6 Years of Active Experience Only
                                                          Dependent Variable: Lobbyist's Estimated Fixed Effect
                                      (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)        (10)      (11)       (12)
Issue-Based HHI                     -0.233    -0.227    -0.218       -0.231     -0.214        -0.218
                                  [0.026]** [0.029]** [0.027]** [0.023]** [0.025]** [0.029]**
Specialist                                                                                                -0.012    -0.016    -0.005       -0.02    -0.027    -0.009
                                                                                                         [0.017]   [0.019]    [0.022]     [0.017]   [0.021]   [0.020]
At Least One Connection              0.07      0.03      0.009                                             0.095     0.062     0.043
                                  [0.017]** [0.020]     [0.019]                                         [0.016]** [0.019]**   [0.022]
At Least Five Connections                                            0.076       0.073         0.055                                       0.098     0.094      0.073
                                                                   [0.016]** [0.017]** [0.019]**                                         [0.017]** [0.020]** [0.020]**
Number of Active Years              -0.014    -0.012    -0.006       -0.018     -0.017        -0.009       -0.01    -0.008     -0.005      -0.014    -0.013    -0.006
                                   [0.008]    [0.008]   [0.008]     [0.007]* [0.007]*         [0.008]    [0.007]   [0.008]     [0.009]    [0.008]   [0.009]    [0.008]
Tenure                               0.031     0.04      0.033       0.045       0.045         0.036       0.03      0.033      0.026      0.042     0.044      0.031
                                   [0.016]   [0.017]* [0.015]* [0.014]** [0.014]** [0.016]* [0.015]* [0.017]*                  [0.019]   [0.015]** [0.018]*    [0.017]
Former Memb. Of Congress                                 0.017                                 0.036                            0.085                           0.052
                                                        [0.048]                               [0.050]                          [0.058]                         [0.053]
Republican                                               0.039                                 0.032                            0.061                           0.071
                                                        [0.024]                               [0.025]                         [0.028]*                       [0.026]**
Democrat                                                 0.034                                 0.03                             0.046                           0.053
                                                        [0.025]                               [0.026]                          [0.029]                        [0.027]*
Experience in/as:
  House (but not as House Rep.)                               -0.012                             -0.024                          -0.001                   0.016
                                                              [0.061]                           [0.064]                         [0.074]                  [0.067]
         Senate (but not as Senator)                           0.019                              0.016                            0.02                   0.013
                                                              [0.022]                           [0.023]                         [0.027]                  [0.024]
                      White House                              0.133                              0.119                          0.127                    0.145
                                                            [0.034]**                          [0.036]**                       [0.041]**               [0.038]**
                                Aide                          -0.048                             -0.045                           -0.03                   -0.03
                                                             [0.022]*                           [0.023]                         [0.027]                  [0.024]
                                Clerk                          0.108                              0.133                          0.103                    0.11
                                                             [0.047]*                          [0.049]**                        [0.057]                 [0.052]*
                            Counsel                            0.036                              0.033                          0.044                    0.043
                                                              [0.022]                           [0.023]                         [0.026]                  [0.024]
        Any Distinctive Experience                            -0.071                              -0.04                          -0.067                  -0.063
                                                              [0.038]                           [0.040]                         [0.046]                  [0.042]
Constant                                15.055    15.027      15.064     15.067     15.052      15.044     14.928    14.924     14.959   14.964 14.953   14.968
                                       [0.040]** [0.046]** [0.056]** [0.035]** [0.039]** [0.059]** [0.036]** [0.043]** [0.066]** [0.036]** [0.046]** [0.060]**
Observations                             3,926     2,830       2,830      3,926      2,830        2,830     3,926     2,830       2,830   3,926  2,830    2,830
Median regressions, Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Each observation is weighted by the inverse of the standard error on the estimated fixed effects we use as dependent variable.
Also included are dummies for lobbyists' experience in the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, 1990s and 2000s.
Any dinstinctive experience indicates any experience detail reported in the Lobbyists.info records.
              Table 15a: Issue Booms and Expertise - Issue Analysis
                                 Dependent Variable
                                Log total lobbyists in issue Log total lobbyists in issue
                                             (1)                          (2)
 Log total amount in issue                 0.501
                                         [0.062]**
Log total amount in issue                                                0.491
                                                                      [0.066]**

Issue Specific Trend                            No                           Yes
Issue F.E.s                                     No                           Yes
Observations                                    684                          760
R-squared                                       0.49                         0.98
                                     Dependent Variable
                                    share specialists in issue   Share specialists in issue

 Log total amount in issue                      -0.021
                                               [0.007]**
Log total amount in issue                                                    -0.022
                                                                           [0.006]**

Issue Specific Trend                              No                         Yes
Issue F.E.s                                       No                         Yes
Observations                                      684                        760
R-squared                                         0.07                       0.74
Standard errors are clustered at the issue level.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%


                          Table 15b: Issue Booms and Expertise - Lobbyist Analysis
                                              Dependent Variable
                                                                 Log per Lobbyist              Log per Lobbyist
                                                                     Amount                        Amount
                                                                       (1)                           (2)
i [Total amount in issue i *Specialist in issue i]                        0.000035
                                                                          [0.000097]

i [Log total amount in issue i *Specialist in issue i]                                           -4254.96
                                                                                                  [9040.62]
Year F.E.s                                                                   Yes                     Yes
Lobbyist F.E.s                                                               Yes                     Yes
Observations                                                               144,137                 144,137
R-squared                                                                    0.48                    0.48
Standard errors are clustered at the issue level.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
               Figure 1A: Distribution of the Share of Specialists Across Lobbying Organizations


                                             Kernel density estimate
               3
               2
     Density
               1
               0




                        0              .2              .4          .6       .8             1
                                                      (mean) specialist

                                                               External
                                                               Internal
                   kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0575




   Figure 1B: Distribution of the Share of Lobbyists with at least one Connection to Politicians
                                  Across Lobbying Organizations


                                             Kernel density estimate
               3
               2
     Density
               1
               0




                        0              .2            .4          .6         .8             1
                                                  (mean) any_connection

                                                               External
                                                               Internal
                   kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0541




Note: :"External" refers to external lobbying; "Internal" refers to in-house lobbying. We restrict the sample
to those organizations that employ at least 2 lobbyists over the sample period. See text for details.
Figure 2: Distribution of External Lobbyists' Estimated Value Added by Level of Expertise


                                                Kernel density estimate
                1.5
                1
      Density
                .5
                0




                      13               14             15             16              17       18
                                       F.E. External lobbyist active for at least 6 years

                                                                    HHI>.3
                                                                    HHI<=.3
                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0874




                                                Kernel density estimate
                1
                .8
        Density
      .4    .6  .2
                0




                      13               14             15             16              17       18
                                       F.E. External lobbyist active for at least 6 years

                                                                  Specialist==1
                                                                  Specialist==0
                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0879



Note: Lobbyists fixed effects were only computed for external lobbyists that are active in at least 6 out
of the 10 sample years. See text for details.
Figure 3: Distribution of External Lobbyists' Estimated Value Added By Level of Connections
(through Campaign Contributions) to Politicians

                                                Kernel density estimate
                1
      Density
      .5        0




                      13              14             15             16               17      18
                                       F.E. External lobbyist active for at least 6 years

                                                             Any Connection==1
                                                             Any Connection==0
                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0681




                                                Kernel density estimate
                1.5
                1
      Density
                .5
                0




                      13               14             15             16              17       18
                                       F.E. External lobbyist active for at least 6 years

                                                            Many Connections==1
                                                            Many Connections==0
                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0798


Note: Lobbyists fixed effects were only computed for external lobbyists that are active in at least 6 out
of the 10 sample years. See text for details.
                Figure 4: Republican Lobbyist Revenue Premium

              Republican lobbying revenue premium (per lobbyist)
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
-.1




      1998   2000       2002        2004        2006         2008        2010
                                    Year

              % GOP Revenue premium                 5% Confidence band
              Democratic Benchmark
      Appendix Table A1: Trends in Total Lobbying Expenses
     Year              Internal           External    All
    1999                 1098                900     1994
    2000                 1291                766     2055
    2001                 1233                841     2072
     2002                1372                917     2288
     2003                1568               1098     2665
     2004                1443               1141     2584
     2005                1638               1303     2941
     2006                1526               1776     3303
     2007                1118               2145     3263
     2008                1122               1726     2847
Notes: All figures are in millions of 2006 dollars.
      Appendix Table A2: Political Cycles and Republican and Democratic Lobbyists
Year                   Lobbying Expenses                      Number of Lobbyists
           Republican       Democratic         Gap    Republican   Democratic     Gap
1999         127.84            113.86          13.98      589           530        59
2000         157.64            122.94          34.70      619           556        63
2001         167.53            152.00          15.53      659           614        45
2002         201.22            168.73          32.49      711           646        65
2003         262.22            209.42          52.80      795           722        73
2004         305.84            212.25          93.59      881           766       115
2005         373.71            263.05         110.66     1022           848       174
2006         521.13            293.00         228.13     1110           920       190
2007         449.21            370.07          79.14     1178          1029       149
2008         368.94            404.62         -35.69     1230          1097       133
Lobbying expenses are in millions of dollars.
                            Appendix Table A3: Technical Expertise in Two Large Lobbying Firms
                                                                                                            Issue-
                                                                                                           specific Registered
        Firm            Employee name                  Position                         Issue          Bar Training  lobbyist
Cassidy & Assoc.   Boylan, John              Senior Vice President          aerospace                   0      1        1
                                             Founder & Executive
Cassidy & Assoc.   Cassidy, Gerald S. J.     Chairman                       aerospace                   1     0         1
                                             Vice President and Deputy
Cassidy & Assoc.   Edwards, Shawn            Director of Cassidy Defense    aerospace                   0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Hegarty,Mark              Senior Vice President          aerospace                   0     1         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   McNamara, Dan             Executive Vice President       aerospace                   0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Meyers, George            Vice President                 aerospace                   0     1         1
                                             Executive Vice President
                                             and Director of Defense
Cassidy & Assoc.   Paul, Terry               Group                          aerospace                   0     1         1
                                             Senior Vice Chairman &
Cassidy & Assoc.   Russo, Marty              Chief Executive Officer        aerospace                   1     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Simmons, Vernon           Vice President                 aerospace                   0     1         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Videnieks, Markus         Vice President                 aerospace                   0     0         1
                                                                            energy efficiency, power
Cassidy & Assoc.   Anderson, Kai             Executive Vice President       storage, green buildings    0     1         1
                                                                            energy efficiency, power
Cassidy & Assoc.   Burlij, Emily             Associate                      storage, green buildings    1     0         1
                                                                            energy efficiency, power
Cassidy & Assoc.   Crespo, Jacqueline        Senior Associate               storage, green buildings    0     1         0
                                                                            energy efficiency, power
Cassidy & Assoc.   Dennis, Tom               Executive Vice President       storage, green buildings    0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Anderson, Kai             Executive Vice President       nuclear power               0     1         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Burlij, Emily             Associate                      nuclear power               1     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Crespo, Jacqueline        Senior Associate               nuclear power               0     1         0
Cassidy & Assoc.   Dennis, Tom               Executive Vice President       nuclear power               0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Anderson, Kai             Executive Vice President       technology                  0     1         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Boylan, John              Senior Vice President          technology                  0     1         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Chapman, Justin           Account Coordinator            technology                  0     0         0
Cassidy & Assoc.   Crespo, Jacqueline        Senior Associate               technology                  0     1         0
Cassidy & Assoc.   Dennis, Tom               Executive Vice President       technology                  0     0         1
                                             Vice President and Deputy
Cassidy & Assoc.   Edwards, Shawn            Director of Cassidy Defense technology                     0     0         1
                                             Vice Chairman & Chief
Cassidy & Assoc.   Hartley, Gregg L.         Operating Officer           technology                     0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Hegarty,Mark              Senior Vice President       technology                     0     1         1

                                             Executive Vice President for
Cassidy & Assoc.   Hochstein, Amos           International Operations       technology                  0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Ide, Betsy                Vice President                 technology                  0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Levy, Dawn                Senior Vice President          technology                  0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   McNamara, Dan             Executive Vice President       technology                  0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Meyers, George            Vice President                 technology                  0     1         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Neal, Laura               Senior Vice President          technology                  0     0         1
                                             Executive Vice President
                                             and Director of Defense
Cassidy & Assoc.   Paul, Terry               Group                          technology                  0     1         1
                                             Senior Vice Chairman &
Cassidy & Assoc.   Russo, Marty              Chief Executive Officer        technology                  1     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Simmons, Vernon           Vice President                 technology                  0     1         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Sutton, Barbara           Executive Vice President       technology                  0     0         1
Cassidy & Assoc.   Temple, Roy               Senior Vice President          technology                  1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Chambers, Scott            Partner                       biotechnology               1     1         0
Patton Boggs LLP   Chism, B. Dell             Patent Agent                  biotechnology               0     1         0
Patton Boggs LLP   McKeague, W. John          Associate                     biotechnology               1     1         0
                       Appendix Table A3: Technical Expertise in Two Large Lobbying Firms (cont.)
                                                                                                   Issue-
                                                                                                  specific Registered
        Firm             Employee name               Position                    Issue        Bar Training  lobbyist
Patton Boggs LLP   Bell, Chris              Of Counsel                clean technology         1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Chajet, Henry            Partner                   clean technology         1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Driver, Michael          Partner                   clean technology         1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Farber, David            Partner                   clean technology         1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Forest, Carl             Partner                   clean technology         1      1        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Frank, Michele           Partner                   clean technology         1      0        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Graziano, James          Partner                   clean technology         1      1        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Greene, Joshua           Partner                   clean technology         1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Harris, Laurence         Senior Counsel            clean technology         1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Horn, Robert             Partner                   clean technology         1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Johnson, Gregory         Partner                   clean technology         1      0        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Kelly, Suedeen           Partner                   clean technology         1      0        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Mayer, David             Partner                   clean technology         1      0        0
Patton Boggs LLP   McIntosh, Carolyn        Partner                   clean technology         1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Passaic, Joseph          Partner                   clean technology         1      0        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Ryan, Deborah            Partner                   clean technology         1      0        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Savit, Mark              Partner                   clean technology         1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Stewart, Scott           Partner                   clean technology         1      0        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Witt, Kenneth            Partner                   clean technology         1      0        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Chambers, Scott          Partner                   drugs/biologics          1      1        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Herbert, Toni-Junell     Partner                   drugs/biologics          1      1        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Nuttall, Carey           Associate                 drugs/biologics          1      0        0
Patton Boggs LLP   Pape, Stuart             Partner                   drugs/biologics          1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Rubin, Paul              Partner                   drugs/biologics          1      0        1
Patton Boggs LLP   Shanks, Mark             Partner                   drugs/biologics          1      1        1
                                                                      medical devices and
Patton Boggs LLP   Nuttall, Carey           Associate                 diagnostics              1     0         0
                                                                      medical devices and
Patton Boggs LLP   Pape, Stuart             Partner                   diagnostics              1     0         1
                                                                      medical devices and
Patton Boggs LLP   Rubin, Paul              Partner                   diagnostics              1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Kelly, Suedeen           Partner                   nuclear                  1     0         0
Patton Boggs LLP   Lessy, Roy               Partner                   nuclear                  1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Allard, Nicholas         Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Arbuckle, J. Gordon      Partner                   smart grid               1     0         0
Patton Boggs LLP   Barton, Betty            Public Policy Advisor     smart grid               0     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Besozzi, Paul            Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Cetta, Jennifer          Associate                 smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Didden, Carly            Associate                 smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Driver, Michael          Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Ellison, Mark            Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Farber, David            Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Greene, Joshua           Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Johnson, Gregory         Partner                   smart grid               1     0         0
Patton Boggs LLP   Jolivert, Meredith       Associate                 smart grid               1     0         0
Patton Boggs LLP   Kelly, Suedeen           Partner                   smart grid               1     0         0
Patton Boggs LLP   Krayem, Norma            Senior Policy Advisor     smart grid               0     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Lodge, Deborah           Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Martin, Kevin            Partner                   smart grid               1     0         0
Patton Boggs LLP   McIntosh, Carolyn        Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Moran, Janet             Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Richter, Jennifer        Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Talesnick, Alan          Partner                   smart grid               1     0         0
Patton Boggs LLP   Turner, Jeffrey          Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   Voorhees, John           Partner                   smart grid               1     0         1
Patton Boggs LLP   White, Eric              Partner                   smart grid               1     0         0
                                                                      technology and
Patton Boggs LLP   Allard, Nicholas         Partner                   communications           1     0         1
                                                                      technology and
Patton Boggs LLP   Berry, Matthew           Partner                   communications           1     0         0
                                                                      technology and
Patton Boggs LLP   Besozzi, Paul            Partner                   communications           1     0         1
                          Appendix Table A3: Technical Expertise in Two Large Lobbying Firms (cont.)
                                                                                                                Issue-
                                                                                                               specific Registered
       Firm               Employee name                     Position                   Issue               Bar Training  lobbyist
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Bright, William              Public Policy Advisor      communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Cetta, Jennifer              Associate                  communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Desai, Monica                Partner                    communications                 1     0         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Didden, Carly                Associate                  communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Ellison, Mark                Partner                    communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Forest, Carl                 Partner                    communications                 1     1         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Gavin, Stephen Diaz          Partner                    communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Graziano, James              Partner                    communications                 1     1         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Hager, Robert                Partner                    communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Harris, Laurence             Senior Counsel             communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Ireland, Kathleen            Public Policy Counselor    communications                 0     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Kim, Hwan                    Partner                    communications                 1     0         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     King, Ryan                   Associate                  communications                 1     0         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Lane, Margaret               Senior Paralegal           communications                 0     0         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Lodge, Deborah               Partner                    communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Martin, Kevin                Partner                    communications                 1     0         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Moran, Janet                 Partner                    communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Reeder, James                Senior Counsel             communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Reisenfeld, Kenneth          Partner                    communications                 1     0         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Richter, Jennifer            Partner                    communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Sachs, Lesley Bowling        Associate                  communications                 1     0         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Stolbach, Richard            Partner                    communications                 1     0         0
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Turner, Jeffrey              Partner                    communications                 1     0         1
                                                                             technology and
Patton Boggs LLP     Yarowsky, Jonathan           Partner                    communications                 1     0         1

Notes: Employee listings and biographies as of November 2010. Bar indicates bar associaion membership.
Issue-specific training indicates the academic or professional technical background, including military.
Reference web pages: http://www.pattonboggs.com/attorneys/List.aspx and http://www.cassidy.com/team/
Appendix A1: Lobbying Report Issue List

ACC Accounting                                HCR Health Issues
ADV Advertising                               HOU Housing
AER Aerospace                                 IMM Immigration
AGR Agriculture                               IND Indian/Native American Affairs
ALC Alcohol & Drug Abuse                      INS Insurance
ANI Animals                                   LBR Labor Issues/Antitrust/ Workplace
APP Apparel/Clothing Industry/Textiles        LAW Law Enforcement/Crime/ Criminal Justice
ART Arts/Entertainment                        MAN Manufacturing
AUT Automotive Industry                       MAR Marine/Maritime/ Boating/Fisheries
AVI Aviation/Aircraft/ Airlines               MIA Media (Information/ Publishing)
BAN Banking                                   MED Medical/Disease Research/ Clinical Labs
BNK Bankruptcy                                MMM Medicare/Medicaid
BEV Beverage Industry                         MON Minting/Money/ Gold Standard

BUD Budget/Appropriations                     NAT Natural Resources
CHM Chemicals/Chemical Industry               PHA Pharmacy
CIV Civil Rights/Civil Liberties              POS Postal
CAW Clean Air & Water (Quality)               RRR Railroads
CDT Commodities (Big Ticket)                  RES Real Estate/Land Use/Conservation
COM Communications/ Broadcasting/Radio/TV     REL Religion
CPI Computer Industry                         RET Retirement
CSP Consumer Issues/Safety/ Protection        ROD Roads/Highway
CON Constitution                              SCI Science/Technology
CPT Copyright/Patent/ Trademark               SMB Small Business
DEF Defense                                   SPO Sports/Athletics
DOC District of Columbia                      TAX Taxation/Internal Revenue Code
DIS Disaster Planning/Emergencies             TEC Telecommunications

ECN Economics/Economic Development            TOB Tobacco
EDU Education                                 TOR Torts
ENG Energy/Nuclear                            TRD Trade (Domestic & Foreign)
ENV Environmental/Superfund                   TRA Transportation
FAM Family Issues/Abortion/ Adoption          TOU Travel/Tourism
FIR Firearms/Guns/ Ammunition                 TRU Trucking/Shipping
FIN Financial Inst.s/Investments/Securities   URB Urban Development/ Municipalities
FOO Food Industry (Safety, Labeling, etc.)    UNM Unemployment
FOR Foreign Relations                         UTI Utilities
FUE Fuel/Gas/Oil                              VET Veterans
GAM Gaming/Gambling/ Casino                   WAS Waste (hazard/solid/interstate/nuclear)
GOV Government Issues                         WEL Welfare
Appendix A2: Sample Lobbying Report
Appendix A3: Chamber, Congressional Committee, Lobbying Issues
_________________________________
House, Agriculture: AGR, FOO, TOB, ANI, CDT
House, Appropriations: BUD
House, Armed Services (103rd, 109-110th): AER, DEF, HOM, INT
House, National Security (104th - 108th): AER, DEF, HOM, INT
House, Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs (103rd): HOU, FIN, INS, RES, MON, BAN, BNK, URB, GAM
House, Banking and Financial Services (104th - 106th): HOU, FIN, INS, RES, TUE, BAN, BNK, URB, GAM
House, Financial Services (106th - 110th): HOU, FIN, INS, RES, WED, BAN, BNK, URB, GAM
House, Budget: BUD
House, District of Columbia (103rd): DOC
House, Education and Labor (103rd, 110th): EDU, FAM, LBR, RET, ALC, WEL, REL, ART
House, Economic and Educational Opportunities (104th): EDU, FAM, LBR, RET, ALC, WEL, REL, ART
House, Education and the Workplace (105th - 109th): EDU, FAM, LBR, RET, ALC, WEL, REL, ART
House, Energy and Commerce (103rd, 107th - 110th): ACC, CSP, ENG, TEC, FOO, FUE, ALC, MMM, MED,
ENV, SPO, TRD, TOU, HCR, CAW, WAS, UTI, PHA, MAN, ADV, MIA, CPI, COM, CDT, CHM, BEV, AUT,
APP
House, Commerce (104th - 106th): ACC, CSP, ENG, TEC, FOO, FUE, ALC, MMM, MED, ENV, SPO, TRD,
TOU, HCR, CAW, WAS, UTI, PHA, MAN, ADV, MIA, CPI, COM, CDT, CHM, BEV, AUT, APP
House, Foreign Affairs (103rd, 110th): FOR, ECN, REL
House, International Relations (104th - 109th): FOR, ECN, REL
House, Government Operations (103rd): GOV, POS, DOC
House, Government Reform and Oversight (104th - 109th): GOV, POS, DOC
House, Oversight and Government Reform (110th): GOV, POS, DOC
House, House Administration (103rd, 109-110th): GOV
House, House Oversight (104th - 108th): GOV
House, Judiciary: LAW, CON, CPT, IMM, CIV, TOR, FIR
House, Merchant Marine and Fisheries (103rd): MAR
House, Natural Resources (103rd, 110th): MAR, NAT, IND, RES, GAM, CDT
House, Resources (104h - 109th): APR, NAT, IND, RES, GAM, CDT
House, Post Office and Civil Service (103rd): POS
House, Public Works and Transportation (103rd): MAR, RRR, ROD, TRA, TRU, DIS
House, Transportation and Infrastructure (104th - 110th): APR, RRR, ROD, TRA, TRU, DIS
House, Rules, GOV
House, Science, Space, and Technology (103rd): ENG, SCI, AER, AVI, CPI
House, Science (104th - 109th): ENG, SCI, AER, AVI, CPI
House, Science and Technology (110th): ENG, SCI, AER, AVI, CPI
House, Small Business: SMB
House, Standards of Official Conduct: GOV
House, Veterans Affairs: VET
House, Ways and Means: UNM, TRD, TAX, WEL, RET
House, Intelligence (Select): INT, HOM
House, Homeland Security (Select 107th and 108th; Standing, 109th-110th): HOM
House, Energy Independence and Global Warming (Select, 110th): ENG, FUE, CDT, CAW, ENV
House, Investigate the Voting Irregularities of August 2, 2007 (Select, 110th): GOV
Senate, Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry: AGR, FOO, TOB, ANI, CDT
Senate, Appropriations: BUD
Senate, Armed Services: AER, DEF, HOM, INT
Senate, Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs: HOU, URB, INS, RES, GAM, BAN, CDT, FIN, TRD, ECN,
MON, BNK, ACC
Senate, Budget: BUD
Senate, Commerce, Science, and Transportation: AVI, ADV, AER, APP, AUT, COM, CPI, CSP, MAN, MAR,
MIA, RRR, ROD, SCI, TEC, SPO, PHA, TRD, TRA, TOU, TRU, CHM, BEV
Senate, Energy and Natural Resources: ENG, NAT, FUE, WAS, CDT, UTI
Senate, Environment and Public Works: ENV, DIS, CAW, ROD, ECN, WAS
Senate, Finance: UNM, TRD, TAX, WEL, RET, MMM
Senate, Foreign Relations: FOR, ECN, REL
Senate, Governmental Affairs (103rd to 108th): GOV, HOM, INT, POS
Senate, Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (109th): GOV, HOM, INT, POS
Senate, Judiciary: LAW, CON, CPT, IMM, CIV, TOR, FIR
Senate, Labor and Human Resources (103rd to 106th): EDU, FAM, LBR, RET, ALC, WEL, REL, ART, HCR,
MED
Senate, Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (107th to 109th): EDU, FAM, LBR, RET, ALC, WEL, REL,
ART, HCR, MED
Senate, Rules and Administration: GOV
Senate, Small Business (103rd to 107th): SMB
Senate, Small Business and Entrepreneurship (108th and 109th): SMB
Senate, Veterans Affairs: VET
Senate, Aging (Special): RET, HCR
Senate, Intelligence (Select): INT, HOM
Senate, Ethics (Select): GOV
Senate, Indian Affairs (Select): IND, GAM
Joint, Library: GOV
Joint, Printing: GOV
Joint, Taxation: TAX
Joint, Economic: ECN
