                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SECURITIZATION WITHOUT ADVERSE SELECTION:
                                THE CASE OF CLOS

                                        Efraim Benmelech
                                         Jennifer Dlugosz
                                         Victoria Ivashina

                                       Working Paper 16766
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16766


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2011




We thank Paul Gompers, Jeremy Stein, Greg Nini, Gary Gorton, Charlotte Ostergaard, James Vickery,
Paul Willen, seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Board,
Harvard University, UNC, London School of Economics, Wharton, University of Florida, Berkeley,
NERA, the World Bank, the Brattle Group, and participants at the American Finance Association annual
meeting, the Yale Conference on Financial Crisis, and Financial Intermediation Society Annual Meeting
for helpful comments. Jessica Dias and Kate Waldock provided excellent research assistance. We
acknowledge research support from the Division of Research at Harvard Business School. We are
especially grateful to Markit for assisting us with CDS data. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by Efraim Benmelech, Jennifer Dlugosz, and Victoria Ivashina. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Securitization without Adverse Selection: The Case of CLOs
Efraim Benmelech, Jennifer Dlugosz, and Victoria Ivashina
NBER Working Paper No. 16766
February 2011
JEL No. G0,G00,G2,G20

                                             ABSTRACT

For nearly a decade prior to the collapse of structured finance markets in late 2007, securitization by
collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) was a key source of capital for the high-yield corporate loan
market. In this paper, we investigate whether securitization was associated with risky lending in the
corporate loan market by examining the performance of individual loans held by CLOs. We employ
two different datasets that identify loan holdings for a large set of CLOs and find that adverse selection
problems in corporate loan securitizations are less severe than commonly believed. Controlling for
borrowers’ credit quality, securitized loans perform no worse, and under some criteria even better,
than unsecuritized loans of comparable credit quality. However, within a CLO portfolio, loans originated
by the bank that acts as the CLO underwriter underperform the rest of the loan portfolio. Overall, we
argue that the securitization of corporate loans is fundamentally different from securitization of other
assets classes because securitized loans are fractions of syndicated loans. Therefore, mechanisms used
to align incentives in a lending syndicate also reduce adverse selection in the choice of CLO collateral.


Efraim Benmelech                                    Victoria Ivashina
Harvard University                                  Harvard Business School
Department of Economics                             Baker Library 233
Littauer 233                                        Soldiers Field
Cambridge, MA 02138                                 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                            and NBER
effi_benmelech@harvard.edu                          vivashina@hbs.edu

Jennifer Dlugosz
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20551
jennifer.l.dlugosz@frb.gov
        In the third quarter of 2007, structured finance markets ground to a halt after nearly a

decade of phenomenal growth. Mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) and Collateralized Debt

Obligations (CDOs) suffered a major blow to their reputation after being tied to a record-

breaking wave of downgrades and bank losses.1 Both academics and practitioners have blamed

securitization for encouraging risky lending and for being responsible, in part, for the recent

credit crisis. In particular, several empirical studies of MBSs have shown that securitization

resulted in lower lending standards, which led to adverse selection in the collateral pools

underlying these products.2

        The focus of our paper is collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), or CDOs backed by

corporate loans. We analyze performance of loans purchased by CLOs between 1997 and 2007

and, contrary to the findings for the other forms of securitization, we find no evidence that

securitized corporate loans were riskier than similar loans that were not securitized. In fact, we

find that securitized loans performed marginally better than unsecuritized loans controlling for

firm characteristics. While our findings can be viewed as a negative result—we find that

securitization is not statistically significant in predicting poor performance—there are important

positive results in our paper: Adverse selection is not an inevitable consequence of securitization,

and not all securitized markets are the same.

        One explanation for the different findings between papers that study mortgage

securitization and our paper has to do with the fact that corporate loans are only partially

securitized. Corporate loans are significantly larger than mortgages and, therefore, they are

typically syndicated; that is, they are originated by a lead bank which retains a fraction of the

1
  See “S&P may cut $12 billion of subprime mortgage bonds,” Bloomberg, 27 March, 2007; “Moody's may cut $5
billion of Subprime-backed CDOs,” Bloomberg, 11 July, 2007; “In UBS case, emails show CDO worries,” WSJ 11
September, 2009.
2
  See for example Keys, Mukherjee, Seru and Vig (2010), Drucker and Mayer (2008), and Nadauld and Sherlund
(2009).
loan, and sells the rest to other banks and institutional investors. Fractions of the same

underlying loan are simultaneously held by multiple CLOs as well as by other institutional

investors and banks, whereas mortgages tend to be sold in one piece to MBS issuers.3 In

addition, the bank that originated the loan typically retains a fraction of the loan on its balance

sheet and each underlying loan is rated. Large corporate loans, therefore, involve a greater

number of formal and informal screeners whose reputation is at stake and the loan originator has

“skin in the game”.

           There is a large body of literature that looks at the mechanisms that mitigate asymmetric

information associated with corporate loan sales; notably, Gorton and Pennacchi (1995), Dennis

and Mullineaux (2000), Sufi (2007), Drucker and Puri (2009), and Ivashina (2009). Overall, the

lead bank’s share and the lead’s reputation are the key mechanisms for reducing information

asymmetry between the originating bank and other lenders in loan syndication. Thus, syndication

before securitization makes CLOs unique.

           Is it trivial then that securitization of syndicated corporate loans is adverse-selection

proof? Judging by the sudden contraction in CLO issuance (along with other structured issuance)

in the third quarter of 2007 and the absence of a subsequent rebound, the answer is no (see

Figure 1). A simultaneous disconnect between yields on existing CLO tranches and corporate

bonds with similar ratings suggests that the market perceived the underlying problem as specific

to structured finance. Indeed, the disappearance of CLO issuance coincided with the widespread

fear that strong demand for securitizable assets may have led to risky lending in the corporate

sector.4


3
 Throughout the paper we refer to loans with CLO investors as securitized loans or loans sold to CLO investors.
4
 See for example “Seeds of Credit Crunch Grow in LBO Loan Market,” Reuters, 19 June 2007: In the old days of
relationship banking, banks relied on credit quality control and huge balance sheets to ride out any problems, but
CLO investors may be more short-term oriented. Lack of credit quality control by some managers of CLOs is

                                                                                                                     2
         To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to provide a comprehensive analysis

of the performance of securitized corporate loans. Our results are consistent with Shivdasani and

Wang (2009) who analyzed the effect of CDO issuance on the supply of funding for leveraged

buyouts (LBOs). Based on the borrowers’ characteristics, the deals’ financing structure, and the

loan pricing Shivdasani and Wang (2009) conclude that an increase in securitization did not lead

to riskier LBOs. The contribution of our study is that we observe the underlying CLO collateral,

this enables us to look at a broader set of corporate transactions affected by securitization and to

investigate directly the effects of securitization on loan underwriting standards.

         Our findings have broad implications for the design of securitized assets and provide

evidence in support of the spirit of the recent financial legislation. In an effort to reduce agency

problems in securitization going forward, Section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform

and Consumer Protection Act requires federal agencies to develop credit risk retention

requirements for securitizers and originators. Our paper provides insight into the effectiveness of

risk retention mechanisms by studying a sector of the structured finance market where risk

retention by originators existed prior to the new legislation.5

         The message that not all securitizations are the same also has more immediate relevance.

In the years preceding the financial crisis, CLOs played a key role in financing billions of dollars

in loans around the world (Figure 2). According to the Loan Syndications and Trading

particularly frightening to veteran private equity investors. “What all of this will show - and it will show more as
CLOs become more popular - is that risk management has not been very well practiced,” said billionaire financier
Wilbur Ross, founder of private equity firm WL Ross & Co. Also, “Easy Money: Behind the Buyout Surge, a Debt
Market Booms -- CLOs Spark Worries of Volatility and Risk; Loan Standards Loosen,” WSJ, 26 June 2007:
Investors searching for higher yields have put so much money into CLOs that even weak companies can get loans at
relatively low interest rates…These days, banks that arrange large buyout financings hold on to very little of the
loans themselves. Bank underwriting standards have slipped as banks have become mere intermediaries.
5
  While our findings suggest that risk retention may help reduce agency problems in securitization, there are dangers
to the current one-size-fits-all approach to risk retention requirements described in the Dodd-Frank Act, which does
not account for differences in the securitization process across sectors. For example, to the extent that risk retention
by originators already exists in the market for syndicated corporate loans, imposing additional retention
requirements on top of that could have an unintentionally restrictive effect on the supply of loans to large
companies.

                                                                                                                       3
Association (LSTA), as of the end of October 2010, CLOs were holding nearly half of all

outstanding non-investment grade loans in the U.S. Roughly 80% of these loans ($400 billion)

are expected to mature before 2015 and many of these borrowers will seek refinancing.

Therefore, it is pivotal to understand whether the contraction in CLO issuance was a response to

fundamentals or the result of a structural shift in demand for securitized assets.

        It is worth noting that many CLOs were downgraded or placed on negative credit watch

during the crisis.6 These actions were triggered by downgrades in the underlying loans held by

CLOs, since rating agency models primarily use the ratings of collateral assets to estimate their

probability of default. However, despite widespread downgrades, there were very few defaults

on CLO tranches. According to the LSTA, less than 1% of CLOs rated by Moody’s defaulted.

We should stress that our findings do not imply that securitized loans should perform well in

absolute terms, but rather that securitized loans should not perform worse than other non-

investment grade loans syndicated to non-banks. This leaves open the possibility that all

leveraged loans are of an intrinsically worse quality than believed at the time of loan origination.

Also, by design, CLOs primarily acquire non-investment grade securities so the securitized pool

of loans should be expected to underperform the overall population of loans.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The first section highlights the key

informational frictions involved in the securitization of corporate loans. Section two describes

the data. Section three presents the empirical results, and section four concludes.




6
 Between December 2008 and December 2009, 65% of CLO tranches rated Aaa by Moody’s were downgraded,
most of them (75%) to Aa. Lower-rated tranches were downgraded at a higher frequency (Moody’s CLO Interest
newsletter, April 2010).

                                                                                                             4
         I.       Collateralized Loan Obligations and Adverse Selection


         Our results are organized around two hypotheses that are related to two central channels

that could lead to adverse selection in the quality of CLO collateral:7


         H1: Syndicated loans bought by CLOs (securitized loans) are worse quality than

unsecuritized loans (extensive margin).


         H2: Securitized loans arranged by the bank underwriting the CLO are worse quality than

other securitized loans within the same portfolio (intensive margin).


         A.       CLOs and the effects of securitization (H1)

         The key friction underlying the securitization process is the information asymmetry about

loan quality. To structure a CLO, a collateral manager—typically an investment management

company—sets up a bankruptcy-remote special purpose vehicle (SPV).8 It then acquires a

portfolio of corporate loans, engages with the underwriter and credit rating agency to both

structure and rate the deal, and issues securities to investors backed by the principal and interest

payments from the loans.9 Because multiple agents are involved, there is an information cascade

between the originating banks, the CLO arranger and the ultimate CLO investors10, where the

originating bank is best informed and ultimate CLO investors are worst informed about loan


7
  Notice that the second hypothesis—intensive margin— is conditional on securitization.
8
  A bank can structure a CLO backed by originated loans to reduce its risk exposure. However, the Securities
Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA) reports that in 2007, 97% of corporate loans CLOs were
structured by financial institutions that did not originate loans and instead acquired pieces of loans at syndication or
in the secondary market with the purpose of securitization. This type of CLO—in which the issuer did not originate
the assets—is referred to as an “arbitrage CLO.”
9
  These CLOs, also known as “cash-flow” or “cash” CLOs, are the focus of our paper.
10
   When talking about lenders or investors in loans, we use “CLO investor” to refer to special purpose vehicles
(SPVs) that directly invest in syndicated loans. “Ultimate CLO investor” denotes companies that purchase CLO
notes (e.g., insurance companies that used to buy CLO AAA tranches). In the data, we do not observe ultimate CLO
investors. We classify loan as securitized if it was acquired by an SPV.


                                                                                                                       5
quality. (The different steps and agents involved in the securitization process are illustrated in

Figure 3.)

        Corporate loans acquired by a CLO are typically syndicated. The key mechanisms that

generally ameliorate asymmetric information between the lead bank and syndicate participants

are the lead’s reputational concerns and the implicit requirement that the lead bank retain a share

of the loan on its balance sheet. It is possible that lead’s incentives to conduct due diligence and

monitor the borrower have become weaker due to broader syndication resulting from large CLO

demand. For example, Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010) show that lead share fell dramatically

during the 2004-2007 credit expansion. In addition, asymmetric information between the CLO

manager and its investors could also lead to adverse selection of collateral.

        CLOs differ from other institutions that participate in the high yield loan market in

several ways, which can result in CLO managers having weaker incentives to screen and monitor

than other market participants. First, in the CLO managers’ compensation is largely independent

of the collateral performance. CLO managers receive a base fee on the order of 40-50 basis

points per year, typically senior to all notes (Tavakoli, 2002). CLO managers are not required to

hold equity in the deal, but there are cases where they own a share of the equity, receive an

incentive fee that is subordinate to equity, or have a partial claim on the residual interest.11

Judging from a random sample of CLO rating reports, we estimate that CLO managers have

equity-like incentives in approximately 50% of deals. However, a back of the envelope




11
  An example of an incentive management fee taken from Benmelech and Dlugosz’s (2009) sample is “The
manager receives an incentive fee after equity has achieved and IRR of 14%”. An example of a manager having a
claim on residual interest without having made an equity investment is “Once equityholders have achieved a 14%
IRR, residual interest proceeds are split 80/20 between equityholders and the manager.”

                                                                                                                 6
calculation suggests that, even in these cases, base management fees are an order of magnitude

larger than incentive fees and, therefore, that CLO management is primarily a volume business.12

         A second distinctive feature of CLOs (as opposed to banks or other investors in loans) is

that their cost of funding is largely determined by rating agency models. The models used by the

credit rating agencies to evaluate CLO portfolios and rate deals rely primarily on loan ratings to

assess the default risk of the underlying collateral. As a result, CLO managers could select worse

quality loans because they exert relatively less effort on collateral selection.13 (Within a given

rating class, the CLO manager is also incentivized to select loans with a higher spread, however

we control for spread throughout the paper.)

         There are some constraints that might restrict CLO manager’s risk taking. In particular,

downgrades in the collateral can force the manager to pay down notes early, thus forgoing an

annual fee. Therefore, a CLO manager cares about deterioration in the ratings of the collateral

assets because too many downgrades could lead to deal termination. The manager also faces a

reputational constraint.14 When assets in the collateral pool miss payments or default, the deal’s

equityholders bear the loss. If equityholders do not earn an adequate return, the manager may

have difficulty selling the equity tranche in future deals. Both of these constraints should

attenuate the conflict of interest between the CLO manager and ultimate CLO investors in the

selection of the collateral. However, these mechanisms are not unique to corporate loans
12
   Suppose a CLO manager earns a base fee of 50 basis points per year and has a claim to 20% of residual interest
after equity achieves an IRR of 14%. According to Fabozzi, Goodman and Lucas (2006, p. 370), 18% is an
optimistic estimate of the return on CLO equity. Given an average CLO size of $500 million and an average equity
tranche worth 10% of deal par, the annual base fee would be $2.5 million (0.005*500) while the annual incentive fee
would be $0.4 million (0.2*(.18-.14)(0.10*500)).
13
   At least one rating agency model primarily used rating, maturity, seniority, jurisdiction, and industry to compute
an expected loss distribution for the underlying collateral. Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009) and Coval, Jurek, and
Stafford (2009) provide extensive detail on rating models. Also see the testimony of Eric Baggesen, Senior
Investment Officer California Public Employees’ Retirement System before the House Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform on September 30, 2009.
14
   In 2008, S&P started to explicitly highlight managers’ experience and record as one of the mitigating factors in
addressing risks underlying CLO structure (e.g., S&P Harbourmaster CLO 11 B.V. Presale Report).


                                                                                                                   7
securitizations and given the evidence from mortgage securitizations, their effectiveness is

questionable.

           We should point out that in addition to CLOs there are other lenders who participate in

the lending syndicate. This means that these other lenders would need to internalize the cost of

adverse selection for a given loan. Why would they be willing to do that? For many non-CLO

investors, participating in the syndicated loan market could lead to other sources of revenue. For

example, “…the spread offered to pro rata investors (banks) is important, but even more

important, in most cases, is the amount of other, fee-driven business a bank can capture by taking

a piece of a loan” (Standard and Poor’s, 2006.) The same argument is likely to be true for

insurance companies. On the other hand, hedge funds and mutual funds could be willing to take

higher because they could use information obtained in the loan market to trade in other securities

(Ivashina and Sun, 2007). In general, the syndicated loan market is a private market and access

to deal flow might be another reason why investors would be willing to pay an additional cost on

some loans.


           B.       Effects of underwriting in securitization (H2)

           In addition to the collateral manager, a CLO has an underwriter (typically a bank)

responsible for screening the loan portfolio and working with the rating agencies to get CLO

tranches rated, priced, and allocated. In essence, the role of the underwriter in CLO deals is

similar to the role of the underwriter in stock or bond issuance.15 As compensation, the

underwriter receives a fee on the notional value of the deal. While the collateral manager has

formal authority over asset selection, the underwriter may exert influence over collateral choice.

Although the presence of an underwriter should improve the screening of the underlying


15
     CLOs are typically underwritten on a best efforts basis (LSTA, 2007).

                                                                                                8
collateral, underwriting banks may use this channel to sell fractions of their own riskier loans to

CLOs. Put differently, even if CLOs do not end up with worse quality loans than other loan

investors on average, they may end up with worse quality loans when they buy them from the

underwriter of their deal. We estimate that about 10% of loans sold to CLOs were originated by

the CLO underwriter.



        II.      Data

        A.       Sample construction

        To test the first hypothesis we employ two different samples. The first sample—which we

will refer to as the “at-origination sample”—includes loans originated between 1997 and May

2007. In this sample, we determine whether a loan was securitized using the names of CLO

SPVs who are part of the lending syndicate based on the information available at the time of loan

origination and loan amendment.16 The second sample—which we will refer to as the “portfolio

sample”—is constructed using a proprietary source that enables us to observe the complete

portfolios of a comprehensive set of CLOs. These data consist of monthly CLO trustee reports

covering the period between July 2008 and January 2010. Loans that appear in the CLOs’

portfolios are labeled as securitized. Below, we describe the data and discuss potential selection

issues in more detail.


                 A.1. At-origination sample

        To identify loans that were purchased by CLOs at origination we start with the sample of

loans to U.S. companies (public and private) reported in Reuters’ DealScan and containing Term


16
  Investors that buy tranches of CLOs (ultimate CLO investors) would never appear in the lending syndicate,
because they do not hold a direct claim again the loan.


                                                                                                              9
loan B or C facilities.17 We also include all term-loans that have a credit rating and have non-

lending institutions, such as hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds, distressed funds, or

structured financial vehicles, in the lending syndicate. Generally speaking, there are two distinct

investor groups in the loan market: banks (the traditional investors) and institutional investors.

Institutional investors, including CLOs, primarily participate in the non-investment grade

(leveraged) segment of the loan market and compete for the same loans.

         We use two methods to tie loans to specific CLOs. First, we search though the list of

lenders at the time of syndication available through Dealscan. The identity of the investors

(names of SPVs) is crosschecked with the list of CLOs constructed by combining information

from: (i) Reuters CDO pipeline, (ii) Standard&Poor’s (S&P) Quarterly CDO Deal List, and (iii)

S&P’s RatingsDirect.18

         The second method we use to link loans to CLOs is to look into purchases of loans in the

secondary market using information from loan amendments. We use both primary and secondary

loan market transactions instead of focusing only on primary market data since loans can also be

acquired on the secondary market.19 This is especially important for the control sample; not

being able to observe CLO investors perfectly might lead us to misclassify securitized loans as

17
   Term loans are installment loans. Term loans B and C are specifically structured for nonbank, institutional
investors. The term loan B or C label formally refers to a facility within a loan package. However, after CLO
investors are identified we collapse the data to one observation per loan. For the regression analysis, in case of
multiple facilities, we look at the largest facility for spread, performance pricing provision, and maturity and we
control for the overall loan size.
18
   The S&P Deal List and RatingsDirect have substantial overlap but there are some transactions that appear
exclusively in one or the other. The Deal List summarizes all global CDOs rated by S&P from September 1994 to
March 2007. RatingsDirect is a real-time database of the agency’s ratings which allows us to identify more current
deals but it drops information on CLOs when they mature or have their ratings withdrawn. Reuters tracks CLOs that
invest in loans more generally, regardless of what agency rated them, and is available from 2006 forward. Having
collected a comprehensive list of CLOs originated over the sample period enables us to check the full list of non-
bank investors reported in DealScan and not just those that contain “CDO” or “CLO” in the name. For example, we
were able are to classify “WhiteHorse III, Ltd.” and “Stone Tower VII” as CLO investors although it is not directly
implied by the names.
19
   Information available at loan origination might also under-report securitization if loans are warehoused (ie,
temporarily held by banks or other institutions with the intent of selling them to a CLO). In this case, the original
syndicate might not list CLO investors, despite the fact that the loans would ultimately be allocated to a CLO.

                                                                                                                  10
unsecuritized, biasing the results against finding differences in performance between the two

groups. We mitigate this concern by detecting warehousing and secondary market purchases

using loan amendments.20 A material loan amendment, such as a change in the spread, pricing

grid, repayment schedule, maturity, or loan amount requires the unanimous approval of all

lenders.21 In such cases, the signatures and identities of all the lenders appear at the bottom of

the document. We collect the first material amendment for each loan in our sample and search

the signers for CLOs. Loan amendments are available to us from 1997 through 2007;

accordingly, we constrain the overall loan sample to this period.

        We classify loans as securitized if there is at least one CLO investor in the lending

syndicate at the time of loan origination or loan amendment. The final sample contains 487

loans, 302 which we classify as securitized or having CLO investors.22 The set of unsecuritized

loans is conditional on having a material loan-amendment, which explains the relatively small

sample size. 185 loans did not have CLO investors at origination or at the time of amendment so

we classify them as unsecuritized; these loans constitute our control group. For 104 of the 302

securitized loans (34%), we detected additional CLO investors through amendments in addition

to those picked up by DealScan. However, of these 302 securitized loans, 292 (97%) had at least

one CLO investor at origination according to DealScan. In other words, most loans that appear

in CLOs at the time of amendment also had at least one CLO investor at origination, which

should diminish concerns about under-identifying securitization because of warehousing.

        We are also aware of potential selection bias concerns. Tests of the first hypothesis are

based on a comparison of securitized (treatment group) and unsecuritized (control group) loans.

20
   Amendments are typically disclosed as a part of SEC filings (see Ivashina and Sun, 2007).
21
   A discussion on the requirements of the syndicate voting and public disclosure of the amendments can be found in
Ivashina and Sun (2007). On average, loans have a material amendment 7.5 months after the loan origination.
22
   To be conservative, we drop 46 unsecuritized loans from the sample that showed up in trustee reports of the
second sample.

                                                                                                                11
To ensure that loans in the control group were not sold to a CLO in the secondary market, our

control group was constrained to loans with amendments.23 Yet, our treatment group includes

loans with and without loan amendments, as long as they had a CLO investor at the origination.

If amended and un-amended loans are fundamentally different then our results may be biased.

However, it is unclear whether the presence of an amendment reflects positive or negative

news.24 If observable amendments are a reflection of successful renegotiations and loans without

amendments in fact reflect failed renegotiations, then our control group is on average of better

quality. Alternatively, if most of the firms soliciting amendments and receiving amendments are

troubled firms, then our treatment group is on average of better quality. We address this issue

empirically by re-examining the results in the subsample where treatment and control group were

constrained to the sample with loan amendments; the results do not change our conclusions.

         Overall, we identify 555 unique CLO investors corresponding to 302 securitized loans.

On average, our sample contains 6 loans per CLO. The median size of a CLO issued during that

period was $460 million (Benmelech and Dlugosz, 2009) and the average minimum investment

in the institutional loan market is $5 million, hence, as a lower bound, six loans represent

roughly 6% of the collateral pool.25 While the at-origination sample provides only a partial look

at each CLO’s collateral pool, we identify some loans for approximately 60% of outstanding

U.S. CLOs.


                  A.2. Portfolio sample


23
   This is a conservative criterion because all but ten loans that had CLO investors at the loan amendment also had
CLO investors at the loan origination; that is, presence of a CLO investor at the loan origination is a reliable proxy
of whether the loan is securitized.
24
   Ivashina and Sun (2007) find that on average abnormal return on the stock or secondary loan market around loan
amendments is zero as a result of offsetting reactions within the sample.
25
   Many CLOs are not 100% invested or hold bonds in addition to corporate loans. Most CLOs are structured as
‘revolving pools’ that allow the manager to turnover 10 to 20% of the collateral per year for the first five to seven
years of the typical twelve year life of a CLO.

                                                                                                                     12
        The second sample used in the analysis comes from Creditflux, a leading global

information source for credit trading and investing which maintains a comprehensive database of

CDOs and credit hedge funds. We have the entire Creditflux CLO database, which includes

monthly trustee reports detailing the complete investment portfolios for a large set of CLOs

covering the period between July 2008 and January 2010. We hand match the portfolio level data

to DealScan and Compustat. Matching to DealScan returns 2,297 unique U.S. corporate loans.

The sample covers 277 U.S. CLOs issued between 1999 and 2008. Using the total CLO volume

tracked by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), we estimate that

our sample covers 46% of CLOs issued between 2003 and 2007.26 (This is a lower-bound

estimate of coverage because the SIFMA statistics might include synthetic CLOs.) On the other

hand, comparing this sample to the one in Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009) indicates that the new

sample covers 65% of deals issued between 2003 and 2007. (This is likely to be an upper-bound

because Benmelech and Dlugosz only look at S&P rated vehicles.)

         In this sample, any loan that appears in a CLO’s portfolio is categorized as securitized.

As before, a sample of unsecuritized loans is drawn from the set of loans in Dealscan that have

Term Loans B and C facilities or are held by other institutional investors more broadly. We limit

the treatment and control groups to loans originated between January 2005 and July 2007 that

mature between 2010 and 2015 for two reasons.27 First, our CLO portfolio observations span the

period from 2008 to 2010. We could misclassify earlier loans as unsecuritized if they matured

before our CLO observations start.28 Second, the focus of our study is the performance of loans

that were originated with the intent of being sold to CLOs. Securitization (CLOs’ purchases of


26
   This assumes that the average CLO has a par value of $500 million.
27
   Focusing on a shorter horizon (2006 and 2007 loans) renders similar results.
28
   Less than 10% of loans originated in 2005-2007 have maturities beyond 2015. Most term loans have maturities of
5-7 years so these very long maturity loans may be outliers, or data entry errors.

                                                                                                              13
loans) in the corporate loan market is a continuous process as opposed to a one-shot deal as in

the MBS market. As we illustrate in the previous section, a loan that originally did not have CLO

investors might end up in a CLO portfolio later on. This is especially true for the period of 2008

and beyond. Over this period very few new loans were originated and many companies went

bankrupt, expanding CLOs’ penetration of the loan market. Thus, the potential challenge in the

portfolio sample is opposite of the one we face in the at-origination sample; we are concerned

that we could misclassify loans as securitized (type II error).


        B.       Summary statistics

        We begin by reporting descriptive statistics and tests of the first hypothesis for both the

at-origination sample and the portfolio sample. Table I, Panel A presents summary statistics on

the loans in both samples. Institutional loans are large loans made to large borrowers; the average

loan size is roughly $600 million and the average borrower had roughly $1.7 billion in sales at

the time of loan origination. Generally speaking, loans purchased by CLOs are non-investment

grade senior-secured loans with ratings in the BB or B range and spreads in the neighborhood of

300 basis points.29

        In comparing the two samples, it is important to keep in mind their relative differences.

The at-origination sample covers a longer period of time (loans originated 1997-2007 versus

2005-2007). However, it conditions on the presence of a loan amendment, which effectively

eliminates some smaller loans (the average loan in the at-origination sample is $560 million

while the average loan in the portfolio sample is $463 million). Table I, Panel B presents a more

extensive description of the borrowers, using Compustat data for the fiscal year ending prior to

29
  Benmelech and Dlugosz (2009) find that CLOs are typically backed by collateral pools with a weighted average
rating of BB-/B+/B. Many restrict the amount of securities rated below CCC+ to 5-7 percent of the pool, suggesting
that the average loan put in a CLO has a BB or B rating.


                                                                                                               14
loan origination. Looking at the portfolio sample, securitized loans and borrowers are larger than

their unsecuritized counterparts on average, but not significantly different on other dimensions.

In the at-origination sample, securitized loans are smaller (as a result of conditioning on

amendment) but borrowers are not significantly different in size. Securitized borrowers look

riskier on some dimensions, however, including leverage and interest coverage. Next we

examine whether loan and borrower characteristics predict securitization in a multivariate

setting.

                                                 [TABLE I]

           Table II examines whether ex-ante loan and borrower characteristics can predict

securitization; this repeats the analysis in Table I in a multivariate setting. We estimate a probit

model where the dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if a loan was securitized and zero

otherwise; the independent variables are loan and borrower characteristics at origination. Both

sets of results suggest that larger borrowers or larger loans are more likely to be sold to CLOs. In

the at-origination sample, a one standard deviation increase in the log of borrower assets (1.3) is

associated with a 7.8 percentage point increase in the probability of securitization. In the

portfolio sample, a one standard deviation increase in the log of loan size (1.3) is associated with

a 12 percentage point increase in the probability of securitization. In the portfolio sample,

various loan characteristics also predict securitization. LBO loans, debt repayment loans, and

loans with higher spreads are more likely to be sold to CLOs.

                                               [TABLE II]



           III.   Results

           A.     Hypothesis I: Does Securitization Predict Performance?



                                                                                                 15
         Since CLO collateral managers can observe ex-ante loan and borrower characteristics, the

results of the previous section do not necessarily suggest an information asymmetry problem. In

this section we test whether loans sold to CLOs are unobservably worse quality than loans sold

to other institutions. To do this, we examine whether securitization predicts future performance,

controlling for observables. The unit of observation for the analysis is a loan and performance is

measured around the loan origination date, controlling for observables just prior to origination.

We use three types of measures of borrower performance: (i) borrower accounting performance

as measured by return on assets and Z-score, (ii) credit rating changes corresponding to senior

secured debt (i.e., loan ratings), and (iii) changes in market-assessed probability of default as

measured by changes in senior debt CDS spreads.30

         Syndicated loans are usually senior secured debt and in that sense multiple measures that

we employ are good proxies for performance of syndicated loans and securitized loan facilities.

When a company receives a syndicated loan, typically no other loan with the same seniority can

be outstanding or issued later. Not all the facilities within a loan package are securitized (i.e.,

they can have different investors/lenders), but all the facilities are governed by the same loan

contract, they receive the same priority in repayment, and they are covered by the same covenant

structure.31 What affects the syndicated loan affects securitized facilities within the loan and vice

versa.

         Table III compares borrowers’ accounting performance around the loan origination date

depending on whether their loan was purchased by CLOs. Panel A focuses on return on assets

(ROA) and Panel B focuses on Z-score; both are industry-median adjusted at the 2-digit SIC

30
   Unfortunately, we do not have secondary loan price data. Looking at defaults would severely narrow our sample.
Recovery rate data is even scarcer.
31
   The exception to this rule are second-lien (subordinated) facilities, however these represent a very small faction of
the syndicated loans. Moreover, term loan B, are never second-lien.


                                                                                                                     16
code level. Accounting performance is the dependent variable in each regression and the key

explanatory variable is a dummy indicating whether the borrower’s loan was sold to a CLO

(Securitized).

           The at-origination sample includes loans originated between 1997 and May 2007. The

portfolio sample includes loans originated between January 2005 and July 2007. To make

coefficients comparable between the two samples we include a dummy indicating origination in

2005-2007 for the at-origination sample regressions. For at-origination sample, Securitized in

2005-2007 is essentially an interaction term reflecting the marginal effect for loans securitized

between 2005 and 2007.

           Turning to the ROA results first, the at-origination sample results consistently indicate

that borrowers whose loans were sold to CLOs outperform borrowers in the control sample in the

first two years after loan origination. In the first year, borrowers whose loans were sold to CLOs

have industry adjusted ROA that is 1 percentage point (25%) higher than borrowers in the

control sample on average; in the following year, their outperformance is larger by 2 percentage

points (40% relative to the sample mean).32 The difference in the magnitude of coefficients

between the first and second years should be interpreted carefully because of survivorship bias;

companies that perform better are more likely to have ROA information available over a longer

horizon.33 In the portfolio sample, we find no significant differences in ROA performance

between securitized and unsecuritized borrowers.

           Turning to Z-score, we find no significant difference in performance between securitized

and unsecuritized borrowers in either sample. In most specifications, the coefficient on the


32
     We obtain similar results after limiting the sample to amended loans (results are omitted for brevity).
33
     The number of observations drops from 284 at time t to 274 at time t+1 to 254 at time t+2.


                                                                                                               17
Securitized dummy is positive—indicating that securitized borrowers tend to have higher (better)

post-origination Z-scores on average—but the coefficients are not statistically significant. The

at-origination sample results show that borrowers who received loans in 2005-2007 tended to

have worse Z-scores ex-post (as one would expect, given the onset of the crisis). However,

borrowers whose loans were originated and securitized in those years did not perform any worse

than their unsecuritized counterparts.

         Overall, these tests provide no evidence that borrowers whose loans are purchased by

CLOs underperform unsecuritized loan borrowers in terms of industry-adjusted ROA or Z-score.

In fact, it appears that securitized loan borrowers actually outperform unsecuritized loan

borrowers in terms of ROA for loans originated prior to the height of the securitization boom

from 2005 through the first half of 2007.

                                                        [TABLE III]

         Accounting measures are only available for publicly traded companies; however, a large

fraction of securitized loans, and institutional loans in general, financed LBO transactions for

which post-transaction accounting data does not exist. To address this issue, we next examine

whether securitization can predict downgrades or upgrades in borrowers’ credit ratings.

Collateral credit ratings are central to the CLO evaluation models used by rating agencies which

re-running the rating model at regular intervals after issuance. In addition, most CLOs include

covenants that restrict the manager’s asset allocation by credit rating.34 Violating these covenants

or failing a ratings test can trigger accelerated pay-down of the notes or require the manager to

adjust the collateral pool through sales and purchases.35


34
   Covenants may take the form of weighted-average rating requirements or basket-type allocation requirements,
e.g., no more than 7% of the portfolio can be rated CCC+ or lower.
35
   Using credit rating as a measure of future performance potentially introduces a bias against finding downgrades
for the securitized loans as CLO managers might pick borrowers that are likely to have stable ratings. However,

                                                                                                                     18
        In Table IV, we look separately at upgrade and downgrade frequency and compare loans

sold to CLOs with comparable unsecuritized loans. The data comes from Reuters Gold Sheets

(compiled from S&P and Moody’s) and covers the period between May 2001 and April 2010.

Rating changes are measured based on a scale that combines Moody’s and S&P senior secured

ratings for the borrowers. Our rating scale incorporates credit watches so that ‘downgrades’

include placements onto negative credit watch and ‘upgrades’ include placements onto positive

credit watch.36

        Controlling for loan and borrower characteristics at the event date, we find little support

for the hypothesis that securitization predicts deterioration of credit ratings between 1997 and

2007. Although the sign of the coefficients suggests that downgrades over a 1-year horizon are

more likely for securitized loans, these results are statistically insignificant. Over a 1-year

horizon, upgrades are significantly more likely (except for the loans originated in 2005-2007,

which are unlikely to be upgraded.) These results for the late period are also confirmed in the

portfolio sample. The only evidence for securitized loans being worse quality is concentrated in

the portfolio sample over the 2-year horizon. It is not clear however that this suggests a

fundamental problem with securitization.

                                                     [TABLE IV]

        Our third approach for measuring performance is to use CDS spreads. We obtain CDS

data from Markit for the period between 2003 and June 2009. CDS quotes are not available for

all of the loans in our sample, but they provide us with a forward-looking measure of borrower

performance that is not restricted to publicly traded companies. CDS spreads measure the


ratings transitions are an important measure of loan performance and are highly correlated with other measures of
performance.
36
   Letter ratings have been converted into a numerical scale (1=AAA, 2=AA+, 3=AA, etc.) where credit watch
negative or positive counts at + or – 0.5, respectively. Borrowers are considered to be “downgraded” or “upgraded”
when the numerical rating changes.

                                                                                                                19
amount an investor would have to pay to insure against a company’s default. As a company’s

default risk rises, its CDS spread increases. The advantage of CDS data over accounting data is

that CDS contracts will often continue to trade if a company is taken private. A large fraction of

the loans in our sample are LBO loans, so measuring borrower performance with accounting

returns in a long-term window introduces a major constraint. Using CDS prices as a measure of

performance reduces survivor bias; however, it limits the analysis to the largest companies in the

sample because only large companies have liquid CDS contracts. We use daily quotes for the

CDS corresponding to the 5-year insurance on senior debt. For each of the borrowers in our

sample that have CDS data, we calculate the percentage change in the borrower’s CDS spreads

in a two year window after a given CLO acquired the loan. We use first and last CDS quotes in

the event window to construct our measure.

       The dependent variable in Table V is the percentage change in CDS spreads over a given

window following the event date. The main explanatory variable is a dummy indicating whether

the loan was sold to a CLO. Controlling for the borrower’s credit rating and lagged CDS

volatility (calculated in the six months prior to the beginning of the performance window), we

find that borrowers with securitized loans experience significant improvement in credit quality

one year after the securitization as compared to borrowers with unsecuritized loans. The average

securitized loan borrower experiences an 84% decline in CDS spreads relative to the average

unsecurtized loan borrower. This is economically large, given that the average percentage change

in CDS spreads over this window is a 20% increase (the standard deviation is 99%). This result

goes in the same direction as the downgrade result and rejects the hypothesis that securitized

loans are riskier than unsecuritized loans. There is a weak indication of deterioration in




                                                                                               20
performance during the financial crisis. The results remain qualitatively the same when we limit

the control sample to amended loans (results are available from the authors).

                                                     [TABLE V]

        None of these performance measures is perfect, however taken together the three

different measures provide a comprehensive picture of performance. To summarize, controlling

for observables at the time of loan origination, securitized loans perform similarly to other

institutional loans from the same lead arranger that are unsecuritized. The results indicate that

agency problems in loan securitization may be less important than commonly believed. Despite

the fact that CLOs are subject to additional layers of agency and adverse selection problems,

their investment choices appear no different than the investment choices of other non-lending

institutions (in terms of ex-post performance).37

        In both samples, we limit attention to loans that are likely candidates for securitization to

assure that securitized and unsecurititized loans are comparable. However in the absence of a

clear mechanism that explains the selection of loans into CLOs there might be some residual

concern that the case and control subsets are not comparable. To address this issue in Table VI

we explore a quasi-experimental setting, where we rely on temporary imbalances between

institutional investors’ demand for loans and loan origination. The argument is that CLOs face an

investment constraint which they cannot smooth over time. We consider several proxies for the

aggregate imbalance between supply and demand at the quarterly frequency: (i) CLO issuance

(CLO fund flow); (ii) the change in the CLO pipeline, reflecting CLO volume that is not closed;


37
  The implied assumption behind our test is that there is no ex-ante unobservable difference between loans with and
without CLO investors. To relax this assumption, in an unreported test, we also look within the sample of the loans
with CLO investors and test whether, controlling for loan size, the number of CLOs in the syndicate or the share of
the loan allocated to CLO investors predicts future loan performance. Because corporate loans are not fully
securitized and are held by other investors including banks, we expect that larger CLO presence will be associated
with worse quality loans. However, the intensity of CLO investment has no predictive power for performance in our
regressions.

                                                                                                                21
(iii) CLO issuance scaled by total term loan issuance; (iv) net cash flow into all institutional

accounts investing in the corporate loan market; (v) net cash flow into institutional accounts

scaled by total term loan issuance; and (vi) the net spread flexing down on institutional loans. An

increase in any of these six variables represents an increase in either CLO demand or, more

broadly, institutional demand. CLO flow data and institutional spread flexing is compiled using

CLO calendars published by Reuters Gold Sheets. Institutional investors fund flow data is from

S&P LCD Quarterly Review covering activity in the leveraged loan market. Total term loan

issuance is constructed using DealScan.

       Aggregate trends, in particular at the overall institutional level, are likely to be exogenous

to the loan selection made by any individual CLO. The basic intuition is that an increase in

aggregate demand for loans should push CLOs to invest in loans that would typically be held by

other institutional investors. If those loans are of a better (or worse) quality, we would expect

that the marginal loans picked by CLOs during these times would differ from the average quality

of CLO collateral. (Given the exogenous nature of the demand proxies, the quality of the overall

pool of potentially securitizable loans is likely to be unchanged.) Table VI replicates the three

tests presented for the first hypothesis (Tables III-V) including the six alternative proxies for

investors’ demand for loans. In addition to controls used in the analysis in Tables III to V we

include a fund-flow proxy and its interaction with the Securitized dummy; the interaction terms

are the coefficients of interest. Coefficients on benchmark controls and fund-flow proxies are

omitted for compactness of presentation.

       Out of 54 coefficients of interest (interaction terms) eight are statistically significant, of

which four indicate outperformance and four indicate underperformance. Two of the demand

pressure measures, including net cash flows into institutional investors’ accounts scaled by the



                                                                                                  22
total term loan issuance, return no significant coefficients of interest. Overall, we interpret this

evidence as consistent with the findings in Tables III though V—there is nothing marginally

special about securitized loans—the marginal loans purchased under exogenous market pressure

are of the same quality as the average. Our point is that loans with CLO investors are no different

than loans held by other institutional investors. When temporarily higher loan demand by CLOs

pushes them to invest in loans that would typically be held by other institutional investors, these

loans are no better or worse than average securitized loan.

                                              [TABLE VI]


       B.      Hypothesis II: When the CLO Underwriter is a Loan Arranger

       In this section, we examine the performance of a subset of securitized loans for which we

expect agency problems to be particularly pronounced. As discussed earlier, adverse selection

problems should be particularly acute when banks engage on both sides of the loan market—

originating loans and underwriting CLOs that purchase loans for collateral. This presents the

greatest opportunity for a bank to sell poor quality loans to a CLO, because there is one less

monitor of loan quality at the CLO level.

       Since we cannot identify the seller of the loan in secondary market purchases, we limit

the sample to primary market purchases for this part of the analysis (hence, we can only the use

at-origination sample). This ensures that it is the arranging bank selling the loan to the CLO. We

separate primary market purchases of loans by CLOs into two groups: cases where the loan

arranger is the CLO underwriter (same bank) and cases where the loan arranger is different from

the CLO underwriter (different bank). Then we compare post-origination borrower performance

across the two types of loans, within a given CLO portfolio, using our three different

performance measures. Note that in order to compare the performance of different loans within


                                                                                                 23
the same CLO portfolio, we are using a loan-CLO dataset.38 Given that our comparison is

between two groups of securitized loans, it is unlikely that the results are driven by unobservable

factors that might explain why some loans are securitized. Thus, by studying the intensive

margin of securitization we alleviate some of the concerns about the endogeneity of the

securitization decision itself. Additionally, we only include CLOs that have a clearly identified

underwriter.

           Table VII examines borrower accounting performance across the two types of loans. In

Panel A, we regress borrowers’ industry-adjusted ROA on a dummy indicating whether their

loan was sold to any CLOs underwritten by the lead arranger (same bank), controlling for

observable characteristics at the time the loan was sold. In Panel B, we use industry-adjusted Z-

score as the dependent variable. These regressions, and all other regressions in this section,

include CLO fixed effects so that we compare the performance of loans within a given CLO

portfolio, depending on whether they were purchased from the CLO underwriter. Based on ROA,

there is no evidence that same bank borrowers perform worse than other borrowers in the three

years following loan origination. Interestingly, there is some evidence that they underperform

based on Z-score. The coefficients on the same bank dummy are negative in all of the Z-score

specifications.        However, the coefficient is only significant in the third year following

origination. This provides some suggestive evidence that borrowers whose loans are securitized

in CLOs underwritten by their own lead banks tend to underperform.

                                                        [TABLE VII]

           Table VIII examines whether securitization by the lead arranger predicts borrower

downgrades or upgrades after securitization. Panel A presents the downgrade results and Panel B

presents the upgrade results. In the year after origination, borrowers whose loans are sold to
38
     In all regressions, we include CLO fixed effects and cluster standard errors by loan.

                                                                                                24
CLOs underwritten by their lead arranger are significantly more likely to be downgraded and less

likely to be upgraded than other borrowers. They are also less likely to be upgraded over a two

year period.39

         In Table IX, we examine borrower performance using CDS spreads. Because of the small

number of same bank loans with CDS data, we use concurrent CDS volatility as a control rather

than lagged CDS volatility, which decreases the sample size. Controlling for the borrower’s

credit rating and CDS volatility, we find no significant difference in performance between the

two sub-groups. However, the paucity of CDS data for same bank borrowers limits the power of

this test.

                                                  [TABLES VIII & IX]

         Our results provide some support for our second hypothesis and suggest that conflicts of

interest may exist when banks that arrange loans also underwrite CLOs. Loans purchased from

the CLO underwriter at syndication perform significantly worse than other loans (in the same

CLO portfolio) purchased at syndication according to Z-score and credit ratings.



         IV.      Conclusion

         Using a unique dataset on loans used as CLO collateral we examine whether

securitization led to risky lending in the corporate loan market. Contrary to the adverse selection

hypothesis, we find that loans sold to CLO investors were of similar quality as loans sold to other

institutional investors. In fact, borrowers whose loans were sold to CLOs in some instances

perform better than comparable unsecuritized loans. While we find some weak evidence of

agency problems in a particular set of transactions—when a CLO purchases loans arranged by its

39
  They appear less likely to be downgraded over a two year period as well, but the result is not robust to including
z-score in the regression.

                                                                                                                   25
underwriter—overall, there is no evidence that securitization led to risky lending in the CLO

market.

       Our results provide a broad insight about structured finance products: Adverse selection

is not an inevitable consequence of securitization. The “skin in the game” on the part of the

originating lender and distribution among investors may be sufficient to alleviate concerns about

adverse selection in collateral pools. This supports risk retention requirements like those outlined

in the Dodd-Frank Act. However, another important point that emerges from our paper is that

there are vast differences in the securitization process, and the attendant incentive problems,

across structured asset classes. To that extent, the one-size-fits-all approach to risk retention

taken in the financial reform bill could miss its mark and have the unintended effect of limiting

the supply of credit to firms.




                                                                                                 26
References:

Altman, Edward, 1968, Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis and the Prediction of Corporate

       Bankruptcy, Journal of Finance 23, 589-609.

Benmelech, Efraim, and Jennifer Dlugosz, 2009, The Alchemy of CDO Credit Ratings, Journal

       of Monetary Economics, 56, 617-634.

Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek, and Erik Stafford, 2009, The Economics of Structured Finance,

       Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 3-25.

Drucker, Steven, and Manju Puri, 2009, On Loan Sales, Loan Contracting and Lending

       Relationships, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2635-2672.

Drucker, Steven, and Christopher Mayer, 2008, Inside Information and Market Making in

       Secondary Mortgage Markets, Working paper, Renaissance Technologies LL3 and Duke

       University.

Fabozzi, F.J., Goodman, L., Lucas, D., 2006. Collateralized Debt Obligations. John Wiley &

       Sons Inc.

Ivashina, Victoria, 2009, Asymmetric Information Effects on Loan Spreads, Journal of Financial

       Economics 92, 300-319.

Ivashina, Victoria and David Scharfstein, 2010, Loan Syndication and Credit Cycles, American

       Economic Review 100, 57-61.

Ivashina, Victoria, and Zheng Sun, 2007, Institutional Stock Trading on Loan Market

       Information, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, Did Securitization

       Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence From Subprime Loans, Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 125, 307-362.



                                                                                             27
Loan Syndication and Trading Association, 2007, The Handbook of Loan Syndication and

       Trading.

Nadauld, Taylor and Shane M. Sherlund, 2009, The Role of the Securitized Process in the

       Expansion of Subprime Credit, Working paper.

Shivdasani, Anil, and Yihui Wang, 2009, Did Structured Credit Fuel the LBO Boom? Working

       paper, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Standard & Poor’s, 2002, Global Cash Flow and Synthetic CDO Criteria.

Standard & Poor’s, 2006, A Guide to the Loan Market.

Tavakoli, J., 2002. Collateralized Debt Obligations and Structured Finance: New Developments

       in Cash and Synthetic Securitization. Wiley.




                                                                                           28
                                                                         FIGURE 1
                                                                       CLO issuance
The figure is compiled using weekly CLO calendars published by Reuters, Gold Sheets. Pipeline indicates CLOs that have not yet closed (i.e., been allocated to
ultimate investor).

                                        30


                                        25


                                        20
                          Billion USD




                                        15


                                        10


                                        5


                                        0




                                                                      New CLO         CLO Pipline




                                                                                                                                                             29
                                                                                 FIGURE 2
                                                                 Quarterly global CDO issuance, 2005-2008
This figure is compiled using issuance data published by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA). Structured finance corresponds to
global CDO issuance backed by collateral that is itself structured (e.g., residential and commercial mortgages-backed securities, asset-backed securities, credit
default swaps, or other CDOs). For example, mortgages are usually pooled into pass-through securities before they are purchased by CDOs.

                                                 120


                                                 100



                                   Billion USD   80


                                                 60


                                                 40


                                                 20


                                                  0
                                                       2005:Q1   2005:Q3    2006:Q1   2006:Q3   2007:Q1   2007:Q3   2008:Q1   2008:Q3

                                                           Structured Finance         High Yield Loans         Bonds          Other




                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                        FIGURE 3
                                                                    CLO STRUCTURING
This figure illustrates different steps involved in securitization of the corporate loans and highlights involvement of different agents (CLO manager, Underwriter,
etc.) during the separate stages of the process.




                                                                                                                                                                31
                                                                        TABLE I
                                                                    SUMMARY STATISTICS
This table reports summary statistics for two alternative samples. The at-origination sample includes loans originated between 1997 and May 2007. The portfolio
sample includes loans originated between January 2005 and July 2007. Statistics are also split based on the two main hypotheses tested in the paper. Same bank
(H2) indicates loans that appeared in a CLO underwritten by their lead arranger. Loan variables are constructed using DealScan. Minimum assignment is the
minimum investment for syndicate participants. Sales at close is taken at the time the loan is closed. Leverage (loan) is the size of the loan divided by the
borrower’s sales at close. All-in-drawn spread is defined as total (fees and interest) annual spread paid over LIBOR for each dollar drawn down from the loan net
of upfront fees. Senior debt rating and Loan rating come from Reuters Gold Sheets (compiled from S&P and Moody’s). Performance pricing dummy indicates
that the spread on the loan is tied to the firm's financial indicators. LBO, M&A and Debt repayment dummies indicate the purpose of the loan. In Panel B,
financial data corresponds to the fiscal year that ended just prior to loan origination. Industries are measured at the 2-digit SIC code level and industry adjusted
figures have the industry median subtracted for the corresponding fiscal year. Compustat variables: Leverage is Total Long-Term Debt plus Debt in Current
Liabilities divided by Total Assets. Loan size/Assets is the loan size from DealScan divided by Compustat’s Total Assets. Interest coverage is EBITDA divided
by Interest and Related Expense. Return on assets (ROA) is EBITDA divided by Total Assets. Q is [Assets + Market Value of Equity – Book Value of Equity –
Deferred Taxes]/Assets. Z-score is defined as in Altman (1968). In Panel B, the number of observations corresponds to the loans for which pre-origination assets
is available. All dollar figures are measured in millions.
                                                                      Panel A: Loan terms
                                                                           H1: Effects of securitization                      H2: Effects of underwriting
                                                              At-origination sample               Portfolio sample              At-origination sample
                                                              Securitized:        Diff.        Securitized:          Diff.      Same bank:          Diff.
                                                            Yes          No       t-stat     Yes          No         t-stat    Yes       No         t-stat
            Number of loans                                    302         185                1,084       2,525                  104       198
            Loan size                          Mean            522          623    1.96         738          346      9.41       614       474          2.61
            Minimum assignment                 Mean             3.5         3.4    0.56         3.3          3.5      1.30        3.1       3.8         2.42
            Sales at loan close                Mean          1,788       1,680     0.38       2,617       1,272       3.55     1,711     1,831          0.30
            Leverage (loan)                    Mean           0.72         0.87    1.65        1.09         1.02      0.95      0.70       0.73         0.35
            All-in-drawn spread (bps)          Mean            304          313    0.81         288          278      1.82       289       313          1.62
            All-in-drawn spread (bps)          Median          275         300                  275          250                 275       300
            Senior debt rating (borrower)      Mean          B+/B        B+/B      1.58       B+/B            B+      4.16        B+      B+/B          1.79
            Senior debt rating (borrower)      Median           B+           B+                   B            B                  B+        B+
            Loan rating                        Mean        BB-/B+      BB-/B+      1.29          B+     BB-/B+        3.30    BB-/B+    BB-/B+          0.91
            Loan rating                        25th %         BB-          BB-                 BB-          BB-                  BB-       BB-
            Loan rating                        Median      BB-/B+          BB-                   B+           B+                 BB-        B+
            Loan rating                        75th %           B+           B+                   B            B                  B+        B+
            Perf. pricing (dummy)              Mean           0.38         0.40    0.52        0.14         0.12      1.81      0.41       0.36         0.95
            LBO loan (dummy)                   Mean           0.44         0.29    3.35        0.61         0.39      12.5      0.45       0.43         0.38
            M&A loan (dummy)                   Mean           0.13         0.18    1.80        0.10         0.12      1.44      0.14       0.12         0.70
            Debt repayment loan (dummy)        Mean           0.09         0.13    1.75        0.03         0.01      3.85      0.05       0.12         1.94


                                                                                                                                                                 32
                                                                  TABLE I – continued
                                              Panel B: Borrower characteristics (sample matched to Compustat)
                                                        At-origination sample                                                   Portfolio sample
                                    Securitized loans               Unsecuritized loans          Diff.       Securitized loans               Unsecuritized loans         Diff.
                                          (Obs.=220)                       (Obs.=166)                              (Obs.=996)                      (Obs.=649)
                                Median      Mean        SD      Median       Mean       SD       t-stat   Median      Mean         SD    Median       Mean      SD       t-stat
Total assets                       944       2,184      3,742       804       2,107     4,179    0.19      1,253      8,180     46,292        865      3,093    8,128    2.72
Net sales                          782       2,022      3,406       611       1,642     2,790    1.17      1,110      4,405     15,641        694      2,407    8,057    3.55
Market cap.                        576       1,144      2,206       603       1,314     2,075    0.66      1,048      2,326      3,568        798      2,518    5,696    0.50
Loan size/Assets                  0.42        0.55       0.50       0.44        0.63      0.63   1.41       0.49       11.2       115        0.38       3.11     50.3    1.54
Leverage                          0.51        0.53       0.36       0.42        0.44      0.29   2.70       0.43       0.56       1.53       0.37       0.48     1.24    0.92
Interest coverage                 2.78        5.60       11.9       3.06        13.6      60.7   1.87       3.53       24.8       249        4.26       30.5       427   0.22
Return on assets                  0.12        0.12       0.07       0.12        0.12      0.09   0.11       0.11       0.07       0.85       0.12       0.09     0.65    0.42
Z-score                           2.12        4.15       14.7       2.26        9.70      40.0   1.54       2.63       13.7       115        2.95       19.2       113   0.60
Q                                 1.33        1.50       0.62       1.41        1.54      0.68   0.42       1.60       2.15       3.80       1.52       2.05     3.28    0.37
Return on equity                  0.07        0.01       1.23       0.07        0.55      4.03   1.90       0.09       0.01       3.05       0.10      -0.02     2.33    0.14
PPE/Assets                        0.44        0.52       0.36       0.42        0.50      0.34   0.73       0.44       0.53       0.43       0.46       0.54     0.41    0.50
Leverage (ind. adj.)              0.23        0.27       0.37       0.17        0.21      0.29   1.87       0.21       0.33       1.54       0.14       0.26     1.24    0.80
Interest coverage (ind. adj.)     -0.31       2.30       11.7       0.10        10.3      60.3   1.88       -0.89      20.0       250       -0.50       25.3       428   0.21
Return on assets (ind. adj.)      0.04        0.05       0.10       0.03        0.06      0.10   0.06       0.02      -0.02       0.86       0.02       0.01     0.65    0.48
Z-score (ind. adj.)               -0.92       0.71       14.8      -1.26        5.60      40.0   1.36       -1.28      9.41       115       -0.92       14.8       113   0.59




                                                                                                                                                                              33
                                          TABLE II
      DETERMINANTS OF SECURITIZATION: LOAN AND BORROWER CHARACTERISTICS AT ORIGINATION
 This table examines the impact of loan and borrower characteristics on the probability that a loan is sold to a CLO. The
 dependent variable is a dummy that equals 1 if a loan was sold to a CLO and 0 if not. The at-origination sample includes
 loans originated between 1997 and May 2007. The portfolio sample includes loans originated between January 2005 and
 July 2007. Borrower financials are taken from Compustat for the fiscal year ending prior to loan origination and industry
 adjustment is done at the 2-digit SIC level. The Compustat dummy equals 1 when a company has pre-origination data
 available in Compustat. Other variable definitions are the same as in Table II. For the regression analysis, the ratings were
 coded on a numeric scale where AAA is 1, AA+ is 2, etc. Year fixed effects control for the year of loan origination. The
 coefficients shown are marginal effects. Standard errors are clustered by loan lead arranger in all specifications.
 Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10 % levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
                                            At-origination sample                                  Portfolio sample
                               Coeff.    z-stat         Coeff.      z-stat           Coeff.     z-stat         Coeff.    z-stat
Borrower characteristics:
 Senior debt rating              0.01     0.71             -0.00      0.14              0.01     1.40            0.01     1.12
                                                   **
 Log(Assetst-1)                  0.06     2.39              0.03      0.85             -0.01     0.90           -0.01     1.28
 ROAt-1 (ind. adj.)              0.05     0.16              0.22      1.11             -0.07     1.59           -0.01     0.53
                                                   **                                                      *
 Leveraget-1 (ind. adj.)         0.18     2.33                 --                      -0.04     1.64               --
 Coveraget-1 (ind. adj.)        -0.00     1.30                 --                       0.00     1.17               --
                                                                             ***
 Z-scoret-1 (ind. adj.)             --       --            -0.00      2.93                 --                   -0.00     0.33
 Not rated (dummy)              -0.01     0.04             -0.18      0.75              0.06     0.58            0.05     0.39
                                                  ***                        **
 Compustat (dummy)              -0.49     4.20             -0.40      2.45              0.08     1.38            0.07     1.02
Loan characteristics:
                                                                                                         ***                       ***
 Loan maturity                  -0.03     1.28             -0.03      1.35              0.10     12.9            0.09     13.6
                                                                                                         ***                       ***
 Log(Loan size)                 -0.05     1.32             -0.02      0.70              0.09     9.39            0.09     9.35
                                                                                                         ***                       ***
 All-in-drawn spread (bps)      -0.00     1.07             -0.00      1.02              0.00     4.99            0.00     5.43
                                                                             **
 Perf. pricing (dummy)          -0.07     1.56             -0.12      2.25             -0.02     0.50           -0.00     0.09
                                                                                                         ***                       ***
 LBO loan (dummy)                0.09     1.50              0.09      1.27              0.13     7.87            0.13     6.72
 M&A loan (dummy)                0.02     0.26              0.03      0.34              0.03     0.79            0.02     0.79
                                                                                                         ***                       ***
 Debt repayment (dummy)         -0.08     1.12             -0.01      0.08              0.21     3.61            0.22     3.55

Year fixed effects               Yes                        Yes                         Yes                      Yes
Pseudo R-squared                 0.11                       0.13                       0.18                     0.10
Observations                     445                        345                       3,167                    2,953




                                                                                                                                  34
                                                                                TABLE III
                                   DOES SECURITIZATION PREDICT FUTURE PERFORMANCE? (H1): RETURN ON ASSETS
  This table compares the ex-post accounting performance of borrowers whose loans were securitized and borrowers whose loans were not securitized. In Panel A,
  the dependent variable is industry-adjusted ROA. In Panel B, the dependent variable is industry-adjusted Z-score (lower Z-score corresponds to worse credit
  quality). The event year (t) is the year of loan origination. Each observation in the analysis is an individual loan. The at-origination sample includes loans
  originated between 1997 and May 2007. The portfolio sample includes loans originated between January 2005 and July 2007. The 2005-2007 dummy equals one
  for loans originated between 2005 and 2007, zero otherwise. Securitized in 2005-2007 is essentially an interaction term reflecting the marginal effect for loans
  securitized between 2005 and 2007. Financial data comes from Compustat and goes through June 2009. Variable definitions are the same as in Table II.
  Standard errors are clustered by loan lead arranger in all specifications. Significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

  Panel A: Return on assets
                                                        At-origination sample                                                      Portfolio sample
Dependent variable:            ROAt (ind. adj.)          ROAt+1 (ind. adj.)   ROAt+2 (ind. adj.)         ROAt (ind. adj.)         ROAt+1 (ind. adj.)     ROAt+2 (ind. adj.)
                               Coeff.   t-stat           Coeff. t-stat        Coeff. t-stat              Coeff. t-stat            Coeff. t-stat          Coeff. t-stat
                                                  ***                     ***
Securitized (dummy)                0.01    3.55            0.02    2.72          0.02    1.33                  --                     --                      --
2005-2007 (dummy)                  0.01    0.84            0.01    0.64         -0.01    0.66                  --                     --                      --
Securitized in 2005-2007          -0.02    1.14           -0.01    0.78          0.02    0.71              -0.00    0.28           0.01    0.81           -0.01    0.60
Borrower characteristics:
 Senior debt rating                0.00    0.75            0.00    1.48          0.00    1.20               0.00    0.32           -0.00   0.20           -0.00    0.10
                                                  **                                             *                                                                           *
 Log(Assetst-1)                    0.01    2.45            0.01    1.36          0.01    1.69               0.00    1.37            0.00   0.94            0.01    1.75
                                                  ***                     ***                    ***                        ***                   ***                        ***
 ROAt-1 (ind. adj.)                0.89    26.2            0.89    16.5          0.85    10.5               0.88    15.5            0.80   12.2            0.80    10.5
                                                  *
 Leveraget-1 (ind. adj.)           0.02    1.83           -0.00    0.27          0.02    1.35               0.01    1.01            0.03   1.55            0.03    1.46
                                                                          *                      ***
 Coveraget-1 (ind. adj.)           0.00    0.26            0.00    1.69          0.00    3.81              -0.00    1.50           -0.00   0.79           -0.00    0.78
Loan characteristics:
                                                                          *                      **
 Loan maturity                     0.00    0.49            0.00    1.75          0.00    1.99              -0.00    0.79           -0.00   0.51            0.00    0.44
                                                                                                                            ***                   ***                        ***
 Log(Loan size)                    0.00    0.21            0.00    0.67          0.00    0.58              -0.01    3.21           -0.01   2.82           -0.02    2.86
                                                  *
 All-in-drawn spread              -0.00    1.82           -0.00    1.27         -0.00    0.24              -0.00    0.78           -0.00   0.46           -0.00    1.25
                                                                                                 *
 Perf. pricing (dummy)             0.00    0.46            0.00    0.37         -0.01    1.67              -0.00    0.42            0.00   0.91           -0.00    0.34
                                                  *                                                                         **
 LBO loan (dummy)                 -0.01    1.69           -0.00    0.15         -0.00    0.56              -0.01    2.18           -0.01   1.45            0.00    0.32
                                                  ***                     *                      ***                        ***                   ***
 M&A loan (dummy)                 -0.03    4.28           -0.02    1.75         -0.03    3.92              -0.03    4.04           -0.02   2.96           -0.02    1.61
 Debt repayment (dummy)            0.01    0.99           -0.00    0.26         -0.00    0.45              -0.01    0.94           -0.01   1.23            0.01    0.51

Year fixed effects                  No                      No                    No                       Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Adjusted R-squared                 0.79                    0.71                  0.57                      0.82                    0.70                    0.62
Observations                       282                     274                   254                        508                     480                    338

                                                                                                                                                                       35
    Panel B: Z-score
                                                     At-origination sample                                                     Portfolio sample
Dependent variable:         Z-scoret (ind. adj.)     Z-scoret+1 (ind. adj.) Z-scoret+2 (ind. adj.)   Z-scoret (ind. adj.)    Z-scoret+1 (ind. adj.)   Z-scoret+2 (ind. adj.)
                            Coeff.     t-stat        Coeff. t-stat          Coeff. t-stat            Coeff. t-stat           Coeff. t-stat            Coeff. t-stat
Securitized (dummy)            0.12     0.31           0.30    0.67           -2.50    0.98               --                      --                       --
                                               *                      **
2005-2007 (dummy)             -1.43     1.79          -1.45    2.17           -5.86    1.23               --                      --                       --
Securitized in 2005-2007       0.72     0.85           1.74    1.57            3.31    0.94            0.27    1.04            0.39    1.20            -0.22    0.56
Borrower characteristics:
                                               ***                    ***                                              ***                     **                        **
 Senior debt rating           -0.23     3.63          -0.21    3.18            0.12    0.55           -0.48    2.90           -0.83    2.07            -0.32    2.20
                                                                                                                       ***                     ***
 Log(Assetst-1)               -0.14     0.88          -0.29    0.84            0.45    0.85            0.73    3.06            1.14    2.61             0.31    1.27
                                               ***                                                                     *                       ***                       **
 ROAt-1 (ind. adj.)           -3.09     3.56          -2.06    1.08           -8.47    1.03            2.73    1.84            5.09    3.06             3.75    2.35
                                               **                     **                                                                                                 *
 Z-scoret-1 (ind. adj.)        0.01     1.97           0.01    2.04           -0.00    0.03            0.01    1.51            0.03    1.31             0.02    1.66
Loan characteristics:
                                                                                                                                               ***                       **
 Loan maturity                -0.08     1.03          -0.17    0.67           -0.08    0.38           -0.13    0.88           -0.39    3.10            -0.37    2.08
                                                                                                                       ***
 Log(Loan size)                0.08     0.49          -0.37    1.04           -3.69    1.21           -0.68    3.41           -0.76    1.44             0.01    0.08
                                                                      ***                                                                                                **
 All-in-drawn spread          -0.00     1.59          -0.00    3.32           -0.01    1.63           -0.00    0.62           -0.00    0.48            -0.00    2.21
                                               *
 Perf. pricing (dummy)         0.50     1.91           0.38    0.96            1.91    1.19            0.21    0.40           -0.53    0.60            -0.41    0.89
 LBO loan (dummy)             -0.14     0.44           0.73    1.26           -0.48    0.25            0.64    1.62            0.15    0.31             0.76    1.43
                                                                                                                       **                      **
 M&A loan (dummy)             -0.61     1.27          -0.61    1.05           -0.13    0.22           -1.07    2.33           -1.78    2.04            -0.82    1.35
 Debt repayment (dummy)        0.42     1.25           0.25    0.50           -0.95    0.54            0.30    1.06            0.38    0.44             1.38    1.63

Year fixed effects              No                      No                      No                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Adjusted R-squared             0.21                    0.18                    0.12                    0.23                    0.27                     0.42
Observations                   202                     189                     176                      371                    350                      238




                                                                                                                                                                    36
                                                                                                   TABLE IV
                                                  DOES SECURITIZATION PREDICT FUTURE PERFORMANCE? (H1): RATING CHANGES
             This table compares ratings downgrades and upgrades for securitized loans and unsecuritized loans. The dependent variable in the regressions is a dummy that
             indicates whether a loan was downgraded or upgraded in a given period after loan origination. Ratings data comes from Reuters Gold Sheets (compiled from
             S&P and Moody’s) and covers the period from May 2001 through April 2010. The at-origination sample includes loans originated between 1997 and May 2007.
             The portfolio sample includes loans originated between January 2005 and July 2007. The 2005-2007 dummy equals one for loans originated between 2005 and
             2007, zero otherwise. Securitized in 2005-2007 is essentially an interaction term reflecting the marginal effect for loans securitized between 2005 and 2007.
             Specifications with the interaction term are estimated using linear model. Variable definitions are the same as in Table II. Loan purpose fixed effects include
             LBO, M&A and Debt repayment dummies. The coefficients are marginal effects. Standard errors are clustered by loan lead arranger. Significance at the 1%, 5%,
             and 10 % levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                           At-origination sample                                                                             Portfolio sample
                                        1-year horizon                                  2-year horizon                                 1-year horizon                                  2-year horizon
                            Coeff z-stat        Coeff     z-stat        Coef     z-stat         Coeff    z-stat        Coeff.    z-stat         Coeff.   z-stat         Coeff.    z-stat         Coeff   z-stat
                            Panel A: Downgrades
Securitized (dummy)          0.05    0.66         0.03    0.45           0.02    0.29            0.01    0.12              --                       --                      --                      --
2005-2007 (dummy)           -0.16    1.24        -0.09    0.67          -0.22    1.11           -0.24    1.20              --                       --                      --                      --
Securit. in 2005-2007                                                                                                                                                                     ***                     ***
                             0.18    0.67         0.13    0.63           0.06    0.25           -0.04    0.18           0.02     0.57            0.03    0.73            0.15     3.02           0.16    2.74
Borrower characteristics:
                                                                   *
 Senior debt rating          0.03    1.42         0.04    1.86           0.01    0.80            0.03    1.51            0.00    0.56            0.01    0.97             0.01    0.57           0.01    0.42
                                                                   **
 Log(Assetst-1)              0.06    1.22         0.07    2.53           0.01    0.24           -0.01    0.16            0.01    0.63            0.02    1.25            -0.02    0.62          -0.03    1.06
                                            **                                          ***                                             *
 ROAt-1 (ind. adj.)         -1.35    2.39         0.26    0.57          -1.67    2.66           -0.78    0.83            0.33    1.88            0.27    1.26            -0.07    0.32          -0.18    0.92
 Leveraget-1 (ind. adj.)    -0.03    0.17            --                 -0.10    0.43               --                  -0.07    0.74               --      --           -0.07    0.89              --      --
                                            **                                          *
 Coveraget-1 (ind. adj.)     0.01    2.09            --                  0.01    1.86               --                  -0.00    0.07               --      --           -0.00    0.51              --      --
                                                                                                                                                                  ***
 Z-scoret-1 (ind. adj.)         --               -0.00    1.59              --                  -0.00    0.51               --                  -0.00    3.46                --      --         -0.00    0.95
Loan characteristics:
 Loan maturity                                                                          **                        **                    **                        **                      **                      *
                            -0.02    1.01        -0.02    0.64          -0.04    2.11           -0.06    1.99           -0.04    2.24           -0.03    2.31            -0.05    2.20          -0.05    1.68
 Log(Loan size)                                                                                                                                                                                                   **
                             0.04    0.65        -0.07    1.34           0.00    0.01           -0.06    0.85            0.02    0.99            0.01    0.72             0.05    1.59           0.06    2.13
 All-in-drawn spread                                                                                              *                     *                         **
                             0.00    1.46         0.00    0.04          -0.00    0.45           -0.00    1.89            0.00    1.89            0.00    2.33             0.00    0.98           0.00    0.63
 Perf. pricing                                                     **                                             *                     ***                                               **
                            -0.05    0.58        -0.12    2.00          -0.04    0.52           -0.16    1.65           -0.11    2.94           -0.06    1.60            -0.09    2.01          -0.04    0.86
Fixed effects:
 Loan purpose                Yes                 Yes                    Yes                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Year                         No                  No                     No                       No                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Industry                    Yes                 Yes                    Yes                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Pseudo R-squared             0.26                0.24                   0.18                     0.21                   0.23                     0.27                    0.13                    0.11
Observations                 147                 105                    182                      137                    293                      194                     366                     258




                                                                                                                                                                                                   37
                                                                                         TABLE IV – continued
                                                           At-origination sample                                                                          Portfolio sample
                                        1-year horizon                                 2-year horizon                                1-year horizon                                2-year horizon
                            Coeff z-stat         Coeff     z-stat        Coef     z-stat        Coeff   z-stat        Coeff.    z-stat       Coeff.    z-stat        Coeff.    z-stat       Coeff    z-stat
                            Panel B: Upgrades
Securitized (dummy)          0.10 1.70 *          0.05     1.01           0.05    0.67          0.11    1.65     *
                                                                                                                           --                     --                     --                     --
2005-2007 (dummy)            0.03 0.30           -0.06     0.90           0.14    0.72          0.34    1.25               --                     --                     --                     --
Securit. in 2005-2007       -0.11 2.73 ***       -0.02     0.25          -0.21    1.91   *
                                                                                               -0.22    1.79     *
                                                                                                                       -0.02    0.50          -0.08    2.30     **
                                                                                                                                                                      0.01     0.18         -0.07    1.04
Borrower characteristics:
                                            ***                     **                                                                                          *
 Senior debt rating          0.03    4.13          0.02    2.18           0.01    0.35          0.01    0.58            0.01    1.07           0.02    1.69            0.00    0.40          0.01    0.59
                                                                                                                                       *                        *
 Log(Assetst-1)              0.00    0.09          0.01    0.46          -0.04    1.00         -0.04    0.61            0.03    1.84           0.04    1.76            0.04    1.41          0.03    1.50
                                            ***                     **                                           **                                                                   **
 ROAt-1 (ind. adj.)          1.03    3.00          0.42    2.23           0.06    0.12          1.60    2.26           -0.15    0.96          -0.04    0.27           -0.71    2.50         -0.48    1.99
 Leveraget-1 (ind. adj.)     0.03    0.34             --                  0.21    1.47             --                   0.01    0.12              --                   0.06    0.47             --
 Coveraget-1 (ind. adj.)    -0.01    1.37             --                  0.00    0.47             --                   0.00    0.44              --                   0.00    1.60             --
                                                                    **                                                                                          **
 Z-scoret-1 (ind. adj.)         --                -0.00    2.07              --                -0.00    1.63               --                  0.00    2.04               --                 0.00    1.74
Loan characteristics:
 Loan maturity              -0.02    1.09          0.01    0.57          -0.01    0.53         -0.00    0.07           -0.02    1.26          -0.02    0.78           -0.03    1.11         -0.04    1.02
 Log(Loan size)              0.07    1.15          0.01    0.26           0.09    1.28          0.07    0.89            0.01    0.42          -0.00    0.14            0.01    0.46          0.03    0.75
 All-in-drawn spread        -0.00    1.05         -0.00    1.04           0.00    0.89          0.00    0.87           -0.00    0.45          -0.00    0.70           -0.00    0.43         -0.00    0.67
 Perf. pricing                              ***                     **                   ***
                             0.20    6.43          0.09    1.99           0.20    4.50          0.10    1.35            0.04    1.08           0.05    1.15           -0.00    0.02         -0.04    0.72
Fixed effects:
 Loan purpose                Yes                  Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                   Yes
 Year                         No                   No                     No                     No                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                   Yes
 Industry                    Yes                   No                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                   Yes
Pseudo R-squared             0.35                 0.19                   0.19                   0.22                   0.14                   0.13                    0.09                  0.09
Observations                 116                  154                    181                    118                    314                    241                     377                   274




                                                                                                                                                                                                38
                                              TABLE V
                 DOES SECURITIZATION PREDICT FUTURE PERFORMANCE? (H1): CDS SPREAD
This table compares the change in credit default swaps (CDS) spreads for securitized loan borrowers with that of
unsecuritized borrowers. The dependent variable is the percentage change in a borrower’s CDS spread in a given period
after the loan origination. CDS data comes from Markit and corresponds to 5-year contracts. CDS quotes are available for
the period 2003 through June 2009. The at-origination sample includes loans originated between 1997 and May 2007. The
portfolio sample includes loans originated between January 2005 and July 2007. The 2005-2007 dummy equals one for
loans originated between 2005 and 2007, zero otherwise. Securitized in 2005-2007 is essentially an interaction term
reflecting the marginal effect for loans securitized between 2005 and 2007. Loan purpose fixed effects include LBO, M&A
and Debt repayment dummies. In some specification the fixed effects are removed due to limited data availability.
Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10 % levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                        At-origination sample                              Portfolio sample
                                  0-12 months           13-24 months            0-12 months            13-24 months
                                   post-event            post-event              post-event             post-event
                              Coeff.   t-stat         Coeff.   t-stat        Coeff.    t-stat        Coeff.   t-stat
                                                ***
  Securitized (dummy)          -0.84    2.72           0.55     1.44              --                     --
  2005-2007 (dummy)            -0.32    0.48           0.04     0.09              --                     --
                                                                                                *
  Securitized in 2005-2007      1.08    1.44           -0.34    0.73           0.26    1.84           -0.04   0.16
  Borrower characteristics:
                                                                                                *                      ***
   Senior debt rating          -0.25    1.08            0.07    1.01           0.07    1.92           -0.17   2.70
                                                ***                                             **                     ***
   Realized CDS vol.            0.01    2.63           -0.00    1.08           0.00    2.22            0.01   6.07
  Loan characteristics:
                                                                        *
   Loan maturity               -0.43    1.60            0.21    1.76           -0.04   0.43           -0.01   0.11
   Log(Loan size)              -0.56    1.30           -0.03    0.24           -0.04   0.65            0.10   0.83
                                                                        **                      *
   All-in-drawn spread         -0.00    1.61            0.00    2.10           -0.00   1.80           -0.00   0.40
                                                                                                **                     ***
   Perf. Pricing                0.23    0.45           -0.45    1.52            0.29   2.03            0.40   3.65
  Fixed effects:
   Loan purpose                 Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes
   Year                          No                     No                     Yes                     Yes
   Industry                      No                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes
  Adjusted R-squared            0.71                   0.99                    0.68                    0.71
  Observations                    23                     44                     158                    171




                                                                                                                         39
                                                                                          TABLE VI
                                                    LOAN SELECTION UNDER FUND FLOW PRESSURE (QUASI-EXPERIMENT)
           This table seeks to address a potential selection bias. We replicated results in Tables III-V using six alternative proxies for investors’ demand for loans. The basic
           idea is to look at the marginal quality of loans securitized in periods when the demand for loans is generally high. In addition to controls used in the analysis in
           Tables III to V we include a fund-flow proxy and its interaction with the Securitized dummy. Coefficients on benchmark controls and fund-flow proxies are
           omitted for compactness of presentation. For ratings downgrades and upgrades we report the specification that includes Z-score. CLO pipeline (billions) is the
           accumulation of CLOs in the pipeline, i.e., excess demand for loans by CLOs. Net price flexing is the net percentage of loans for which spread flexed down; a
           positive number indicates excess of demand for loans by institutional investors (CLOs included). Fund-flow data is at quarterly frequency. The analysis is done
           using the at-origination sample that includes loans originated between 1997 and May 2007. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10 % levels is indicated by ***, **,
           and *, respectively.

                                                                                                     Fund-flow proxy (investors’ demand for loans)
                                                                                                                             Net cash flows into Net cash flows into    Net price flexing
                                                                                                        CLO fund flow/
                                                           CLO issuance          CLO pipeline                                   institutional     inst./ Term loan           (%)
                                                                                                       Term loan issuance
                                                                                                                                   accounts            issuance
Table         Dependent var.     Explanatory var.       Coeff.    Stat          Coeff.    Stat        Coeff.    Stat         Coeff.   Stat        Coeff.   Stat        Coeff.    Stat
Tbl. III      ROAt               Securitized             0.005    0.53            0.000   0.04         -0.01    0.40          0.003   0.51         0.002   0.43        -0.020    1.51
                                                                                                 *                                                                                      **
Tbl. III      ROAt               Securitized*Fund fl.   -0.001    0.59            0.004   1.73          0.08    0.46         -0.001   0.36         -0.04   0.41         0.120    2.13
                                                                          ***                    *                     *                     **                   **
Tbl. III      ROAt+1             Securitized             0.020    3.00            0.010   1.64          0.04    1.95          0.010   1.96          0.01   2.02        -0.030    0.83
Tbl. III      ROAt+1             Securitized*Fund fl.   -0.001    1.52            0.001   0.23         -0.26    1.47         -0.001   0.68         -0.11   0.98         0.150    1.42
                                                                                                 *                                                                *
Tbl. III      ROAt+2             Securitized             0.008    0.87            0.020   1.66          0.03    1.40          0.020   1.62          0.02   1.66        -0.020    0.41
                                                                                                                                                                                        *
Tbl. III      ROAt+2             Securitized*Fund fl.    0.002    1.40            0.002   0.55         -0.13    0.69         -0.003   1.00         -0.21   1.18         0.230    1.74
                                                                                                                       **
Tbl. III      Z-scoret           Securitized              0.36    0.61             0.20   0.42          1.32    2.00           0.22   0.44          0.26   0.53          0.66    0.73
                                                                                                                       *
Tbl. III      Z-scoret           Securitized*Fund fl.    -0.02    0.42            -0.02   0.16         -11.6    1.74           0.00   0.01         -1.57   0.51         -0.92    0.18
Tbl. III      Z-scoret+1         Securitized              0.40    0.54             0.48   0.80          1.45    1.56           0.68   1.02          0.63   0.99          0.46    0.25
Tbl. III      Z-scoret+1         Securitized*Fund fl.     0.02    0.55            -0.02   0.11         -9.25    1.13          -0.02   0.28         -0.16   0.03          3.21    0.43
Tbl. III      Z-scoret+2         Securitized             -3.83    1.02            -2.58   0.97         -6.82    0.78          -2.43   0.82         -2.64   0.91         -0.66    0.21
Tbl. III      Z-scoret+2         Securitized*Fund fl.     0.26    0.96             0.47   0.55          56.6    0.71           0.32   0.50          32.8   0.69          3.64    0.26
                                                                                                                       **
Tbl. IV       Downgr. (1-y.)     Securitized             0.001    0.01            0.060   1.02          0.36    2.07          0.140   1.61          0.13   1.55         0.470    0.78
                                                                                                                       *
Tbl. IV       Downgr. (1-y.)     Securitized*Fund fl.    0.010    0.66            0.010   0.14         -3.05    1.71         -0.030   1.43         -1.49   1.19        -1.080    0.47
Tbl. IV       Downgr. (2-y.)     Securitized            -0.060    0.45            0.010   0.06          0.30    1.03          0.050   0.33          0.04   0.24         0.570    1.08
Tbl. IV       Downgr. (2-y.)     Securitized*Fund fl.    0.010    0.39           -0.040   0.78         -3.41    1.60         -0.040   1.24         -1.57   1.04        -1.570    0.92
Tbl. IV       Upgr. (1-y.)       Securitized             0.090    0.79            0.040   0.40          0.03    0.23          0.060   0.64          0.06   0.69         0.140    0.51
Tbl. IV       Upgr. (1-y.)       Securitized*Fund fl.   -0.010    0.99            0.010   0.70          0.04    0.04         -0.010   1.22         -0.84   1.10        -0.110    0.10
Tbl. IV       Upgr. (2-y.)       Securitized             0.150    1.06            0.040   0.50          0.01    0.05          0.120   1.27          0.08   0.92         0.250    0.58
                                                                                                                                             *                                          *
Tbl. IV       Upgr. (2-y.)       Securitized*Fund fl.   -0.020    1.12            0.020   0.62          0.48    0.31         -0.030   1.95         -0.80   0.54        -1.800    1.88
Tbl. V        CDS (1-12 m.)     Securitized            -1.220    1.21           -0.370   0.39         -2.87    0.76         -0.004   0.01         -1.15   0.12         0.010    0.01
Tbl. V        CDS (1-12 m.)     Securitized*Fund fl.    0.130    1.07            0.300   1.65   *
                                                                                                        25.4    0.56          0.110   0.93          0.79   0.14        -2.180    0.35
Tbl. V        CDS (13-24 m.)    Securitized             1.320    1.59           -0.040   0.04          0.27    0.13          0.290   0.42          0.21   0.31        -1.150    0.34
Tbl. V        CDS (13-24 m.)    Securitized*Fund fl.   -0.140    1.58           -0.450   1.18          2.28    0.12          0.040   0.62          4.18   0.91         0.380    0.12



                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                        TABLE VII
 DOES SECURITIZATION BY THE ORIGINATOR PREDICT FUTURE PERFORMANCE? (H2): RETURN ON ASSETS
This table compares the accounting performance of borrowers whose loans were sold to a CLO underwritten by their lead
arranger with other borrowers whose loans were securitized. The sample only includes securitized loans. Each observation
is a loan-CLO pair and performance is measured in a window following the loan origination date. The sample is limited to
loans purchased by CLOs in the primary market. All specifications include CLO fixed effects. In Panel A, the dependent
variable is industry-adjusted return on assets. In Panel B, the dependent variable is industry-adjusted Z-score (lower Z-score
corresponds to worse credit quality). The focus is on the Same bank dummy which is equal to 1 when a loan appears in a
CLO underwritten by its lead arranger and 0 otherwise. Financial data comes from Compustat and goes through June 2009.
Standard errors are clustered by loan. Variable definitions are the same as in Table II. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10 %
levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                Panel A: Return on assets
                                                                    At-origination sample
               Dependent variable:         ROAt (ind. adj.)          ROAt+1 (ind. adj.)     ROAt+2 (ind. adj.)
                                           Coeff.   t-stat           Coeff. t-stat          Coeff. t-stat
               Same bank (dummy)              -0.00    0.44           -0.00    0.53          0.01    0.71
               Borrower characteristics:
                Senior debt rating            -0.00    0.69           -0.00    0.57          -0.01   1.56
                                                              **                      *
                Log(Assetst-1)                 0.01    2.10            0.01    1.72           0.01   0.96
                                                              ***                     ***                    ***
                ROAt-1 (ind. adj.)             0.99    21.9            0.98    17.5           1.02   13.0
                                                                                      **
                Leveraget-1 (ind. adj.)        0.02    1.51            0.01    0.65           0.05   1.50
                                                              ***                     *                      **
                Coveraget-1 (ind. adj.)       -0.00    2.97           -0.00    1.69          -0.00   2.30
               Loan characteristics:
                                                                                      *                      ***
                Loan maturity                 -0.00    0.17            0.00    1.95           0.01   3.04
                Log(Loan size)                -0.00    0.60           -0.00    0.42           0.01   1.05
                                                              *                       *                      **
                All-in-drawn spread            0.00    1.70            0.00    1.66           0.00   2.23
                Perf. pricing (dummy)          0.00    0.22            0.01    1.23           0.01   0.74
                                                              *
                LBO loan (dummy)               0.02    1.89            0.01    0.55          -0.00   0.27
                M&A loan (dummy)               0.00    0.20           -0.00    0.20          -0.02   1.18
                                                              ***
                Debt repayment                 0.04    3.38            0.02    1.49           0.01   0.59
               Fixed effects:
                CLO                            Yes                      Yes                   Yes
                Year                           Yes                      Yes                   Yes
               Adjusted R-squared             0.91                     0.87                  0.83
               Observations                  1,636                    1,619                 1,552




                                                                                                                           41
                                       Panel B: Z-score
                                                         At-origination sample
Dependent variable:         Z-scoret (ind. adj.)         Z-scoret+1 (ind. adj.) Z-scoret+2 (ind. adj.)
                            Coeff.     t-stat            Coeff. t-stat          Coeff. t-stat
                                                                                                  *
Same bank (dummy)             -0.42     1.55              -0.50     1.54          -0.63    1.75
Borrower characteristics:
                                                   ***                      ***                   ***
 Senior debt rating           -0.38     4.49              -0.37     3.51          -0.36    2.78
 Log(Assetst-1)               -0.10     0.35              -0.30     0.92          -0.37    0.86
                                                   ***                      **                    **
 ROAt-1 (ind. adj.)           -9.26     5.69              -4.60     2.01          -5.61    2.51
                                                   ***
 Z-scoret-1 (ind. adj.)        0.02     3.52               0.01     1.61           0.00    0.26
Loan characteristics:
 Loan maturity                -0.07     0.64              -0.03     0.23           0.07    0.49
 Log(Loan size)                0.21     0.64               0.08     0.18           0.13    0.26
 All-in-drawn spread          -0.00     0.17              -0.00     0.70          -0.00    0.27
                                                   *
 Perf. pricing (dummy)         0.88     1.87               0.84     1.47           1.03    1.46
                                                   **
 LBO loan (dummy)             -1.35     2.35              -1.19     1.38          -1.72    1.63
                                                   *                                              **
 M&A loan (dummy)             -0.94     1.70              -1.04     1.35          -1.63    2.01
 Debt repayment                0.37     0.64               0.73     0.81           0.19    0.22
Fixed effects:
 CLO                            Yes                         Yes                    Yes
 Year                           Yes                         Yes                    Yes
Adjusted R-squared             0.67                        0.52                    0.53
Observations                  1,156                       1,082                    995




                                                                                                         42
                                        TABLE VIII
  DOES SECURITIZATION BY THE ORIGINATOR PREDICT FUTURE PERFORMANCE? (H2): RATING CHANGES
This table compares the post-origination downgrade and upgrade frequency of borrowers whose loans were sold to a CLO
underwritten by their lead arranger with other borrowers whose loans were securitized. The sample only includes
securitized loans. The dependent variable in the regressions is a dummy that indicates whether a loan was downgraded or
upgraded in a given period after the loan origination date. The focus is on the Same bank dummy equal to 1 when a loan
appears in a CLO underwritten by its lead arranger and 0 otherwise. Ratings data comes from Reuters Gold Sheets
(compiled from S&P and Moody’s) and covers the period from May 2001 through April 2010. Standard errors are clustered
by loan. Variable definitions are the same as in Table II. Loan purpose fixed effects include LBO, M&A and Debt
repayment dummies. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10 % levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                      At-origination sample
                                                1-year horizon                                         2-year horizon
                                  Coeff. z-stat          Coeff.     z-stat         Coeff.     z-stat            Coeff.    z-stat
                                  Panel A: Downgrades
     Same bank (dummy)              0.15    1.95 *          0.16     3.48    ***
                                                                                    -0.20      2.02      **
                                                                                                                  0.06     0.41
     Borrower characteristics:
                                                    ***                      ***                         **
      Senior debt rating             0.17    4.36           0.01     3.19           -0.09      2.02               0.04     0.82
                                                    **                                                   *
      Log(Assetst-1)                 0.19    2.25          -0.00     0.02            0.21      1.82               0.02     0.14
                                                    ***
      ROAt-1 (ind. adj.)            -2.54    2.94           0.05     1.24           -2.11      1.55              -0.53     0.28
      Leveraget-1 (ind. adj.)       -0.50    1.50              --                   -0.59      1.28                  --
      Coveraget-1 (ind. adj.)        0.01    0.77              --                    0.01      0.62                  --
      Z-scoret-1 (ind. adj.)            --                 -0.00     1.37               --                        0.00     0.05
     Loan characteristics:
                                                    ***                      **                          **
      Loan maturity                  0.13    3.44           0.01     2.25           -0.13      2.31               0.03     0.57
                                                                             ***                         **                        ***
      Log(Loan size)                -0.09    0.77          -0.03     2.78           -0.38      2.47              -0.52     2.98
                                                    **
      All-in-drawn spread (bps)      0.00    2.04          -0.00     0.11           -0.00      0.42              -0.00     1.13
                                                    ***                      ***                         ***                       ***
      Perf. Pricing (dummy)         -0.23    2.98          -0.08     4.18           -0.49      3.57              -0.68     5.34
     Fixed effects:
      Loan purpose                   Yes                   Yes                       Yes                          Yes
      CLO                            Yes                   Yes                       Yes                          Yes
      Industry                       Yes                    No                       Yes                          Yes
     Pseudo R-squared                0.65                  0.52                      0.48                         0.61
     Observations                    386                   504                       692                          540
                                  Panel B: Upgrades
                                                                             ***                                                   **
     Same bank (dummy)              -0.00   1.23           -0.19     2.71           -0.03      0.38              -0.23     2.50
     Borrower characteristics:
                                                    ***
      Senior debt rating             0.00    3.56          -0.00     0.00            0.05      1.27              -0.03     0.58
                                                    *
      Log(Assetst-1)                -0.00    1.74          -0.11     1.09           -0.07      0.63               0.15     0.83
                                                    ***                                                                            **
      ROAt-1 (ind. adj.)            -0.01    3.21          -0.45     0.57           -0.06      0.05               3.76     2.44
      Leveraget-1 (ind. adj.)       -0.00    1.52              --                   -0.02      0.07                  --
      Coveraget-1 (ind. adj.)       -0.00    2.31              --                   -0.01      1.26                  --
                                                                                                                                   ***
      Z-scoret-1 (ind. adj.)            --                 -0.01     0.54               --                       -0.22     3.39
     Loan characteristics:
      Loan maturity                 -0.00    1.13           0.03     0.69           -0.03      0.77              -0.04     0.84
                                                    ***
      Log(Loan size)                -0.00    2.70           0.15     1.17           -0.08      0.59               0.19     0.89
                                                                                                                                   ***
      All-in-drawn spread (bps)     -0.00    0.02          -0.00     0.32            0.00      0.52               0.01     2.88
                                                    ***                      *                           ***                       ***
      Perf. Pricing (dummy)          0.99    4.35           0.27     1.77            0.40      3.10               0.64     3.93
     Fixed effects:
      Loan purpose                  Yes                    Yes                       Yes                          Yes
      CLO                           Yes                    Yes                       Yes                          Yes
      Industry                      Yes                     No                       Yes                          Yes
     Pseudo R-squared               0.82                   0.32                      0.35                         0.58
     Observations                   302                    480                       676                          487




                                                                                                                                         43
                                            TABLE IX
          DOES SECURITIZATION BY THE ORIGINATOR PREDICT FUTURE PERFORMANCE? (H2): CDS
This table compares the change in CDS spreads following loan origination for borrowers whose loans were securitized by
their lead arranger versus other securitized loans. The sample only includes securitized loans. The dependent variable is the
percentage change in a borrower’s CDS spread in a given period after loan origination. The focus is on the Same bank
dummy equal to 1 when a loan appears in a CLO underwritten by its lead arranger and 0 otherwise. CDS data comes from
Markit and corresponds to 5-year contracts. CDS spreads are available for the entire evaluation period, which spans 2003
through June 2009. Loan purpose fixed effects include LBO, M&A and Debt repayment dummies. Standard errors are
clustered by loan. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10 % levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                                                At-origination sample
                                                         0-12 months            13-24 months
                                                          post-event             post-event
                                                     Coeff.   t-stat         Coeff.   t-stat
                            Same bank (dummy)          0.06    1.03           0.00    0.03
                            Borrower characteristics:
                                                                       ***
                             Senior debt rating       -0.22    4.41           -0.01   0.26
                                                                       ***                     ***
                             Realized CDS vol.         0.01    6.65            0.00   4.32
                            Loan characteristics:
                                                                       ***
                             Loan maturity            -0.34    2.68           -0.01   0.22
                                                                       ***                     ***
                             Log(Loan size)           -0.54    3.04            0.33   4.92
                                                                                               ***
                             All-in-drawn spread       0.00    0.25            0.00   7.64
                                                                       ***                     ***
                             Perf. pricing             2.39    4.39            0.38   3.55
                            Fixed effects:
                             Loan purpose              Yes                    Yes
                             CLO                       Yes                    Yes
                             Industry                  Yes                    Yes
                            Adjusted R-squared         0.98                   0.99
                            Observations                269                   348




                                                                                                                           44
