                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     RETHINKING AMERICA'S ILLEGAL DRUG POLICY

                                          John J. Donohue III
                                           Benjamin Ewing
                                            David Peloquin

                                         Working Paper 16776
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16776


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2011




The authors wish to thank Jonathan Caulkins, Phil Cook, Louis Kaplow, Rob MacCoun, Jeffrey Miron,
Peter Reuter, and participants at two NBER conferences and the Harvard Law School Law and Economics
workshop for valuable comments. We are also particularly grateful to Jeffrey Miron and Angela Dills
for sharing their national time series data on drug prohibition enforcement and crime. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2011 by John J. Donohue III, Benjamin Ewing, and David Peloquin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rethinking America's Illegal Drug Policy
John J. Donohue III, Benjamin Ewing, and David Peloquin
NBER Working Paper No. 16776
February 2011
JEL No. K0

                                                 ABSTRACT

This paper provides a critical review of the empirical and theoretical literatures on illegal drug policy,
including cross-country comparisons, in order to evaluate three drug policy regimes: criminalization,
legalization and “depenalization.” Drawing on the experiences of various states, as well as countries
such as Portugal and the Netherlands, the paper attempts to identify cost-minimizing policies for marijuana
and cocaine by assessing the differing ways in which the various drug regimes would likely change
the magnitude and composition of the social costs of each drug. The paper updates and evaluates Jeffrey
Miron’s 1999 national time series analysis of drug prohibition spending and the homicide rate, which
underscores the lack of a solid empirical base for assessing the theoretically anticipated crime drop
that would come from drug legalization. Nonetheless, the authors conclude that given the number
of arrests for marijuana possession, and the costs of incarceration and crime systemic to cocaine criminalization,
the current regime is unlikely to be cost-minimizing for either marijuana or cocaine.


John J. Donohue III                                     David Peloquin
Stanford Law School                                     Yale Law School
Crown Quadrangle                                        127 Wall Street
559 Nathan Abbott Way                                   New Haven, CT 06511
Stanford, CA 94305                                      david.peloquin@yale.edu
and NBER
donohue@law.stanford.edu

Benjamin Ewing
Yale Law School
127 Wall Street
New Haven, CT 06511
benjamin.ewing@yale.edu
I. Introduction

       The United States stands out among developed nations for both its extremely punitive

illegal drug policy and the high percentages of its population that have consumed banned

substances—particularly marijuana and cocaine. The war against the millions of Americans who

use and sell these drugs has cost taxpayers billions of dollars each year and contributed

substantially to America’s globally unmatched incarceration rate (Walmsley 2009).1 Yet it has

failed to displace America from among the world leaders in use rates for illegal drugs even if

escalating punitiveness may have contributed to declines in U.S. drug consumption from its

peaks in the late 1970s and 1980s.

       To locate America’s illegal drug policy globally and along a spectrum of potential

alternatives, it is helpful to consider three broad approaches governments may take toward drugs:

(1) legalization—a system in which possession and sale are lawful but subject to regulation and

taxation (U.S. policy for alcohol and tobacco);2 (2) criminalization—a system of proscriptions on

possession and sale backed by criminal punishment, potentially including incarceration (U.S.

policy for marijuana, cocaine, and other illegal drugs); and (3) depenalization—a hybrid system,

in which sale and possession are proscribed, but the prohibition on possession is backed only by

such sanctions as fines or mandatory substance abuse treatment, not incarceration3 (U.S. policy

toward alcohol during Prohibition).4 All three of these approaches have been implemented in the

practices of various governments around the world, though to greater and lesser extents. Nearly

all countries have criminalized a consistent set of proscribed substances including marijuana,

cocaine, heroin, and methamphetamine; most have also legalized other drugs such as alcohol and

tobacco; and some have adopted policies of depenalization for substances whose sale, and to

some degree possession, remains prohibited.5




                                                 1
       We begin our analysis in Section II by attempting to define America’s illegal drug

problem, first sketching consumption patterns, current policy, and the social costs of illegal drugs

under America’s basic regime of criminalization. Because America’s illegal drug policies are an

integral part of the context in which those costs arise—and many of those costs, such as those

associated with incarceration, would not exist but for America’s current policies—we consider

current policies and social costs in tandem, distinguishing costs that stem from criminalization

and costs that flow from psychopharmacological effects of drugs on their users. Following this

overview, we focus in Section III on the particular cases of marijuana and cocaine. For both

marijuana and cocaine, we analyze three potential regimes—criminalization, depenalization, and

legalization. We also address the two most significant sources of social costs from cocaine:

crime and incarceration.

       Marijuana is the most widely used illegal drug in America (as elsewhere) and the one

with the most vocal advocates for legalization. Cocaine has been an especially acute problem in

America, with the prevalence of this drug and its derivative, crack, providing the impetus for the

escalation of the War on Drugs in the 1980s and Plan Colombia in the 1990s. We restrict our

discussion to these two drugs partly because one of our principal contentions is that analysis of

illegal drug policy from a perspective of minimizing social costs requires great focus on the

varying burdens of individual drugs given their different toxicological and inherent criminogenic

effects, and their distinct patterns of consumption and distribution.

       Under U.S. criminalization of marijuana, a large number of people are arrested and

otherwise punished for possession of a substance that is routinely consumed in today’s

developed world and is—by various expert accounts and along many measures—less dangerous

to users and society than cigarettes or alcohol. This policy not only consumes criminal justice




                                                 2
resources and crowds out other valuable social spending, it also creates hard-to-quantify costs in

other forms: diminished respect for the law, loss of faith in government warnings about the

serious dangers posed by more harmful drugs, and a morally arbitrary arrest lottery undermining

the principle that like offenders be treated equally. On the other hand, cocaine is substantially

more dangerous than marijuana and under criminalization it is much more socially costly in the

aggregate, notwithstanding far lower rates of use. The costs of cocaine under criminalization

overwhelmingly stem from crime, violence, and incarceration.

       The differing nature of the costs of criminalization for marijuana and cocaine is important

because it suggests that the effect of a regime change (e.g., from criminalization to

depenalization or legalization) would be different for marijuana than for cocaine. Depenalization

and legalization could both potentially reduce perhaps the foremost cost of marijuana

criminalization: the extremely high number of arrests for possession, and the concomitant

burdens they impose on the criminal justice system’s resources and individual arrestees—many

of whom are otherwise law-abiding.6 Legalization, to a much greater extent than depenalization,

would reduce the costs of black-market violence and lengthy incarceration for sellers that weigh

so heavily in the overall costs of cocaine.

       On the other hand, economic theory suggests that reductions in sanctions through

depenalization or legalization would lower costs both implicit (such as time spent and risk

incurred to obtain the drug) and explicit (the per unit dollar price of the drug), and thereby

increase demand and use. By more substantially reducing costs and government disapproval, and

by potentially enabling advertising, legalization would be expected to lead to higher levels of

consumption than under a regime of depenalization. The possible exception to this claim would

be if legalization were accompanied by a sufficiently comprehensive taxation regime that would




                                                  3
restrain consumption by maintaining a high enough price to the consumer. The

psychopharmacological effects of cocaine are markedly more harmful than those of marijuana,

and the costs per additional user would be higher for cocaine than marijuana. Moreover,

marijuana consumption is much higher than cocaine consumption so the offsetting effect of tax

revenues on the social costs of cocaine would be much less significant than for marijuana.

       In sum, legalizing cocaine would pose greater risks and offer greater potential rewards

than legalizing marijuana: the decreases in certain categories of costs and increases in others

would be much more substantial for cocaine than for marijuana.

       Not surprisingly, much of the debate over illegal drug policy and potential reforms hinges

on two contentious questions. First, by how much would the prevalence and intensity of a drug’s

use rise under a different regime?7 Second, would reductions in other social costs—particularly

through lower rates of crime and criminal justice enforcement costs—outweigh the costs of

increased consumption?

       Our nation’s experience with alcohol regulation is instructive. During Prohibition—a

regime of decriminalization or extreme depenalization—alcohol consumption was suppressed

(from higher rates under legalization) to a degree that noticeably lowered the cost of alcohol

abuse. These gains, however, appear to have come at a high cost in terms of crime, which fell

sharply after Prohibition ended. While criminal gangs no longer cause mayhem over alcohol

distribution, alcohol abuse does lead to belligerence and crime as well as many other social costs

ranging from impaired productivity and increased motor-vehicle deaths to higher levels of child

abuse and neglect. The U.S. has vastly more alcoholics than drug addicts in part because we

have allowed a free market coupled with extensive advertising to promote alcohol consumption,

with taxation levels that are well below social costs.




                                                 4
       Conjectures from some sources that similarly free markets for cocaine could increase

today’s relatively small number of cocaine addicts to levels beyond the current number of

alcoholics are offered in support of the current war on drugs. Opponents counter by pointing to

the enormous criminal violence—here and abroad—that this war has generated, as well as the

500,000 incarcerated Americans whose lost freedom and productivity are among the greatest

casualties of the war on drugs. The stakes are high for illicit drug policy, yet unfortunately we

must continually choose its contours (for maintaining the status quo is itself a choice) with a less

than ideal evidentiary base.

       Legalization would almost certainly reduce crime, but such a prospective gain must be

weighed against the increase in the costs of substance abuse that would likely follow. The

murder and violence of illegal drug dealing, and the hundreds of thousands of ruined lives of

prison inmates must be assessed against increased motor vehicle deaths and potentially millions

of lives impaired by addiction. These are not pretty or easy choices, and to a significant extent

the consequences of various drug policy regimes will depend upon the specifics of design and

implementation. Our effort here is directed toward clarifying the tradeoffs by exploring, in the

contexts of marijuana and cocaine, the question of which regime—and what set of policies

within that overarching framework—would minimize the total cost to society.8



II. Defining America’s Illegal Drug Problem

a. Consumption Patterns

i. Consumption Across Users

       As Figure 1 reveals, according to the WHO World Mental Health Surveys taken in the

2000s, 42 percent of American adults have tried cannabis, more than twice the take-up rate in




                                                 5
any of the 17 countries studied other than New Zealand, which trailed closely behind the United

States (Degenhardt et al. 2008).9 Figure 2 illustrates that the percentage of Americans ever

consuming cocaine is even more extreme: sixteen percent of American adults have tried cocaine,

dwarfing the next highest rates of about four percent in Colombia, Mexico, Spain, and New

Zealand and the under two percent rates in other European countries, the Middle East, Africa,

and Asia (Degenhardt et al. 2008). As Figure 7 and Figure 8 reveal, annual use figures are

naturally lower, but the U.S. also stands near the top in terms of rates of past-year use. Figure 3

and Figure 4 provide comparable data on lifetime use rates of tobacco and alcohol, the two most

socially costly legal drugs. While U.S. consumption levels for these legal substances are not low,

they stand out less in the global context than U.S. use rates of marijuana and cocaine.10 If our

severe criminalization has been effective at reducing the prevalence of marijuana and cocaine,

however, then use rates in the U.S. are actually markedly lower than they would be were we to

follow other countries’ examples and move away from our distinctly punitive approach. One’s

assessment of the effectiveness of our illegal drug policy is partly tied to one’s assessment of that

counterfactual world.11

                               Insert Figure 1, 2, 3 and 4 about here

       A recurring pattern in the distribution of consumption across users holds for a variety of

recreational drugs: a small percentage of users account for a large percentage of consumption.

This pattern is found for alcohol consumption in the United States (Cook 2007, 57), as well as

for cocaine use. For example, one study found that the top 22 percent of users account for 70

percent of cocaine consumption (NRC 2001, 60; see also Rydell and Everingham 1994, finding

that heavy cocaine users consume cocaine at a rate nearly eight times that of light users). The top

heaviness of the distribution of cocaine use among consumers is believed to have increased from




                                                  6
the early 1980s when consumption was nearly evenly split between light users and heavy users

(NRC 2001, 60). Reuter (1999b, 17-18) characterizes cocaine as a “career” rather than an

“event,” because as they come to appreciate the harmful consequences of the drug, the casual

users quit, leaving in place a core of more serious users. Marijuana consumption is concentrated

among individuals in their late teens and their twenties. Most consumers use the drug relatively

infrequently and for relatively short periods of time (MacCoun and Reuter 2001, 342). Taken as

a whole, these drug use distribution patterns suggest that the most severe problems stemming

from drug use are concentrated within a relatively small percentage of users.

       The National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence (NCADD 2002) relies on a

2001 study by the Schneider Institute for Health Policy at Brandeis University, Substance Abuse:

The Nation’s Number One Health Problem, for the claim that about 18 million Americans have

alcohol problems and 5 to 6 million Americans have (illegal) drug problems (SIHP 2001). A

similar set of estimates—not of “alcoholics” and problem users but of abusive or “dependent”

users—comes from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) from 2007

(SAMHSA 2008). The study found that in 2007, approximately 22.3 million people aged 12 or

older had, in the past year, abused or experienced dependence on alcohol, illegal drugs, or both:

15.5 million abused or depended upon alcohol, 3.2 million on alcohol and illegal drugs, and 3.7

million on illegal drugs but not alcohol (SAMHSA 2008, 71).12

       The NSDUH methodology uses various questions to classify persons as “dependent”

upon or “abusing” different substances based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental

Disorders, 4th edition (DSM-IV). As the report puts it:

       Dependence is considered to be a more severe substance use problem than abuse

       because it involves the psychological and physiological effects of tolerance and




                                                7
       withdrawal. Although individuals may meet the criteria specified here for both

       dependence and abuse, persons meeting the criteria for both are classified as

       having dependence, but not abuse. Persons defined with abuse in this report do

       not meet the criteria for dependence (SAMHSA 2008, 71).


       The plight of drug users who are deemed to be in the thrall of addiction, abuse, or

dependence is central to understanding illegal drug policy. Those who advocate maintaining

severe criminalization frequently raise the specter of ballooning addiction to make

depenalization or legalization seem intolerably reckless.13 They argue, consistent with the

dominant understanding of addiction today as a disease, that once addiction sets in, individuals

find themselves caught in a pattern of self-destructive behavior that is nearly impossible to

escape. Severe sanctions for use, on this account, offer a strong incentive to avoid initiating the

addiction cycle and to get out of it once it begins.

       Yet there are fundamental tensions within the viewpoint just described. First, if punitive

treatment of users reduces the number of people trying illegal drugs (and perhaps in turn the

number who become perpetual users), it may conflict with the aim of providing problem users

with the therapeutic treatment they need to wean themselves from drugs. It is not simply that

governments with punitive dispositions divert resources that could be used on treatment

programs. Punitive criminalization may create fears of punishment and demonization that

directly discourage users from seeking treatment. The Economist recently noted that in Portugal,

which decriminalized possession of illegal drugs in 2001, “[t]he number of addicts registered in

drug-substitution programmes has risen from 6,000 in 1999 to over 24,000 in 2008, reflecting a

big rise in treatment (but not in drug use)” (Treating Not Punishing 2009).14 The United States




                                                  8
has tried a different approach, using criminalization as a vehicle to promote treatment by

sometimes offering it as an alternative to, or a means of reducing, criminal penalties.15

       Second, the generally accepted view—outside of some Chicago school theoretical

musings of the late 1960s and early 1970s—has long been that swift and certain sanctions are

more salient, and effective at deterring than more distant and uncertain punishments of greater

severity. Kleiman (2009) has stressed the intractable tradeoff between swiftness and severity in

punishment. As he puts it:

       One problem with the brute-force, high-severity approach is that severity is

       incompatible with swiftness and certainty. Severity means using a large share of

       punishment resources on a (relatively) few offenders, and (as the American

       experience with capital punishment since its reintroduction illustrates) the more

       severe a sentence is the more reluctantly it will be imposed and the more “due

       process”—and therefore the more time—it will require. (Kleiman 2009, 3)


The greater deterrence value of more immediate and likely sanctions seems especially important

given the apparent risk and time preferences of drug users—individuals whose behavior suggests

a present-moment orientation and a heavy discounting of future burdens. An experiment with

offenders on probation in Honolulu, for example, which tested the effect of a program oriented

around imminent but short incarceration for violators, found that program participants were 55

percent less likely to be arrested for a new crime and 72 percent less likely to test positive for

drug use (Hawken and Kleiman 2009, 64).

       Third, to the extent that addiction means a lack of voluntariness on the part of the addict,

sanctioning addicts with the full brunt of criminal law is in tension with the core American

criminal law requirements of mens rea and actus reus. If drug addiction is characterized by



                                                  9
involuntariness, then addicted users appear neither culpable to a degree meriting criminal

sanctions16 nor likely to be deterred by such punishment. On the other hand, if drug addiction is a

disorder of choice, as some have recently and compellingly argued on the basis of strong

evidence that most addicts recover,17 then an internalities-based justification of criminalization is

weakened: addiction begins to look less like an irreversible step into self-destruction and more

like a habit that individuals will struggle over, but quite likely eventually overcome. The greater

the degree of choice involved, the less catastrophic is initiation into use and even addiction, and

the less justifiable are the costly sanctions designed in large part to keep individuals from ever

experimenting with illegal drugs.

       The significance of addicts in aggregate marijuana and cocaine consumption is important

to bear in mind when considering the effect of changes in price—and policy shifts that would

affect a drug’s price, such as changes to criminal sanctions, depenalization, or legalization—on

the prevalence and intensity of use. Initially, one might assume that non-addicts and prospective

dabblers would be more responsive to changes in price than addicts, whose compulsive behavior

is often equated with an inability to quit, rising costs notwithstanding. According to this line of

thinking, marginal increases in price—through, say, more severe criminal penalties—would

affect casual users much more than heavy users, thus decreasing aggregate harms of use only by

changing the behavior of marginal users, without substantially diminishing the core of problem

users. A lower price resulting from more lenient policies would induce some new users whose

intensity of use would be harder to predict—though a reasonable assumption might be that the

new group would contain no greater percentage of addicts than the initial population of users.18

       However, it is also possible—and consistent with the economic model of rational

addiction put forth by Becker and Murphy (1988)19—that addicts will be responsive to price




                                                 10
changes over longer time spans. While neither we nor Becker and Murphy believe that all

addictive behavior can be explained adequately as the rational pursuit of welfare maximization,20

their model highlights an important theoretical consideration in attempting to assess the impacts

of actual and hypothetical policy changes (and concomitant drug prices) on use: time horizon.

One reason among many for caution in extrapolating from the results of short-lived policy

experiences is that a policy affecting the use rate of a drug through the price mechanism may

have a substantially greater impact if retained over a long period of time. Provocatively, the

model put forth by Becker and Murphy suggests that in the long run, consumption of addictive

goods may be even more responsive to price changes than consumption of nonaddictive goods.21

In the long run at least, price changes may indeed expand or contract the core of problem users.

       Another factor to take into account when considering consumption across users is the age

at which users are most likely to become addicted to illicit substances. In surveys of individuals

in the United States, psychiatric researchers have found that drug abuse disorders, excluding

alcohol, have a lifetime prevalence of 8.5 percent, and that age 19 is the median age-of-onset for

such disorders (Kessler et al. 2005, 595). More importantly, these same surveys indicate that

drug abuse disorders have a narrow age-of-onset range, with an interquartile range of 17-23

years (Kessler et al.). This suggests that efforts aimed at curtailing drug use among young people

can play a key role in preventing drug addiction. Individuals who do not develop a disorder by

their late twenties are much less likely ever to develop such a disorder.22 Therefore, finding ways

to limit access to drugs among children and teens should be central to any regime—and any

depenalization or legalization proposal.



ii. Consumption Across History




                                                11
       Simply identifying the trends in illegal drug use over time is a difficult task, given the

obvious obstacles to securing accurate information about illegal behavior over extended periods

of time. A number of surveys of illegal drug use include the percentages of individuals reporting

to have used in the past month, past year, and ever. These are often broken down by drug and

user characteristics—most notably age group. While the percentage of a population using a drug

during a given time period is a valuable measure, all such statistics are limited in that they do not

capture other important variables such as quantities and potencies used by individuals, much less

the severity of harms associated with the instances of use.23

       Even if one accepts the accuracy of the data, one must also use caution in analyzing

historical data regarding drug use trends. There is a natural—but potentially misguided—

tendency to equate periods of low prevalence with successful policy and to attribute spikes in the

percentage of users with policy failings. Even if prevalence of use were the sole criterion by

which to measure the success of drug policy, it would remain extremely difficult to attribute

causation to specific policies given the myriad other social factors that influence use.

       With those provisos in mind, it is worth taking a cursory look at historical trends in the

use of marijuana and cocaine in the United States. In Figure 5 we report data from the

Monitoring the Future surveys24 on the percentage of high school seniors reporting use of

marijuana, cocaine, any illegal drug, and any illegal drug other than marijuana, within the past 30

days. While these are relatively narrow measures, we present them not just for the intrinsic

significance of use prevalence among late adolescents, but also because they are broadly

consistent with overall prevalence and have the important advantage of consistent tracking over a

long period of time.

                                     Insert Figure 5 about here




                                                 12
       As Figure 5 suggests, the percentage of high school seniors who recently used marijuana

reached a peak during the late 1970s, declined until the early 1990s, rose during the mid-to-late

part of that decade and has since leveled and begun to decline in the 2000s. The percentage of

high school seniors who recently used cocaine rose through the late 1970s, stayed high in the

early 1980s, rose again in the middle of the decade, then declined by its end, falling until the

early 1990s, after which time it rose fairly modestly by historical standards, then leveled. The

tight correlation between the percentage using marijuana and the percentage using any illegal

drug is broadly consistent with drug use trends—not just in the United States, but globally as

well. This correlation is quite common across populations because the percentage of individuals

around the world using marijuana dwarfs the percentage using all other illegal drugs.

       Figure 5 might be taken to suggest that the “Just Say No” campaign of the Reagan years

led to a major decline in consumption that was reversed during the more permissive Clinton

years, although one must consider whether the Reagan campaign influenced reporting behavior

as well as drug use. In addition, scholars have offered two reasons to doubt that policy changes

in the U.S. can explain the declines in cocaine and marijuana use from the mid-eighties through

the early nineties, the subsequent rise in use during the 1990s or the leveling off in the new

century. First, drug use has in a number of instances followed the trajectories of epidemics—

wherein use has increased continuously until reaching a plateau, then diminishing, likely due in

part to greater awareness of the harmful consequences of use. Second, as Room et al. (2008, 15)

note, regarding cannabis:

       Interestingly, there seems to be a common pattern over time across countries. For

       most western nations between 1991 and 1998 there was an increase of about half

       in the proportion of 18 year olds reporting that they had tried cannabis. Since




                                                 13
       1998 in the same countries there has been a substantial decline in that figure,

       though in 2006 it still remains well above the 1991 level…The common patterns

       across countries with very different policy approaches reinforce the general

       impression that penalties for personal use have very little impact on the

       prevalence of cannabis use in a society.



b. Current Policy

i. America’s Punitive Approach

       No responsible analysis of the harmful consequences of drug use can ignore the

       possibility that many of the harms of drug use are either caused or augmented by

       the legal prohibition against these drugs and its enforcement. Drug prohibition is

       inevitably a source of government intrusion into citizens’ lives. Many (but not all)

       overdoses occur due to the unknown purity and potency of illegally purchased

       drugs. The sharing of contaminated syringes is largely a consequence of the

       artificial scarcity created by their illegality. And much of the criminality and

       violence associated with drug use (but by no means all) is due to the high price of

       illegal drugs and the conditions of their sale in illegal markets.

              -National Research Council, Informing America’s Policy on Illegal Drugs

              (2001, 63).


       Figure 6 illustrates that across the array of five broad areas in which the federal

government spends resources to control drug use, the dominant growth in spending since the

initiation of the war on drugs has come in the area of domestic criminal enforcement. The

federal government’s categorical classification of drug prohibition spending changed after 2001.



                                                  14
However, in the past decade, federal drug policy has continued to shift its emphasis toward the

supply side (ONDCP 2009, 15). As we will later show more directly, disaggregating the costs

associated with America’s illegal drug problem under the current drug-control policy approach

underscores that many of the social costs of illegal drugs arise not from drug use per se but rather

from drug control.25 In this section, we examine the punitive side of America’s current drug

policies, focusing on the costs of incarceration.

                                     Insert Figure 6 about here

       Current U.S. drug control policy is largely punitive in nature. In 2007, law enforcement

agencies nationwide made over 1.8 million arrests for drug abuse violations, more arrests than

for any other category of offense (BJS 2009, 1). Of these arrests, approximately four-fifths were

for possession, with 42.1 percent resulting from marijuana possession and 21.5 percent from

heroin or cocaine possession (BJS 2009). The Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)

has found that the largest cost increases in the war on drugs from 1992 to 2002 came as a result

of increased incarceration rates for drug offenses and drug-related offenses and from the law

enforcement and judicial proceedings needed to put offenders in prison (ONDCP 2004, vi).

       Now imprisoning a greater percentage of its population than any other country

(Walmsley 2009), the U.S. has less than five percent of the world’s population but nearly 25

percent of its prisoners (A Nation of Jailbirds 2009). The punitive focus of U.S. drug policy is a

major component of our country’s record-sized prison populations. The American incarceration

rate has increased greatly since President Ronald Reagan’s emphasis on the war on drugs in the

early 1980s. The number incarcerated in prison or jail on drug charges is estimated have risen

from about 40,000 in 1980 to about 500,000 today—more than the total number incarcerated for

all offenses thirty years ago (Mauer 2009, 1). As of 2004, drug offenders constituted an




                                                    15
estimated 55 percent of the federal prison population and 21 percent of the state prison

population (Mumola and Karberg 2007).26

       Though most arrests involving drug offenses are for possession, most individuals serving

prison sentences for drug offenses are behind bars for trafficking offenses, not just possession. In

1999, the most recent year for which the Bureau of Justice Statistics did a comprehensive report

on federal drug offenders, simple possession was the most serious offense for only 2.1 percent of

drug offense suspects referred to U.S. Attorneys for prosecution, whereas for 97.5 percent, drug

trafficking was the most serious offense (BJS 2001, 2).27 In terms of drugs involved for

defendants actually convicted of federal drug offenses, 30.6 percent involved marijuana, 22.4

percent involved crack cocaine, 21.5 percent involved cocaine powder, 12.5 percent involved

methamphetamine, 7.8 percent involved opiates, 0.5 percent involved hallucinogens, and 4.8

percent other substances (BJS 2001, 9).

       Unsurprisingly, the percentage of incarcerated drug offenders serving time for possession

appears to be significantly greater in state as opposed to federal prisons. Analyzing data from the

2004 Survey of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities, Mumola and Karberg (2007,

4) report that in 2004, 5.3 percent of drug offenders in federal prisons and 27.9 percent of drug

offenders in state prisons were incarcerated for possession. The authors found that of drug

offenders held in state prisons, 61.8 percent reported that cocaine or crack was involved in their

offenses, and the analogous figures were 18.6 percent for stimulants, 12.7 percent for marijuana

or hashish, 12.2 percent for heroin and other opiates, 2.2 percent for depressants, and 1.7 percent

for hallucinogens.28 One must interpret these data with caution. First, just 20.7 percent of drug

offenders in state prisons reported having no prior criminal history (Mumola and Karberg 2007,

4). Second, given the pervasiveness of plea bargaining and the evidentiary ease of prosecuting




                                                16
possession relative to other offenses, the percentage of convicts incarcerated in state prisons

whose most severe offense truly is possession remains somewhat illusive.

       The price of keeping hundreds of thousands of drug offenders behind bars is high and

rising. Locking up approximately half-a-million drug offenders has a direct budgetary cost in the

billions each year—approximately $6.6 billion for state drug prisoners and perhaps that sum over

again for federal prisoners and convicts serving time in jail.29 In addition to the costs of

incarceration borne by government and prisoners, a large toll falls on the families of those

incarcerated, partly in terms of lost incomes, many of which were lawful ones (Donohue 2009).

Fifty-nine percent of male state and federal inmates in prison for drug possession or trafficking

have minor children, whereas in the general prison population, only fifty-one percent have

children, indicating an additional cost stemming from high incarceration rates in the form of

children with absent fathers (BJS 2008, 4).

       There is also a startling racial disparity in imprisonment for drug charges. In state

prisons, African-Americans account for 38.6 percent of prisoners overall and 45.1 percent of

prisoners convicted of drug offenses (Sabol, Couture and Harrison 2007, 24), though they

represent just 13 percent of the U.S. population (US Census Bureau 2008).30 There is also

evidence that a substantial portion of racial profiling problems result from the targeting of drug

sellers through criminal enforcement efforts, which could be greatly reduced under a less

punitive drug policy.



ii. America in a Global Perspective

       With the aim of devising rational drug policies based on practical experience rather than

predominantly ideological concerns, countries throughout Europe are experimenting with drug




                                                  17
policy in a variety of ways. In general, European countries have less punitive—and more harm-

reduction oriented—approaches to drug policy than the United States. The Action Plan adopted

by the German government in 2003 to deal with Germany’s drug problem is representative of

this approach, claiming: “The ‘Action Plan on Drugs and Addiction’ advocates a realistic drug

policy. It responds more to the concrete reality of life than to any ideological principles. Every

addict must have access to appropriate therapy options” (Caspers-Merk 2003, 7). The plan

encompasses both legal and illegal substances, recognizing that far more Germans suffer

substance abuse problems related to tobacco and alcohol than illegal drugs (11-12).

       Portugal has become the poster child of European drug reform following its July 1, 2001

decriminalization of formerly illicit substances.31 Rather than handle drug possession and use as

a criminal matter, the police in Portugal give a civil citation to those caught using or possessing a

quantity of drugs less than the average amount sufficient for ten-day use by one person. As

Greenwald (2009, 3) notes, these civil citations instruct recipients to appear before a “dissuasion

commission” within seventy-two hours. The dissuasion commission, which is designed to avoid

all appearances of a criminal tribunal, is made up of a lawyer and two members of the medical

profession, and it may order those caught with drugs to pay a fine or undergo a course of

treatment. Greenwald reports, however, that fines are a last resort designed to be suspended

except for addicts and repeat offenders, who can have their fines suspended as well, if they agree

to treatment (3).32

       Even European countries that have not followed the extreme depenalization approach of

Portugal have experimented with less punitive and more treatment-oriented drug policies. In

Switzerland, for example, cannabis use remains a criminal offense (Room et al. 2008, 117).

However, Switzerland experimented with a regime of open sales of small quantities of illicit




                                                 18
drugs, such as heroin, in Zurich’s Platzspitz (the so-called “Needle Park”) (MacCoun and Reuter

2005, 264). This experiment lasted only five years, from 1987-1992, because the park became

unsightly and was viewed as an embarrassment by the city. Instead of resorting to strict punitive

measures for drug use, Switzerland then instituted a heroin maintenance program that allowed

heroin addicts to receive daily heroin shots supervised by a nurse in a clinical setting.

Switzerland has since expanded this program due to evidence that crime rates and unemployment

rates among participants drop during participation (266-67). Similar programs have been

instituted with encouraging results in Vancouver, Canada, and the Netherlands (Reuter 2009).

       But the trend toward decriminalization of drugs is not universal: the United Kingdom has

gone in the other direction in recent years, at least with respect to marijuana, by increasing the

maximum penalties for marijuana use. Gordon Brown’s government decided to reclassify

cannabis from a Class C drug to a more serious Class B drug, resulting in a maximum penalty of

fourteen years of imprisonment for marijuana supplying, dealing, producing, and trafficking, and

five years for possession (Room et al. 2008, 92-93). However, while the potential for such

penalties exists, the British Home Office describes the “likely” enforcement steps: for a first

possession offense police will issue a warning, for a second they will issue a Penalty Notice for

Disorder (a civil citation resulting in an 80 Pound fee), and for a third, they will arrest the

individual (Home Office 2009). Thus, even in one of Europe’s strictest drug regimes, arrests and

criminal punishment are reserved for repeat offenders.

       While many European countries have more liberal policies toward drug possession, they

generally continue to have strict penalties for drug trafficking―though these are appreciably less

severe than their counterpart American punishments. As the European Monitoring Centre for

Drugs and Drug Addiction puts it, “[o]ver the past ten years, most European countries have




                                                  19
moved towards an approach that distinguishes between the drug trafficker, who is viewed as a

criminal, and the drug user, who is seen more as a sick person who is in need of treatment”

(EMCDDA 2008, 22). For example, in spite of their relatively liberal policies toward drug users,

the maximum drug trafficking penalty in the Netherlands is, nominally at least, 16 years (DEA

2005, 255). Even in Portugal, drug trafficking remains a criminal offense because it involves

possession in excess of the average dose needed for ten days of personal use (Greenwald 2009,

3). Relative to America, Europe has focused more on helping rather than punishing problem

users, while still attempting to disrupt large-scale drug networks.

         Europe is not the only region of the world to have largely eliminated or reduced the

penalties associated with possessing and using certain drugs. Latin America has also trended

toward decriminalization in recent years. The Argentine Supreme Court decriminalized

possession of small amounts of marijuana in August of 2009 (Brice 2009). The court based its

ruling on the grounds that it is unconstitutional to punish adults for private use of marijuana if

that use does not harm anyone else (Moffett 2009).33 In declaring unconstitutional a law that

provided for sentences of up to two years for drug possession, the court also opened the door for

possible decriminalization of other substances, because the specific law overturned was not

limited to marijuana. Lower courts might expand the ruling to other drugs. Following the court

ruling, the chief of the Argentine cabinet praised the decision for challenging an American-style

war on drugs by ending “the repressive policy that the Nixon administration invented” (Brice

2009).

         A few days prior to the Argentine court ruling, Mexico enacted decriminalization

legislation specifying that individuals in possession of small amounts of marijuana, cocaine,

heroin, and methamphetamine will not be criminally prosecuted (Luhnow and de Cordoba 2009;




                                                 20
Wilkinson 2009). The new Mexican regime is similar to the Portuguese decriminalization in that

those caught by police possessing a small amount of drugs will be encouraged to seek treatment

(Luhnow and de Cordoba). After being caught three times with drugs, the user will be required

to attend treatment. Unlike the prior presidential administration, which sharply criticized earlier

attempts by Mexico to decriminalize drugs, President Obama’s drug czar, Gil Kerlikowske, said

that the Administration would evaluate the new Mexican law using a “wait and see” approach

(Luhnow and de Cordoba).

       In recent years both Brazil and Ecuador have also signaled that they may follow the path

of Argentina and Mexico toward decriminalization (Moffett 2009). Taken together, these

developments reflect the dissatisfaction many Latin American governments have with America’s

punitive war on drugs: a war that was started in large part to combat drug production and

trafficking emanating from Latin America. While it is too soon to tell what effects the Argentine

and Mexican reforms will have on use rates in those countries, we will show in subsequent

sections that the European experience casts doubt on prohibitionist fears that drug use will

inevitably jump sharply.



c. Defining the Costs

i. Aggregating the Costs

       The social costs of recreational drug use in America have been staggering and unabated.

According to the ONDCP’s most recent estimate, the economic cost of illegal drug use in the

United States in 2002—including lost productivity, health effects, and crime-related costs such

as policing expenditures and incarceration—was $180.9 billion, having grown at an average rate

of 5.3 percent annually since 1992 (ONDCP 2004, vi).34 The costs of two legal drugs—alcohol




                                                21
and tobacco—are of a similar order of magnitude. The most recent comprehensive estimate of

Harwood (2000) puts the annual economic cost of alcohol use at $184.6 billion in 1998.35 Rice

(1999) estimates the annual economic cost of smoking in 1995 was $138 billion. Placing these

figures in constant 2008 dollars provides a set of crude estimates of current annual social costs of

alcohol ($244 billion), tobacco smoking ($195 billion), and illegal drugs ($217 billion).36

       Commentators have rightly pointed out that such cost figures give a misleading

impression of precision, ignore the benefits of drug use,37 and provide scant direction for actual

drug policy.38 We offer these cost estimates for a crude sense of the scale of the problems under

the current regime and as a reference point from which to examine the various types of costs

associated with drug use—their relative magnitudes, who causes them, and who bears their

burdens. It is also worth noting, however, that while such aggregate figures aspire to capture the

domestic costs of illegal drugs, the costs imposed on foreign countries by the combination of

America’s exceptionally large demand for illegal drugs coupled with its severe attempts at

prohibition are also high and growing. Organized criminals from the Taliban in Afghanistan to

drug cartels in Colombia and Mexico are enriched by America’s drug consumption and

prohibition policy, with many highly unpleasant consequences. The current American

administration has shown some signs of appreciating the magnitude of the role played by

American drug demand in fostering crime in foreign countries. Following the recent wave of

increasingly deadly gang violence near the Mexican-American border, Secretary of State Hillary

Clinton surprised the media by candidly admitting that American drug consumers support crime

in Mexico fueled by drug profits (Landler 2009).39 Consideration of these foreign costs (and

their domestic repercussions) might bring total social costs of illegal drugs to equal or exceed

those of alcohol.




                                                22
ii. Disaggregating the Costs

       The social costs of drug use come in many different forms. Adapting a list from a 1996

article by MacCoun et al. (1996), the National Research Council (NRC 2001, 54) lists sixteen

different categories of drug-related harms:

       physical/mental illnesses; diseases transmitted to others; accident victimization;

       health care costs (drug treatment); health care costs (drug-related illnesses,

       injuries); reduced performance in school; reduced performance at workplace; poor

       parenting, child abuse; psychopharmacological crime and violence; economically

       motivated crime and violence; fear and disorder caused by users and dealers;

       criminal justice costs; corruption of legal authorities; strain on source country-

       relations; infringements on liberty and privacy; and violation of the law as an

       intrinsic harm.


       It is striking, though, how large a portion of the social costs of drug use today arises from

a single source with a broad reach: drug-related crime. Viewed as an isolated statistic, the

ONDCP’s estimate of the social costs of drug abuse provides little insight into the nature of

America’s drug problem. When disaggregated into its component parts, however, it is more

revealing. Consider the following related estimates from that report, ONDCP (2004), each for the

then most recent available year, 2002:

              Of the $180.8 billion in illegal drug costs, $108 billion (nearly 60 percent)

               were crime-related (IV-7, V-2).




                                                 23
              Over two-thirds of those crime-related costs were in the form of lost

               productivity for those incarcerated on drug-related charges and costs

               related to the administration of the criminal justice system (IV-8).

              Incarceration of offenders—475,000 for drug law violations, and 190,000

               for drug-related property or violent crimes—resulted in productivity losses

               of $39 billion and direct outlays of $17 billion at the federal, state and

               local levels (III-18, IV-8).

              Health costs constituted a mere 8.7 percent of the total costs of drug abuse

               (vii).


The ONDCP report goes on to state:

       [T]he large majority of these [crime] costs [of illegal drugs] are for drug specific

       offenses—sales, manufacturing, possession—and the smaller fraction are for

       drug-related crimes undertaken to finance expensive drug habits. Over 11 percent

       of arrests in the US are for drug offenses. In addition, appreciable fractions of

       income generating crimes are attributed to drug abuse: on the order of a quarter of

       burglaries, personal larcenies and robberies (xii).


       While steps toward legalization of currently illegal drugs would likely increase

consumption, estimates vary about the extent of this change and how its concomitant costs would

compare with gains from decreased law enforcement costs, productivity and other gains from

reducing the levels of incarceration, and potentially substantial decreases in the crime and

violence stemming from decreased profitability and scope of black markets.40 Though our best

guess is that moving towards legalization would substantially reduce crime, it is possible that a




                                                24
regime shift to depenalization or legalization would increase toxicologically-induced crime and

thereby offset expected decreases in black market crimes.41

       Citing evidence that a high percentage of arrestees test positive for alcohol and various

illegal drugs, advocates of continued criminalization frequently imply, contrary to the

implications of the ONDCP cost study, that toxicologically induced crimes are more common or

costly than those whose origins are systemic to drug prohibition. Data do show a correlation

between crime and illicit drug use that is, upon first consideration, quite distressing: the 2008

Annual Report of the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring Program (ADAM II) found that in 2008,

among ten major metropolitan areas across the country, the percentage of arrestees testing

positive for the presence of some illicit substance ranged from 49 percent in Washington, D.C. to

87 percent in Chicago (ONDCP 2009, 15). However, as we will reiterate in the sections that

follow, extrapolating from the ADAM II results to a belief that drug criminalization decreases

crime or violence (rather than substantially increases both) conflicts with a number of theoretical

considerations as well as considerable empirical evidence concerning the relatively greater

importance of systemic (compared to toxicologically motivated) offenses.

       Three theoretical points should be highlighted. First, as previously noted, the

approximately 1.8 million annual arrests for drug abuse violations are more than for any other

category of offense (BJS 2009). It is neither surprising, nor indicative of a causal relationship

between drug use and crime (other than the tautological one produced by criminalization itself)

that individuals in this subcategory of arrestees frequently test positive for illegal drugs. Second,

any causal extrapolation from the correlation between drug use and crime runs up against the

intractable problem of omitted variables bias: it is quite likely that factors which predispose

individuals to frequent use of drugs also push them toward both crime and greater likelihood of




                                                 25
apprehension by authorities. This is especially true for marijuana: detectable traces may remain

in one’s system for extended periods of time, so one may test positive upon arrest even if the last

instance of use occurred days or even weeks before the arrest, and before or after the commission

of the offense (Pacula and Kilmer 2003). Third, the important question is not whether crime

systemic to prohibition substantially outweighs toxicologically-induced crime—although, the

best evidence supports this hypothesis. Rather, the appropriate inquiry should be into how the

marginal decreases in systemic crime would compare to the marginal increases in

toxicologically-driven crime given a regime change. Even if lesser penalties, depenalization or

legalization would increase use, the new class of users—individuals formerly deterred by

criminalization—would constitute a class much less predisposed to commit other crimes than the

group of people already using under criminalization.

       Return to the ONDCP’s aggregate cost study and three of its key insights: (1) roughly

forty percent of the current costs of illegal drugs in the United States are crime costs borne by

offenders via incarceration and the government via administration of the criminal justice system;

(2) these costs dominate the victim-borne costs of drug-related crime and health-related costs of

abuse; and (3) the greatest driver of these costs is crime systemic to criminalization, rather than

crime motivated by toxicology. Together, these propositions suggest that a substantial portion of

America’s current drug problem is its drug control policy. Since government policies create

some of the costliest of all the burdens associated with illegal drugs, a substantial reduction in

the social costs of illegal drugs would seem to require a reduction in the costs imposed by the

current criminalization regime, not just a restraint of the costs of abuse.



III. Reforming America’s Illegal Drug Policy42




                                                 26
a. Broad Themes

        While many advocates of legalization and continued criminalization of illegal drugs see

sufficient similarities across drug classes to paint with broad strokes, we perceive the nature and

extent of the harms associated with each drug to call for careful, individualized analysis.43 That

is not to say that recreational drugs do not share certain similarities or that society’s experience

with legal drugs cannot provide insight into the likely impact of legalizing a currently proscribed

drug. The gaping disjunction between the law and policy toward cigarettes and alcohol on the

one hand, and toward marijuana, cocaine and other currently illegal drugs on the other, appears

less the result of thoughtful distinction than of inertia and a self-perpetuating myth that drugs

accorded legal status are qualitatively similar to each other and different from drugs that are

criminalized.44 But if a unified approach across certain drugs might be desirable for a variety of

reasons, only by meticulously examining each drug’s unique psychopharmacological effects and

social attributes can we begin to group together the different drugs that should be treated

similarly.45

        In this section, we consider potential changes to America’s policy toward marijuana and

cocaine. To oversimplify somewhat, marijuana is the most widely used illegal drug, one of the

least dangerous for users across various dimensions, and the frequent subject of debate over

policy reform. Likewise, any decrease in social costs stemming from a change to marijuana

policy is likely to be far smaller than would result from a comparable policy change concerning a

“harder” drug such as cocaine. On the other hand, because the social costs under America’s

current drug regime are highest for cocaine,46 changes to policy toward cocaine (as opposed to

other narcotics) would change the social cost mitigation calculus in a way that would

countenance potential risks and rewards of the greatest magnitude.




                                                 27
b.     Marijuana

i. Psychopharmacology and Culture

       [T]here is a glaring discontinuity between the lived experience of Americans and

       the drug policies of their governments. Nearly a hundred million of us—forty

       percent of the adult population, including pillars of the nation’s political,

       financial, academic, and media élites—have smoked (and, therefore, possessed)

       marijuana at some point, thereby committing an offense that, with a bit of bad

       luck, could have resulted in humiliation, the loss of benefits such as college loans

       and scholarships, or worse. More than forty thousand people are in jail for

       marijuana offenses, and some seven hundred thousand are arrested annually

       merely for possession.

               -Hendrik Hertzberg, Higher Standards, The New Yorker, February 25,

               2008.


       Marijuana is a pivotal substance in the debate over illegal drug policy for many reasons.

The World Drug Report 2008 found that cannabis “continues to dominate the world’s illicit drug

market in terms of pervasiveness of cultivation, volume of production and number of consumers

. . . [and its consumer market] dwarfs those for other drugs” (UNODC 2008, 14). In its “Facts

and Figures” webpage on Marijuana, the ONDCP highlights three statistics from the 2008

National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) (SAMHSA 2009): among Americans aged

12 or older, 102 million (over 40 percent) had tried marijuana in their lifetimes, 25.8 million

(over 10 percent) had used in the past year and 15.2 million (over 6 percent) in the past month

(ONDCP 2010). As noted in Figure 1, the United States is a clear outlier with respect to the



                                                28
percentage of its population that has tried marijuana (though this is in part a reflection of the

unusually high use rates in the late 1970s and 1980s). Although methodological issues and data

availability make cross-country comparison for annual illegal drug use more difficult than for

lifetime use, Figure 7 gives at least a crude sense of the United States in global context by

showing the past year cannabis use estimates for the United States and the rest of North America,

Australia, New Zealand, and selected countries from western and central Europe.47 The data

suggest that America is also among the world leaders in the percentage of its population using

marijuana more regularly.

                                     Insert Figure 7 about here

       Far more individuals are arrested for possession of marijuana in the United States than for

any other illegal drug. Of the more than 1.8 million arrests for drug violations in 2007, 42.1

percent—more than 750,000—were for marijuana possession, and when sales and possession

arrests are aggregated, 47.4 percent or nearly half of all drug arrests are marijuana-related (FBI

Uniform Crime Reporting Program 2007).48 Marijuana arrests have risen significantly in recent

decades; one recent study found that from 1992 to 2002 marijuana arrests increased by 113

percent while overall arrests decreased by 3 percent (King and Mauer 2006).

       Room et al. (2008, 22) summarize the basic sensory effects of cannabis on its users:

       Cannabis produces euphoria and relaxation, alters perception, distorts time, and

       intensifies ordinary sensory experience, such as, eating, watching films,

       appreciating nature, and listening to music. Users’ short-term memory and

       attention, motor skills, reaction time and skilled activities are impaired while they

       are intoxicated…Cannabis users are typically seeking one or more of these effects




                                                 29
       when they use. But use can also result in unsought and adverse effects. The most

       common unpleasant effects of acute cannabis use are anxiety and panic reactions

       . . . [these] are a common reason for discontinuing use.


       Current evidence suggests that while the harmful health effects of marijuana are not

trivial (Browning 2009), they are less troublesome than those of other illegal drugs such as

cocaine, heroin, or methamphetamine. MacCoun and Reuter (2001, 356, 360) conclude that

“[t]he harms of cannabis are clearly no greater that those of alcohol, at the individual level” and

“dependence occurs frequently, almost as frequently as for alcohol amongst those who start

using the drug. . . . [but with seemingly] modest adverse consequences.” A recent survey of

clinicians and researchers found that the experts perceived cannabis to be less addictive than

most other drugs—including caffeine, amphetamine, alcohol, cocaine, methamphetamine,

oxycodone, crack, nicotine, and heroin (Gore and Earleywine 2007, 176-85). Similarly,

Kershaw and Cathcart (2009) report on a study by the Institute of Medicine which found that of

those who tried tobacco, 32 percent went on to become dependent compared to just 9 percent for

marijuana (see Figure 9).49 Marijuana is also far less lethal than nicotine, alcohol, and other

prevalent illegal drugs (Gable 2006, 155); fatal overdoses are unheard of, if not virtually

impossible. Long-term smoking of marijuana could generate adverse health consequences from

breathing smoke, though increased potency reduces the number of inhalations required to

achieve the desired effect.

       Marijuana use has intruded into mainstream America to a greater degree than any other

illegal drug.50 Moreover, Room et al. (2008) observe that because marijuana’s global prevalence

so exceeds that of other illegal recreational drugs, the bureaucracies of drug control within

individual countries and at the global level depend upon the criminalization of marijuana to



                                                 30
broaden the scope of their mission. They note the World Drug Report 2008 estimates that 65

percent of global seizures and 67 percent of “doses” seized were for cannabis and argue, using

global use figures, that without cannabis illegal drug use would not be a global population-level

issue (89, 92). Finally, the therapeutic potential of marijuana has given rise to a debate over

whether doctors should be allowed to prescribe the drug for medicinal purposes.

       Perhaps for all these reasons, marijuana has proven an attractive target for advocates of

legalization, though many prominent opponents endorse a continued hard-line stand. Growing

numbers of commentators in the popular press have advocated the legalization of marijuana

(Klein 2009), and assessed the revenue boost legalization might provide states facing cash-

strapped budgets (Yamamuru 2009). The debate has been further stimulated in recent months as

states have begun reacting to Attorney General Eric Holder’s announcement that the DEA will

no longer raid state-approved medical marijuana distributors (Woo 2009).

       Willingness to consider—if not outright endorse—legalization of marijuana has also

grown among academics. Over 500 economists,51 including three Nobel Laureates,52 signed an

open letter to the President, Congress, Governors, and State Legislatures expressing skepticism

about current marijuana policy and calling for open debate over a shift from prohibition to

taxation and regulation. The letter highlights Harvard economist Jeffrey Miron’s 2005 report The

Budgetary Implications of Marijuana Prohibition, which estimates that legalization would save

the federal and state governments a combined $7.7 billion in prohibition enforcement

expenditures and yield approximately $2.4 billion in tax revenues if taxed like an ordinary good

or as much as $6.2 billion if taxed similarly to alcohol or tobacco (Miron 2005, 2-3).53 In the

wake of the recent economic downturn, old and new reformers have latched on to the “lost

revenues” argument for legalization.




                                                 31
       This section first considers the case for reforming marijuana policy, specifically weighing

the costs of depenalization and legalization against those of the current system of prohibition.



ii. Criminalization

       A defense of marijuana prohibition based on cost-minimization analysis might proceed as

follows. First, a completely unregulated market for marijuana would lead to undesirably high

levels of consumption—either because of negative externalities (social costs of marijuana use

that accrue to those not a party to marijuana use and exchange) or internalities (private costs that

accrue to users themselves but that users nevertheless fail adequately to account for in their

consumption decisions). Second, regulation and taxation will not adequately correct for these

market failures. Third, severe criminal sanctions for users and sellers are cost-justified deterrence

mechanisms for reducing use. A more sophisticated version of this third argument would make

explicit an important hypothesis frequently left implicit but nevertheless underlying much

thought about drug policy: criminalization may not only raise the price for the user (thereby

reducing its attractiveness for an individual with given preferences) but also, through the norm-

generating or socializing effect of the law, actually alter individuals’ preferences such that for

any given price, use and distribution hold less appeal.54

       Though some libertarians argue that the value of individual autonomy dictates allowing

marijuana use (irrespective of externalities) and simply sanctioning user behavior when it

directly infringes upon the liberty of others, a cost-minimization approach demands

consideration of the magnitude of social costs of use before accepting the notion that autonomy

can trump all such social costs not generated directly from physical force or fraud. Few dispute

that marijuana creates at least some externalities and also internalities—certainly at least in the




                                                 32
case of minors not yet capable of adequately processing the risks but also perhaps for the 1 in 11

who becomes dependent on the drug merely from trying it. The great contention is over which

policies can most efficiently mitigate the total costs associated with marijuana use—in other

words, which policies will yield the lowest total social costs, combining the costs of use and

control.

        The crux of the argument in favor of retaining the prohibitions on use, possession, and

sale of marijuana is that eliminating any of these sanctions would increase marijuana use by

reducing the cost and decreasing the risk. Full legalization might also stimulate demand by

enabling advertisement and brand development. Increased use—either in terms of intensity and

frequency or number of users—would in turn increase the costs of use borne by users themselves

and society. There are also two related, subsidiary arguments, worth addressing. First, it is often

contended that marijuana is a “gateway drug” that renders its users more likely to begin using

other, more dangerous drugs, and, therefore, an increase in marijuana users as a result of

depenalization or legalization would in turn increase the number of users of other illegal drugs.55

Second, it is sometimes argued that marijuana use induces crime.

        Before turning in subsequent sections to the evidence regarding expected increases in

marijuana use under depenalization and legalization, it is helpful to consider briefly the insightful

analysis of the gateway issues offered by MacCoun and Reuter. Though they believe that “there

is little evidence that expanding marijuana use does increase the use of other, more harmful

drugs,” MacCoun and Reuter present a taxonomy of seven possible meanings of the gateway

concept: the first step; the spurious correlation; the early warning; the trap; the tantalizer; the toe

in the water; and the foot in the door (MacCoun and Reuter 2001, 245-51).




                                                  33
        The basic problems for an econometrician attempting to identify whether—and if so

which—gateway hypotheses reflect actual experience are omitted variables bias and

endogeneity. At the level of the individual, it is difficult to pinpoint a gateway mechanism

because it is quite likely that underlying characteristics that predispose individuals to use

marijuana also increase the likelihood of using other drugs. At the population level, it is difficult

to assess the effect of marijuana use on the use of other drugs for an additional reason: causality

likely runs in both directions.

        However, even without precisely estimating the impact of marijuana use on the

likelihood of trying other drugs, one may place a rough upper bound on the extent of such an

effect by noting how commonly individuals use marijuana without going on to other, more

harmful drugs. In their recent cannabis report, Room et al. (2008, 65) write: “Few [marijuana

users] go on to use more dangerous illicit drugs; the 1995 US National Household Survey on

Drug Abuse found that only 23 percent of 26-34 year olds who had used marijuana at some time

had also used cocaine during their lives.” Similarly, the 2007 NSDUH found that those who used

marijuana exclusively constituted 53.3 percent of illegal drug users and 73.2 percent of

marijuana users (SAMSHA 2008, 16).

        As MacCoun and Reuter remind us, it is also important to understand the mechanism of

any gateway effect, assuming one exists at all. If the “gateway” is a matter of individuals

becoming comfortable with illegal behavior and black market consumption, then legalization

could undermine this gateway effect, even as it increased consumption directly via lower prices

to users.

        The most-cited evidence in support of the hypothesis that marijuana users are driven to

crime while under the influence is undoubtedly the ADAM II data indicating that in 8 of 10




                                                 34
major metropolitan areas studied in 2008, over 40 percent of arrestees tested positive for

marijuana at the time of arrest (ONDCP 2009, 17). The weight of auxiliary evidence suggests,

however, that this correlation primarily reflects factors other than a causal relationship of crime

induction through intoxication.

       First, the psychopharmacological effects of marijuana are relatively modest compared to

the effects of alcohol, cocaine, and other illegal drugs, and do not suggest, a priori, that

intoxicated users are driven to violent, antisocial activity with great frequency. 56 Second, it is

clear from the sheer size of marijuana’s user base that most users do not resort to non-possessory

crime at all—while intoxicated or otherwise. Third, some empirical evidence suggests that the

enforcement of marijuana criminalization may not work even as a “broken windows” policing

strategy,57 much less as a direct measure preventing supposedly toxicologically induced crime. A

recent analysis of marijuana in public view (MPV) arrests across 75 police precincts in New

York City from 1989 to 2000 concluded that “there is no good evidence that this “reefer

madness” policing strategy contributed to the decline in the sorts of serious crimes that are of

greatest public concern in New York City” (Harcourt and Ludwig 2007, 166).58 On the contrary:

while an initial panel data analysis offered some support for the idea that these misdemeanor

marijuana arrests contributed to reductions in violent crime, when the authors restructured their

regression model to control for mean reversion, the coefficient on MPV arrests became

statistically significant in the opposite direction—suggesting that “an increase in MPV arrests

over the period translates into an increase in serious crime—not, as the broken windows theory

would predict, a decrease in serious crime” (171).

       In considering the merits of criminalization, it is also important to remember that even

within a system of criminalization, there is much leeway regarding the severity and nature of




                                                 35
prohibition enforcement. Moreover, there is significant historical and cross-country evidence to

help understand how consumption and costs might change under a less punitive criminal regime.

While it is always difficult to isolate the impact of a drug policy, and one must always be wary in

generalizing from the experience of other countries to today’s America, there is evidence, albeit

somewhat conflicting, suggesting that depenalization and even decriminalization of marijuana

may not lead to significant increases in use.



iii. Depenalization

        It is often said that in the 1970s, eleven states “decriminalized” marijuana (NRC 2001).

These states significantly reduced penalties for simple possession of marijuana, in some cases

implementing a narrow form of the regime we call depenalization.59 Evidence on the impact of

these marijuana reform laws initially found little or only a weak effect (NRC 2001, 192-93).60

On the other hand, a recent study finds that because other states have also reduced penalties for

marijuana possession, “[so called] decriminalized states are not uniquely identifiable based on

statutory law as has been presumed by researchers over the past twenty years” (Pacula et al.

2003, 26). The same study also finds, however, that the demand for marijuana among young

people is sensitive to variation in penalties. A still more recent study traces the research—which

began with studies finding little to no effect but now has become more mixed—and offers two

possible explanations for the conflicting findings: (1) the effect of legal variation is different

across age groups; and (2) the historical time period may matter (MacCoun et al. 2009, 350).

Moreover, the authors find that a reason for minimal effects of depenalization may be that many

individuals are unaware of the changes in their state’s marijuana law.61




                                                  36
       Another reason why use rates might not respond to decreased penalties is the extremely

low likelihood of being arrested for illegal drug possession: reviewing the data, Boyum and

Reuter estimate that in 1999, the “risk of being arrested for marijuana possession, conditional on

using marijuana in the previous year, was about 3 percent; for cocaine the figure was 6 percent”

(Boyum and Reuter 2005, 56). To the extent that individuals predisposed to illegal drug use also

exhibit lower risk aversion and higher discounting of future welfare than the rest of society, they

are especially unlikely to find psychologically salient—or change their behavior as a result of—

risks characterized by low probabilities and high costs, such as possible arrest for possession.

       Probably the most famous example of marijuana reform comes from the Netherlands.

There, the 1976 “Opium Act” ushered in the de facto decriminalization (or extreme

depenalization)62 of possession of small amounts of cannabis for personal consumption (5 grams

or fewer) and a system of tolerated sale in “coffee shops” that in some sense resembles a form of

highly but peculiarly regulated legalization. Under the latter system, registered coffee shop

owners that adhere to certain guidelines may, without being targeted for prosecution, possess up

to 500 grams of cannabis and sell it in quantities of 5 grams or fewer (Abraham 1999, 1). The

Dutch experience with this controlled form of drug use provides insight into what could happen

if the United States were to move down a path toward depenalization, decriminalization, or even

legalization of marijuana. MacCoun and Reuter (2005, 264) report that since the 1976 reform,

the number of “coffee shops” has increased steadily so that there now may be between 1200 and

1500 such venues in Amsterdam; on the other hand, van der Gouwe, Ehrlich, and van Laar

(2009) report a decrease in the number of officially tolerated coffee shops from 1999 to 2007.

Marijuana use in the Netherlands increased during the 1980s and early 1990s as the “coffee

shops” became more widespread. However, there is no evidence for the existence of the so-




                                                37
called “gateway effect” discussed earlier. Notably, there was no increase in use rates of heroin,

which is traditionally the most widely used hard drug in the Netherlands, or of cocaine, in spite

of the corresponding crack crisis in the United States (MacCoun and Reuter 2005, 264). Indeed,

the European School Survey Project on Alcohol and Other Drugs (ESSPAOD 2003) conducted a

quarter-century after de facto decriminalization and emergence of the coffee shop system in the

Netherlands found that only 28 percent of Dutch school children surveyed reported smoking

cannabis compared with 38 percent in France, whose politicians have been harshly critical of the

Dutch approach.63 Also, as we note in Figure 1 below, data from the World Health Organization

World Mental Health Surveys indicate that when measured in terms of lifetime cannabis use, the

United States has a much higher rate of those over age 18 who have ever used cannabis (42

percent) compared with the Netherlands (20 percent) (Degenhardt et al. 2008, 1057).

       One of the goals of the Dutch scheme involves separating cannabis sales from sales of

other illicit drugs in the hopes that cannabis users will not come into contact with sellers of drugs

like heroin, thus stopping marijuana users from moving to more serious drugs. Manja Abraham

(1999) reported that for users over age 18, 48 percent of cannabis purchases took place in coffee

shops, whereas relatives and friends supplied 39 percent of cannabis used (3-4). While this

demonstrates that a large informal cannabis market exists, only 3.7 percent of users reported

obtaining cannabis from a stranger and 5 percent from a home dealer, someone who advertises

cannabis sales and delivers them to the home, legally or illegally, depending upon the amount

delivered. Among experienced users of cannabis (those who report using the drug more than 25

times in their lives), 54 percent reported purchasing cannabis most often in a coffee shop

compared with 32 percent for less-experienced users (Abraham 1999, 4). This suggests that

while a large percentage of sales occur outside of the state-sanctioned coffee shops, the heaviest




                                                 38
users obtain their cannabis through regulated channels or from people they know, rather than

participating in a clandestine market of dealers. The lack of transactions with dealers who are

otherwise unrelated to the individual is important because it is such transactions that bring an

individual into contact with the black market and its associated crime and violence.

       Evidence from Portugal and Australia also suggests that depenalization need not lead to

substantial increases in marijuana use or its associated problems. In the period since

decriminalization, drug use in Portugal has not spiked, nor has the country been besieged by drug

tourists (Cato Institute 2009). In fact, Portugal continues to have among the lowest rates of

cannabis and cocaine use in the European Union, and its rates remain far below their

counterparts in the United States (Greenwald 2009, 23-24). Room et al. (2008, 130-33) have

pulled together a handful of studies comparing changes in use rates in Australian jurisdictions

covered by schemes involving civil penalties for small cannabis offenses with changes in use

rates for the rest of Australia still subject to the country’s standard criminal penalties for

marijuana possession. On the whole, these analyses offer little if any evidence to suggest that use

rates increased more in civil penalty jurisdictions than elsewhere.

       In the United States, medical marijuana laws have begun to create a subsystem that,

under our taxonomy, would be considered a form of decriminalization verging on a highly

regulated form of legalization. Medical marijuana laws have introduced a mechanism that allows

patients to grow and use marijuana for medical purposes without facing the prospect of state

prosecution, while still allowing the states and the federal government to continue prohibiting the

large-scale cultivation, distribution, and ordinary possession of marijuana. Fifteen U.S. states

have provisions allowing for some type of medical marijuana; however, these subsystems of

decriminalization differ from state to state. For example, in Colorado, a constitutional




                                                  39
amendment providing for medical marijuana included the requirement that patients using

medical marijuana possess a registry identification card issued by the state, and it provided for

the establishment of a confidential state registry for this purpose.64 In California, probably the

best-known example of a medical marijuana regime in the United States, the Compassionate Use

Act of 1996 simply declares as one of its purposes: “to ensure that patients and their primary

caregivers who obtain and use marijuana for medical purposes upon the recommendation of a

physician are not subject to criminal prosecution or sanction.”65 This act did not create a

mandatory registry program for patients using medical marijuana. Rather, in 2004, California

introduced a voluntary Medical Marijuana ID card, administered by the county governments.66

       While California’s medical marijuana dispensaries have been the focus of several news

stories since the Obama Administration announced that agencies in charge of enforcing federal

drug laws would no longer raid such dispensaries (Johnson 2009), the legal status of dispensaries

remains questionable, and it would be misleading simply to say that California legalized the

“sale” of medical marijuana (Wohlsen and Risling 2009; Martin and del Barco 2009). The

Compassionate Use Act did not provide for sales through such dispensaries, and the expanded

codification of medical marijuana in California occurring in 2003 provided only for multiparty

growing of marijuana in collectives and cooperatives.67 California’s Attorney General has

indicated that for dispensaries to operate legally in California, they must operate as a non-profit,

only sell to members of the collective, verify members’ status as qualified patients or primary

caregivers, only acquire marijuana from qualified members, and only cultivate and transport

amounts required to meet the needs of the collective’s members (State of California 2008).

       The California courts have also placed limits on the ability of individuals cultivating and

selling marijuana to avoid prosecution for possession and sale of the drug by claiming to be the




                                                 40
“primary caregiver” of multiple patients. The California Supreme Court has held that a patient’s

primary caregiver must establish such status “based on evidence independent of the

administration of medical marijuana,” and that growth and supply of medical marijuana alone are

insufficient to establish oneself as a primary caregiver.68 The California Supreme Court has also

held that employers can fire medical marijuana patients who test positive for marijuana as a

result of a urinalysis, because the drug remains illegal at the federal level, and nothing prevents

employers from terminating employees who use illegal substances.69 Thus, while medical

marijuana states like California have decriminalized marijuana possession and use for medical

marijuana patients, users still face repercussions such as loss of employment and certain

limitations on purchases of marijuana that would presumably be reduced or eliminated in a

legalization regime.



iv. Legalization

       From a cost-minimization perspective, the primary expected benefits of legalization over

depenalization would be even more substantial reductions in government expenditures on drug

control, new tax revenues to offset remaining government spending, the potential for increased

government control over product standards and labeling information, and substantial reductions

in drug-related crime costs. Government regulation of labeling and product standards could help

mitigate the problems of increased potency and user uncertainty regarding whether the drug

taken has been laced with, or partly replaced by, other harmful ingredients the consumer did not

intend to use—such as PCP. As noted earlier, Miron (2005, 2-3) estimates that the tax revenues

from legalized marijuana would indeed be substantial—somewhere between $2.4 and $6.2

billion.70 By undermining the black market, marijuana legalization could also be expected to




                                                 41
reduce systemic or economically motivated marijuana-related crime (as opposed to any

toxicologically motivated marijuana crime), and the costs of law enforcement efforts targeted at

marijuana. Miron (2005, 2) also estimates that legalization would save the federal and state

governments a combined $7.7 billion in prohibition enforcement expenditures. While the

assumptions required for such estimates make them imprecise, it is not implausible that for

marijuana alone, the combination of tax revenues and diminished enforcement expenditures

could boost government coffers by over $10 billion.

       However, given the extremely large number of arrests for marijuana possession—far

more than for sale—depenalization could achieve many of the same gains in reduced

enforcement costs. Moreover, marijuana often has a much shorter distribution chain than

cocaine; cultivation by individuals is common and many users receive marijuana from friends for

free.71 These social factors may help explain why violence appears to be significantly less

common and severe in black markets for marijuana than in such markets for cocaine.72 Hence,

one of legalization’s advantages over depenalization—its ability to undermine black markets—

may be less important for marijuana than for cocaine. Legalization could also be expected to

increase use more substantially than depenalization, although social costs of additional marijuana

use could be mitigated if marijuana proved a partial substitute—rather than complement—for

such drugs as cigarettes and alcohol.

       We next consider additional considerations relevant to legalization: advertising,

international legal obligations, and informational benefits.

       Advertising. Legalization of marijuana in the United States might unleash the power of

American advertising to entice consumers to use newly legalized substances while obscuring

their dangers. There is some chance that an outright interdiction on advertisements of legalized




                                                 42
drugs would be found to violate First Amendment speech protections. Twenty-five years ago,

the Supreme Court held in Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company73 that if the

government can ban a product or an activity like gambling, it can also proscribe advertising of

that product or activity. This might suggest that because marijuana and other drugs are currently

prohibited, advertising of such products could be banned. More recent decisions, however, have

suggested that the government is not necessarily empowered to ban truthful advertising, even of

products it could otherwise proscribe.74

       Steven Duke and Albert Gross (2006, 214-16) have called the Posadas decision an

“aberration” and suggested that a complete ban on drug advertising could chill debate about the

true dangers of drug use. Instead, these authors argue that a better way to limit advertising

would be to withhold trademark protection from companies selling legalized drugs so that they

would have no brand names to advertise, unlike today’s alcohol and cigarette companies. In

addition, Duke and Gross recommend placing warnings on print ads at least as large as the

largest type in the ads and prohibiting radio and television advertising, which the Court has held

to be immune from First Amendment protections because the airwaves are owned by the

public.75

       Evidence on the value of warning labels comes from Canada where colorful pictures of

the damage to the body associated with smoking are placed on cigarette packages and required to

cover at least 30 percent of the package material. The Canadian warnings have been found to be

far more effective at inhibiting smoking than the bland American “Surgeon General’s Warning”

(Givel 2007). One of the most touted anti-drug advertising campaigns in the United States has

been Montana’s attempt to counter its methamphetamine problem through television ads and

billboards depicting the physical deformities and violent behavior caused by meth use.




                                                43
According to one analysis, two years after the introduction of the “Not Even Once” advertising

campaign, meth use in Montana had dropped by one-half (Beale 2008). Following legalization,

rigorous requirements on packaging of newly legalized drugs and explicit counter advertisements

could help reduce a sudden surge in demand.

       Placing such explicit warnings on newly legalized drug products would raise questions

about how to deal with alcohol and tobacco advertising following the legalization of currently

illicit substances. If one were to enact strict regulations requiring graphic depictions of the

harms of newly legalized drugs like marijuana, it would seem inconsistent to allow cigarette

manufacturers to continue packaging cigarettes with the current Surgeon General’s Warning,

given that in terms of both lethality and addictiveness, marijuana may well be a less dangerous

substance than nicotine (Gable 2006, 153). A comprehensive marketing policy on all dangerous

substances might be difficult to accomplish, however, for political reasons.

       An ongoing case filed in federal district court in Kentucky by several tobacco

manufacturers and retailers could determine the extent to which the government may require

large or graphic warning labels in print advertisements or product packaging.76 In this case, the

plaintiffs are seeking an injunction against sections of the Family Smoking Prevention and

Tobacco Control Act77 requiring graphic warning labels on cigarette packaging similar to those

found in Canada, curtailing the use of color advertising in magazines with over 15 percent

readership or two million readers under age 18, and prohibiting the advertisement of tobacco

products within 1,000 feet of school playgrounds. In January 2010, the U.S. District Court for

the Western District of Kentucky granted the plaintiff tobacco companies’ motion for summary

judgment regarding the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act’s provision

requiring that all tobacco advertising appear in black text on a white background in magazines




                                                 44
with over 15 percent readership or two million readers under the age of 18.78 The court found

that the ban violated the First Amendment because it was not narrowly tailored to serve the

asserted state interest of protecting minors from tobacco advertising. The court seemed to place

heavy emphasis on the fact that barring all color advertising would ban some of the logos and

product symbols used by tobacco companies; product symbols whose meanings could not easily

be translated into black and white text.79 However, the court was more tolerant of the new

warning requirements that mandate that cigarette packaging contain graphic warnings similar to

those used in Canada, finding that these restrictions were narrowly tailored, and thus not in

violation of the First Amendment.80 This case will likely be appealed, and if it reaches the U.S.

Supreme Court, which many experts believe it will, its holding could shape the government’s

ability to restrict the advertisement of legalized drugs for decades to come.

       International Law. Another complication for legalization is international law. While

many researchers attempt to make international comparisons in studying drugs, one area of drug

control policy that receives scant attention is the United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic

Drugs of 1961 which binds all UN member nations to maintain prohibition of drugs, including

cannabis specifically (Levine and Reinarman 2006, 61). While the Single Convention on

Narcotic Drugs requires that countries maintain prohibition of manufacture, sales, and import, it

does not require a punitive regime of the type currently found in the United States. Article 36 of

the Single Convention, “Penal Provision,” specifically allows for treatment programs to either

enhance or serve as a substitute for punishment.81 The Economist reports that countries like the

Netherlands are able to allow for some innovation in controlling marijuana use through the

convention’s commentary, which states that its goal is “improvement of the efficacy of national

criminal justice systems in the field of drug trafficking” (A Toker’s Guide 2009). Thus reforms




                                                45
working within the framework of the existing treaty are possible, though full-scale legalization

would require either a country’s withdrawal from the treaty or revision thereof.

       Perhaps partly due to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, even countries with more

liberal narcotics policies than the United States lack full-fledged drug legalization and at most

allow for depenalization of marijuana and/or widespread needle exchange programs. As

discussed above, in the Netherlands, a country long known for its tolerance of marijuana

smoking, the importation and commercial production of cannabis remains illegal (Levine and

Reinarman 2006, 64). When considering its own drug reform, Portugal declined to adopt

outright legalization likely in part because of its treaty obligations under the 1961 Single

Convention (Cato Institute 2009).

       Information Under Legalization. America’s war on drugs is deeply entrenched, and

powerful institutional forces make change difficult. In important ways the case for marijuana

reform rests not only on the potential for the institution of an evidence-based, cost-minimizing

approach to marijuana policy in its own right, but also on the possibility that marijuana reform

might catalyze the use of such an approach in shaping drug policy in general. The National

Research Council’s Informing America’s Policy on Illegal Drugs: What We Don’t Know Keeps

Hurting Us argued that our current form of criminalization severely limits the tools social

science needs to study the effects of drugs and drug policies, and it therefore poses a serious

obstacle for the possibility of making policy based on sound evidence. Criminalization obscures

our knowledge of consumption patterns, prices, and potencies, and hence of the responsiveness

of prices to policy changes.82 Perhaps most significantly, because America has no recent

experience with the legalization of major currently illegal drugs, there has been too little

variation in the data to tease out the causal effects of prohibition or the likely consequences of its




                                                 46
repeal.83 Policy changes resulting in interstate variation in the treatment of marijuana would

generate clearer information for analysts and policymakers.



c. Cocaine

       Cocaine has made America’s drug problem uniquely severe and has been at the heart of

such national policies as President Reagan’s push for an increasingly punitive war on drugs in

the 1980s and Plan Colombia in the 1990s. As already noted, the United States is an outlier in

cocaine use in terms of the percentage of Americans having ever tried the substance, which is

approximately four times that of the next highest use country included in a 2008 World Health

Organization survey of international drug use, as seen in Figure 2. Data from the 2009 World

Drug Report, which compiles recent annual use figures from several dozen countries, indicate

that in terms of current use rates the U.S. is no longer such an outlier. Nonetheless, Figure 8

below shows America’s past-year prevalence rate is still among the highest in the world.

                                    Insert Figure 8 about here

       In order to better recognize the unique attributes of cocaine, we begin by offering a

review of the psychopharmacology of the drug and then move into analyses of the problems with

mandatory minimum sentencing and differences between the U.S. approach and that of other

countries.



i. Psychopharmacology and Systemic Crime

       Much of America’s strict prohibition on cocaine is premised on the belief that cocaine is

far more damaging psycho-pharmacologically than other licit or illicit drugs. Regular cocaine

use does lead to unquestionable medical and psychological problems. Cocaine is a stimulant,




                                                47
meaning that it causes the body to “speed up” the operation of ordinary functions. At low doses,

physical effects of cocaine are similar to those of high doses of caffeine, including “nervousness,

jitteriness, sleeplessness and agitation,” whereas high doses of cocaine can result in “suspicion,

hypervigilance, and paranoia,” and extremely high doses can result in “a toxic psychosis, with

symptoms similar to the delirium of high fever” (Morgan and Zimmer 1997, 137). As evidenced

by the death of “body packers” who swallow balloons filled with cocaine in order to transport the

substance into the United States, cocaine can be deadly if consumed in large doses (137-38).

       Though by nearly all accounts cocaine is more harmful to its users than marijuana, the

belief that cocaine is not at all comparable to alcohol or nicotine is undermined by studies on

lethality and addictiveness of common drugs. Using a “safety ratio” measure calculated by

taking the “lethal dose” of a drug (the quantity which causes death in 50 percent of animals) and

dividing it by the “effective dose” (the quantity necessary to produce the desired effect in 50

percent of animal populations), cocaine has a higher ratio (15) than ethanol (10), indicating that

it carries less risk of accidental fatal overdose than alcohol (Gable 2006, 153).

       As for the likelihood that one will become addicted to cocaine, sometimes called the

“capture ratio,” a 1999 study by The Institute of Medicine found that only 17 percent of those

who try cocaine go on to become dependent on the substance, whereas the same figure is 32

percent for tobacco users as shown in Figure 9 below (Kershaw and Cathcart 2009). This

finding comports with the latest Monitoring the Future study finding that while 7.2 percent of

high school seniors report having used cocaine at least once in their lifetime, only 1.9 percent

report having used cocaine in the past 30 days (NIDA 2009, 192, 199). This suggests that a large

portion of those who try cocaine do not become regular users. A comparison with tobacco

proves illustrative, because while 44.7 percent of high school students report having used




                                                 48
tobacco at least once during their lifetimes, 20.4 percent report having used the substance in the

past 30 days, suggesting that, at least given current law, tobacco has a higher addiction rate than

cocaine (192, 199). This evidence tends to undermine the view that anyone trying cocaine will

all but certainly become an addict.

                                      Insert Figure 9 about here

       U.S. drug policy has also reflected exaggeration of differences between the

psychopharmacological effects of cocaine and crack. The primary difference between cocaine

and crack use stems from the differing routes of administration, with powder cocaine being

snorted through the nose, while crack cocaine is generally smoked. Smoking crack leads to a

quicker high than snorting powder cocaine because the large surface area of the lungs and the

proximity of pulmonary to cerebral circulation allow for rapid absorption of the drug and a direct

route to the brain (Belenko 1993, 34-35). This rapid absorption results in a high within 5-10

seconds and a subsequent crash once the high wears off (35). Physically, crack smoking, like

smoking of other drugs, can lead to a variety of lung problems.84 Behaviorally, crack smoking is

associated with many of the same problems observed in users of powder cocaine, including

depression, loss of interest, nervousness, fatigue, sleeplessness, loss of appetite, and thoughts of

suicide, though with higher prevalence than for powder cocaine users (38). However, these

behavioral problems are gathered from surveys of crack users, and thus come from a self-

selected population that may be predisposed to such disorders even without drug use (38).

       While differences do exist between cocaine and crack, many of the policy changes, such

as the much harsher federal sentencing guidelines for crack as opposed to powder cocaine, now

appear to have been enacted partly because of an exaggeration of the differences between the

effects of cocaine and crack. Consider, for example, the “crack baby” scare of the 1980s, during




                                                 49
which the media highlighted the problem of numerous babies supposedly born addicted to crack.

This scare appears to have been sensationalized. Recent research calls into question the

supposed link between mothers using crack and children suffering from physical ailments

different from those experienced by children whose mothers are not crack users (Morgan and

Zimmer 1997, 152-54). Apparently, many of the problems associated with “crack babies” can be

traced to the strong correlation between using crack and the failure of mothers to take other steps

associated with prenatal health rather than physiological effects of crack use on the infants.

       Psychopharmacological effects have been mischaracterized in other ways as well,

beginning with the nature of the relationship between crack use and crime. Many people believe

that crack causes crime because of its physical effects on the user. However, while crack was

associated with a large increase in violence in American cities during the late 1980s, the

psychopharmacological impact of the drug was largely not to blame. In a study of New York

City murders committed during a six month period of 1988—the height of the crack epidemic—

researchers attempted to attribute the cause of homicides to three different drug-related factors:

(a) psychopharmacological effects of drug use, (b) economic compulsion in which drug addicts

kill while committing thefts to fund drug purchases, and (c) systemic effects of participating in

the drug market, such as when a dealer kills one of his own agents (Goldstein et al. 1997, 117).

These researchers determined that only 7.5 and 1.9 percent of the murders could be attributed

solely to either the psychopharmacological effects of drug use or economic compulsion,

respectively, (another 4.1 percent fell into multiple categories) whereas 39.1 percent were part of

the systemic involvement in the illegal drug markets. 85 This study found that 52.6 percent of

homicides in New York City during this peak period of the crack problem were in some way

drug related. Nonetheless, the psychopharmacological effects of drugs do not appear to be the




                                                 50
primary culprit in the correlation between homicide and crack use. This is underscored by the

substantial crime and homicide drops in the 1990s, which, as Figure 7 reveals, occurred even as

the percentage of 12th graders reporting cocaine use in the past month rose through the decade,

following a substantial decline in the late 1980s.

         In other words, it appears more the clandestine nature of the market in which cocaine is

traded rather than the drug itself that leads to violent crime. When two drug dealers or a drug

dealer and customer have a dispute regarding a sale or drug turf, they cannot use the legal system

to settle the dispute. Rather, they must work problems out on their own, often through violent

means.

         In a 1999 article, Miron contributed an analysis supportive of the systemic violence view

based on national time series data through 1995. The data showed a positive correlation between

an index of prohibition expenditures and the homicide rate that was statistically significant

across several specifications and persisted even with controls for demographic variables, the

unemployment rate, per capita income, the execution rate and the incarceration rate (Miron

1999). The intuitive causal theory offered by Miron and others is that the more severe the

prohibition on illegal drugs, the more attractive is violence relative to other mechanisms of

dispute resolution and the greater is the diversion of law enforcement resources from other

crimes. Notably, the relationship Miron identified in the data extended beyond the end of

Prohibition in 1933—which, as we noted earlier, ushered in a major decrease in homicide (and

crime, even in the midst of the Great Depression). Examining Figure 10, our simple plot of

Miron’s prohibition enforcement index against the homicide rate, one sees that his national time

series correlation appears strong up to the early 1990s (when Miron’s original data set ended),

after which time the story breaks down.




                                                 51
                                    Insert Figure 10 about here

       With more recent data provided to us by Miron and Angela Dills, his coauthor on a more

recent paper again using national time series data to analyze the effect of a variety of variables

on various measures of crime (Dills, Miron, and Summers 2008),86 we revisited Miron’s original

hypothesis and regression specifications. We extended one of Miron’s original regressions and

several slight variations on that specification to nearly an additional decade of time and two

subsets of the available data—1933-2004 and 1966-2004.87 The regression from 1933 onward

tested the sensitivity of the drug prohibition spending coefficient to the exclusion of early 20th

century data, the accuracy of which is questionable and upon which at least one econometrician

has attempted to improve (Eckberg 1995).88 The regression from 1966 onward tested whether

the positive correlation between prohibition enforcement spending and the homicide rate held up

for the last third of the 20th century onward—the time period over which substantial anti-drug

spending emerged and the war on drugs became entrenched.89

       Finally, we conducted one additional set of regressions (which we do not report here) as a

modest check on how well Miron’s prohibition enforcement index proxies for overall spending

on drug criminalization. Miron’s index tracks the population- and inflation-adjusted expenditures

by the one or two federal laws or agencies at any given time devoted exclusively to drug and/or

alcohol prohibition, which have at many times been a relatively small component of total anti-

drug spending.90 While the current state of available data makes it infeasible to incorporate state-

level enforcement spending (which has been estimated to exceed federal spending and the

absence of which is a shortcoming of Miron’s approach),91 we were able to test Miron’s

prohibition enforcement index as a proxy for overall domestic law enforcement spending by

running simple, uncontrolled regressions for 1986 through 2001 using total federal domestic law




                                                 52
enforcement (population- and inflation-adjusted analogously to Miron’s index), after which time

the ONDCP’s computation methodology radically changed (ONDCP 2002, 10-11; ONDCP

1998, 16). While the short time span is a concern, the general consistency of the results using the

two different measures suggests that Miron’s index offers a reasonable approximation of changes

to at least federal domestic enforcement spending.

         The first two columns of Table 1 show Miron’s original specifications through 1995 and

the resulting positive coefficient on his drug prohibition spending index, which was significant at

the 1 percent level. Our effort at reproducing Miron’s original demographics-controlled

regression also reveals a positive coefficient, albeit smaller and significant only at the 5 percent

level.

                                     Insert Table 1 about here

         When one extends the data beyond 1995, however, the relationship that Miron had

established for the previous 95 years appears to break down. In our regressions on the homicide

rate through 2004, starting in 1900 (with and without Eckberg’s adjusted pre-1933 homicide

rate), 1933 and 1966, the coefficient on the prohibition spending index is generally smaller and

only for 1966 onward does Miron’s full specification yield a coefficient on the prohibition

spending index that is significant at the 5 percent level. Moreover, the R-squared values for the

regressions from 1990 to 2004 are much lower than those for Miron’s original regressions from

1900 to 1995.

         The regression results do not fatally undermine the hypothesis that drug criminalization

increases the homicide rate. They do, however, cast further doubt on the strength of empirical

support (which was already only speculative and provisional) for Miron’s intuitively plausible

theory. Figure 10 reveals why the added data from the 1990s onward weakens the estimated




                                                 53
relationship between prohibition enforcement expenditures and homicide: federal per capita

drug prohibition spending has continued to rise despite a steady fall in the homicide rate.

       A number of more general problems potentially plague the basic regression

specifications: the enormous difficulty of drawing causal inferences from national time series

data; the possibility that causality runs in both directions; and the omission of state enforcement

expenditures and other possible explanatory factors. However, bearing in mind these various

provisos, Miron’s analysis is consistent with, and provides a notable (though tentative and

limited) supplement to, more targeted analyses—such as the aforementioned study of New York

murders—supporting the theory that criminalization does more harm by the systemic crime and

violence it creates than good in any toxicologically-induced crime it may prevent.



ii. Costs of Incarceration

       The criminalization of cocaine has greatly contributed to our country’s vast prison

population. Related problems with our current approach to cocaine are mandatory minimum

sentences and the differential treatment of crack and powder cocaine. As discussed earlier, there

is a large racial disparity between African-Americans and Caucasians in terms of the percentage

imprisoned for drug-related offenses. Much of this racial disparity is the result of mandatory

sentences for possession and trafficking of crack which have been far more severe than those in

place for powder cocaine. In the early 1990s, over 90 percent of defendants in crack cases were

African-American compared with only 25 percent of defendants in powder cocaine cases

(Caulkins et al. 1997, 20).92 Mandatory sentencing laws for drugs generally prescribe a sentence

based on the quantity of the drug in question. Until just recently, under federal sentencing

guidelines a defendant needed to possess an amount of powder cocaine one hundred times




                                                 54
greater than the amount of crack cocaine in order to receive an equivalent sentence.93 Thus a

defendant convicted of possessing 50 grams of crack cocaine with intent to distribute faced a

mandatory minimum sentence of ten years whereas a defendant would need to possess 5

kilograms of powder cocaine to expect the same sentence.

       Though President Obama recently signed the Fair Sentencing Act, which is set to reduce

the sentencing disparity ratio from to 100 to 1 to 18 to 1 (CNN Wire Staff 2010), a significant

differential will remain, and some states also have adopted more stringent sentences for crack

cocaine than powder cocaine (Boyum and Reuter 2005, 52). Differences in state law treatment

of the two drugs have the potential to be more important because more prisoners are convicted of

crack offenses at the state rather than federal level each year.

       In addition to the racial disparities created by mandatory sentencing laws, scholars have

also noted additional concerns regarding their implementation. First among these is the fact that

drug amounts are determined by mixture weight rather than pure weight. This introduces

sentencing distortion because drugs sold in the illicit market vary greatly in their purity. For

example, the sale of coca leaf, which contains only 2 percent cocaine, is treated the same as the

sale of pure powder cocaine in terms of weight, even though 100 grams of coca leaf has the same

amount of cocaine as 2 grams of pure cocaine (Caulkins et al. 1997, 23). The focus on weight

also prevents a distinction between large-scale dealers, the “kingpins” of the business, and small

time dealers. A “kingpin” may operate in such a way that he carries very little of a drug

substance on him at any given time and thus when caught in possession with an intent to sell,

receives a lighter sentence than one of his subordinates, who carries larger quantities of the

substance in order to make frequent sales. Without the mandatory minimum sentences, judges

would have more discretion to differentiate between the “kingpin” and the small-time dealer.




                                                 55
       Mandatory sentences shift power from judges to prosecutors because prosecutors have

discretion concerning whether to charge an individual with a crime carrying a given minimum

sentence, whereas once the defendant is convicted, under a mandatory sentencing scheme the

judge lacks the discretion to reduce a sentence (Caulkins et al. 1997, 24). Deciding whether it is

preferable to grant more power to judges or prosecutors is a judgment call which depends on

whether one believes such power should be vested in the executive or judicial branch; however,

the shift in power is a clear impact of mandatory minimum sentencing laws.

       Given the substantial costs of mandatory minimums, are they necessary or cost-justified

deterrence mechanisms? Credible evidence suggests they are not. A 1997 empirical evaluation

of the cost-effectiveness of mandatory drug sentences found mandatory minimums are less

effective at reducing cocaine use than both conventional enforcement and treatment programs

(Caulkins et al. 1997). The authors, part of the RAND Drug Policy Research Center, attempted

to measure the effects on cocaine consumption of spending an additional $1 million on

conventional enforcement, mandatory minimum sentences, or treatment. Looking at the 184,548

drug dealers convicted in state and federal courts during 1990, the authors estimated that were

the federal mandatory minimum drug sentences94 applied to all of these dealers, the cost to the

public for the additional prison time would be $22.5 billion. According to the model tested in

this study, longer sentences influence cocaine consumption by raising the price of cocaine as

dealers increase prices in order to offset the increased probability of a longer prison sentence.

Using an estimate that a drug dealer must be compensated an additional $37,500 per additional

year of incarceration and a cost to the public of $25,000 per year of incarceration, they estimated

that each $1 spent on longer sentences will translate into a $1.50 increase in total costs to

consumers of cocaine. Thus they found that an additional $1 million spent on longer sentences




                                                 56
would increase cocaine prices by 0.004 percent.95 Over a 15 year time horizon given a dealer

discount rate of 12 percent and an elasticity of demand for cocaine of 1, they determined that

each additional $1 million spent on longer sentences reduces cocaine consumption by 12.6

kilograms nationwide (Caulkins et al. 1997, 103). Given estimated total annual consumption of

291,000 kilograms, this represents a change far less than one-hundredth of one percent. If one

assumes the relationship to be linear over this range, every increase in incarceration costs of $1

billion per year might be expected to reduce cocaine consumption by about 4.3 percent.

       When evaluating treatment programs, the RAND authors relied on Rydell’s and

Everingham’s (1994) study of cocaine treatment reporting that 13 percent of cocaine addicts

abstain from hardcore cocaine use in the long-run following treatment and that 79 percent abstain

during the 0.3 year length of the average treatment program. Given the $1,740 average cost of a

treatment program, an extra $1 million could treat 575 heavy cocaine users, resulting in a 16

kilogram reduction in the first year. Over a 15 year time horizon, given that 13 percent of heavy

users quit heavy use following treatment, these authors estimated that each $1 million spent on

treatment would reduce cocaine consumption by 103.6 kilograms, compared with 12.6 kilograms

for longer sentences, making treatment appear much more effective (Caulkins et al. 1997, 105).

While the linearity assumption might be more strained over this range, the comparison to the

incarceration-increase numbers is revealing: an annual increase of $1 billion in spending on

treatment might be expected to reduce cocaine consumption by 35.6 per cent.

       These findings are in line with Rydell’s and Everingham’s (1994) examination of the

effectiveness of treatment (both outpatient and residential programs) compared with three other

drug enforcement policies: source country control (eradicating coca leaves in the country where

they are grown), interdiction (seizures at the U.S. border to prevent cocaine from entering the




                                                57
country) and domestic enforcement (cocaine seizures, asset seizures, and arrests of drug dealers

by federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies). The authors found that the cost of crime

and productivity loss from cocaine use decreases by $7.46 for every $1 spent on treatment

whereas the same figure for source country control is $0.15 per dollar, $0.32 for interdiction, and

$0.52 for domestic enforcement. Rydell’s & Everingham’s initial study was criticized for

underestimating the decrease in cocaine use stemming from increases in cocaine prices due to

source-country control, interdiction, and domestic enforcement. Repeating their study of policy

effectiveness in 2000 assuming a more elastic demand for cocaine, Caulkins, Chiesa, and

Everingham (2000) determined that treatment has a four-to-one advantage over domestic

enforcement in reducing the costs of crime and productivity losses.

       Overall, this evidence on treatment versus severe punishment for those found possessing

or dealing cocaine today suggests that mandatory treatment for drug offenders is a more cost-

effective solution. As with marijuana policy, there appear to be many potential improvements for

cocaine policy, even within the regime of criminalization.



IV. Conclusion

       In the United States—indeed, throughout the world—many individuals are drawn to

substances that may harm them greatly. Public policy varies enormously with respect to these

substances, partly based on the degree of addiction, the nature of harms, and historical

experience. Though sugar, saturated fat, and high fructose corn syrup impose enormous health

costs, regulation to discourage consumption of them is virtually non-existent; in fact, corn

subsidies in particular have been criticized for perversely incentivizing poor diets. In contrast,

tobacco and alcohol are subject to considerable regulation while remaining legal, and a host of




                                                 58
drugs ranging from heroin and cocaine to methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD, and marijuana are

banned by state and federal law.

          Tobacco imposes high costs on a large proportion of users because the addiction is

powerful and the health cost of decades of use will likely be great. Nonetheless, consumption

rates tend to be high because the health costs are temporally distant, and governments tend not to

prohibit consumption because current productivity and parenting ability are not discernibly

impaired. Interestingly, perhaps the greatest domestic success in reducing consumption of

harmful substances came for this lawful product, engineered largely through tax hikes via the

settlement of tort litigation against the tobacco companies.

          Other harmful recreational substances vary in terms of addictiveness and the ability of

large numbers of users to enjoy them sporadically and without substantial health cost or

productivity impairment for work and parenting. But for sizeable percentages—perhaps 10

percent for marijuana users, 15 percent for alcohol and cocaine users, and almost 25 percent for

heroin users (see Figure 9)—the personal and social costs are dramatic and substantial. It is

largely to reduce these costs to this minority of users that governments have banned, and tried to

keep as many people as possible away from marijuana, cocaine, methamphetamine, and heroin

(and sought to control various legal pharmaceuticals that similarly seem to be used without

substantial cost by most while imposing great burdens for some not inconsiderable fraction of

users).

          Estimates placing the economic costs of illegal drug abuse at levels roughly comparable

to those costs for alcohol and tobacco underscore that there are no easy choices when it comes to

drug policy. Aggressive efforts to limit consumption through a tough penal approach tend to

restrain the costs from drug use while unleashing the high costs of enforcement and incarceration




                                                  59
in a context of increased violence centered around the criminal gangs that run the drug trade.

Conversely, legalization of alcohol and tobacco drastically reduces enforcement costs with

respect to these substances while keeping the costs of consumption high. A cost-minimizing

approach to drug policy might move us away from a punitive approach to control of the currently

illegal drugs, while entailing aggressive measures to prevent underage consumption and

constrain demand.

       On the other hand, while thorough consideration of policy toward legal drugs is beyond

the scope of the present inquiry, comparisons of their toxicological effects and social costs with

those attributable to such illegal drugs as marijuana and cocaine suggest that more vigorous

pursuit of demand-restraint policies for alcohol and tobacco may result in a reduction of the

social costs of those drugs. At some point, insights from social science and medical testing may

be refined enough, and widely enough disseminated, to enable potential users to secure better

advance notice regarding their particular susceptibility to the serious consequences of drug and

alcohol abuse. At present, many individuals find out the hard way, at great cost to themselves

and society. Despite the problem of moral hazard, greater treatment seems to offer a more cost

effective method for dealing with these abusers than criminal penalties.

       Our analysis has also underscored that optimal drug policy is likely to differ from one

drug to another, since, for example, the impact of government policies—current and

hypothetical—may be substantially different for an extremely prevalent drug with relatively mild

toxicological effects, such as marijuana, than for a far less common, but more addictive and

dangerous drug, such as cocaine. Given the differences in prevalence, user base composition,

toxicological effects and distribution networks between marijuana and cocaine, depenalization or




                                                60
legalization would impact the magnitude and distribution of social costs in meaningfully

different ways for these two drugs.

       Yet if reform’s risks and likely impacts upon the distribution of social costs differ from

drug to drug, our analysis nevertheless concludes that for both cocaine and marijuana, there is

considerable potential for reducing the overall social costs. Our review of theory and empiricism

suggests that carefully tailored versions of depenalization or legalization might provide these

cost-reductions, and additional analytic scrutiny could further clarify their likely impacts.

       In light of the admitted uncertainty in empirical predictions of use rates under

hypothetical new regimes, and considering the many important values that a cost-minimization

approach fails to entertain, we are not surprised that many observers fear or dismiss alternatives

to criminalization.96 Distributional issues, although under-theorized in the illegal drug policy

context, arguably underlie much concern about reform. While we follow standard economic

analysis and treat a dollar in costs equally across contexts, politicians and voters are attentive to

who bears the costs of alternative policies. Particularly troublesome to opponents of

legalization—and to a lesser extent depenalization—may be that such reform would redistribute

many costs away from current drug users, sellers, and the government97 and on to a new set of

victims: the new drug users and victims of accidents, a group whose ranks could include one’s

neighbors, relatives, or even one’s own children. Upper middle class voters with influence over

policy may believe that marijuana prohibition protects their children by placing costs on lower

class drug sellers and other countries (such as Mexico). The supporters of prohibition will point

to the lower rates of marijuana use by high school seniors today than in the late 1970s as

evidence for the success of the prohibitionist approach. But, as Figure 11 illustrates, substantial

historical drops in tobacco and alcohol consumption by high school seniors show that




                                                  61
consumption declines by the young can be engineered even for legal substances. Moreover,

events from Kabul to Mexico City show that policies of drug prohibition enrich violent forces

internationally in ways that can impose large indirect costs on the United States.

                                    Insert Figure 11 about here

       While we refrain from analyzing distributional consequences in depth, we are keenly

aware of the concern they engender. Our relative optimism about the potential of depenalization

or legalization to reduce the costs of certain illegal drugs does not come from a sense that such

drugs are not socially harmful. We believe any serious analysis of reform must be especially

sensitive to policies for tailoring depenalization or legalization to mitigate costs from increases in

use.98 Counter-advertising, treatment, age-restrictions, and policies against driving while under

the influence—to list just a few such ideas—would together not just alter at the margin but

integrally affect a new regime for any currently illegal drug.

       In thinking about various options for reforming policy toward marijuana or cocaine, it is

helpful to bear in mind that a choice among criminalization, depenalization, and legalization

could be made with the aim of minimizing social costs, rather than simply curtailing use—the

socially costly goal toward which our current policy of criminalization seems oriented.

Maintaining a focus on the social harms of a drug, not just less subtle measures of the prevalence

of use, helps to clarify the effects of policies that rely predominantly on tough criminal penalties.

       However, even those who would design drug policy principally to minimize use

prevalence should not discount the potential of a carefully tailored version of depenalization or

legalization to serve that goal. Consider Becker’s suggestion that if the goal of reduced

consumption (particularly for the young) is largely derived via maintaining high prices, this goal

could be achieved at lower social cost by legalizing and taxing up to the level of current price




                                                 62
(Becker, Murphy, and Grossman 2006).99 While the merits of this argument will depend upon

the specifics of the legalization policy and the drugs to which it is applied, some general

theoretical considerations are worth stressing.

       The socializing impact of legalization and possible attendant product advertising could

increase individuals’ preference for a socially harmful substance, increasing demand for the drug

at any given price even if an excise tax were designed to simultaneously keep the price from

falling too greatly.100 Moreover, the greater the excise tax, the less effective legalization would

be at shrinking the black market as illegal dealers would find a higher legal price easier to

undercut. There is yet another basic tension in Becker’s view: while it assumes consumers are

responsive predominantly to price rather than the moral command of illegality (and hence its loss

under legalization is a minimal cost), it also presumes that consumers will largely turn away

from the lower priced illegal drugs that skirt the excise tax.101

       Yet although legalization with significant taxation would not eliminate the black market

for a drug entirely, it would be expected to shrink substantially the size of the illegal market,

with the attendant cost reductions from less crime. The remaining black market would also have

diminished risk and profit margins, thus providing less economic incentive for participants to

engage in costly crime and violence to maintain their stakes. Moreover, the additional tax

revenues could be used to fund greater enforcement to protect the under-aged (as well as to target

the tax evaders), while providing greater vehicles for treatment for those who succumb to the

burdens of addiction and abuse. Finally, it is not insignificant that legalization is the only regime

that does not contemplate untold numbers of illegal transactions by otherwise law-abiding

individuals, and an attendant diminished respect for, and faith in, the rule of law.102




                                                  63
       Similarly, a well-crafted form of depenalization is not necessarily antithetical to the goal

of discouraging drug use. Like legalization, depenalization could also significantly reduce the

enforcement costs and productivity losses from the arrest and legal processing of hundreds of

thousands of marijuana possession cases—and some of the costs from analogous proceedings,

plus incarceration, in the context of cocaine. Although one might worry that depenalization

would expand consumption without contracting the black market, and that full decriminalization

of possession would appear hypocritical when combined with the retention of criminal penalties

for sale, it is not clear that these concerns would be borne out in practice. Particularly if

sanctions were reduced for sale as well as possession, depenalization could, like legalization,

reduce the risk and reward for illegal market participants, thus diminishing the likelihood of

violence used to protect their market positions. Depenalization of possession alone could not

only reduce enforcement costs but also—as the insights of Kleiman (2009) help show—increase

the potential swiftness, certainty, and deterrence value per sanction unit, for situations where

punishments were applied. It might also help usher in a policy shift toward harm reduction—a

new orientation toward helping, rather than punishing, the victims of drug abuse. Rather than

being an example of hypocritical or morally ambiguous policy, depenalization could be framed

as a new understanding of which activities are sufficiently harm-producing to merit

criminalization (i.e., sale) and which aren’t (i.e., possession). Indeed, the experience of a number

of European countries suggests that depenalization could reduce the costs of enforcement,

redirect efforts toward helping problem users, and perhaps even reduce the violence of illegal

markets, without these gains being outweighed by increased costs from use.103

       Although our inquiry into illegal drug policy has been a self-conscious search for a cost-

minimizing regime, our evaluation of various policy options can also provide a basis for analysis




                                                  64
by those who would prefer simply to minimize use cost-effectively or who would conduct a full

welfare analysis including the benefits of use for the many casual or moderate users who do not

fall victim to costly abuse or dependence.




                                               65
Endnotes

1
  The United States’s incarceration rate of 7.56 per 1,000 people is five to ten times the rate in most
western and northern European countries.
2
  Under our taxonomy, the libertarian ideal espoused by such scholars as Milton Friedman is a subset of
legalization in which taxation and regulation would be kept to a minimum.
3
  The terms “depenalization” and “decriminalization” have been used in confusing, misleading, and
sometimes contradictory ways. The National Research Council (2001, 192) notes: “The term
‘decriminalization’ has sometimes been misunderstood to refer to ‘legalization’ (i.e., making drugs
available for nonmedical uses, as in the case of alcohol). However, as used by experts in criminal law and
popularized by the National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse [NCMDA] in 1972,
‘decriminalization,’ refers to the repeal of criminal sanctions against possession for personal use, even
though the drugs remain contraband and commercial access remains prohibited. The erroneous
association between decriminalization and legalization has led some commentators to abandon the term in
favor of ‘depenalization’ to refer to these more lenient marijuana laws.” Our taxonomy closely tracks the
usage adopted by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA 2005, 12).
The EMCDDA uses decriminalization and depenalization in the following ways: “‘[D]ecriminalisation’
comprises removal of a conduct or activity from the sphere of criminal law. Prohibition remains the rule,
but sanctions for use (and its preparatory acts) no longer fall within the framework of the criminal law
(elimination of the notion of a criminal offence). This may be reflected either by the imposition of
sanctions of a different kind (administrative sanctions without the establishment of a police record – even
if certain administrative measures are included in the police record in some countries, such as France), or
the abolition of all sanctions. . . . ‘[D]epenalisation’ means relaxation of the penal sanction provided for
by law. In the case of drugs, and cannabis in particular, depenalisation generally signifies the elimination
of custodial penalties. Prohibition remains the rule, but imprisonment is no longer provided for, even if
other penal sanctions may be retained (fines, establishment of a police record, or other penal sanctions).”
We use the term “depenalization” to describe a regime in which possession is punished with sanctions
other than incarceration, reserving “decriminalization” to refer to regimes in which penalties for
possession are not just reduced but are entirely removed or diverted from the realm of criminal law.
         In addition to the erroneous association between “decriminalization” as used by the NCMDA in
the drug context and ordinary understandings of legalization, there are two other important reasons for
preferring the term depenalization to decriminalization, when describing the general policy of responding
to possession with fines and/or treatment rather than incarceration. First, some Western European
countries, for example, make much greater use of fines than the United States for a variety of criminal
offenses. While fines may strike Americans as non-criminal sanctions, they are routinely used as criminal
sanctions in some other countries. (For example, Greene (1988) cites a study from the early 1980s finding
that in West Germany the fine was used as the sole penalty for three-quarters of property crime offenders
and two thirds of those convicted of assault.) Hence, even if such a country relies primarily—or even
exclusively—on fines and treatment to punish possession, one cannot thereby conclude that possession
has necessarily been taken out of the system of criminal law. Second, as Suk (2008) notes with the
example of employment discrimination law in France, some of those same countries use criminal law as
the primary means of addressing behavior that in the U.S. is handled primarily through tort law. A more
expansive domain for criminal law is structurally related to a heavier use of lesser sanctions, such as
fines, in the criminal context, and it may also mean that criminal sanctions do not automatically trigger
the degree of stigmatization that they imply in the United States. To the extent that criminal sanctions in
general carry less of a stigma in some of the countries with less severe punishments for drug offenses,
those countries’ variations on depenalization appear closer to decriminalization from the perspective of
the American system and its use of incarceration as the basic sanction of criminal law.




                                                    66
          One further clarification is in order: in theory, proscription with sanctions other than incarceration
could be applied to sale, in addition to possession. However, because the application of depenalization to
both possession and sale would essentially yield a system resembling a highly (though peculiarly)
regulated legalization, we do not treat the depenalization of possession and sale together as a basic
regime. Rather, we implicitly relegate such a regime to a subset of legalization and use the term
“depenalization” to refer to depenalization of possession. This means than any depenalization of
possession is likely to be incomplete, because states and countries generally set quantity caps defining the
limits of non-criminal possession as a way to distinguish ordinary users from sellers.
4
  Contrary to popular perception, Kleiman (2006) notes that depenalization was actually America’s policy
toward alcohol during prohibition. Alcohol prohibition did not target simple possession but rather
manufacture, sale, and transportation, and in that sense it was a policy of extreme depenalization. Cook
(2007, 19) notes that even when sanctions were imposed for manufacture, sale, or transportation, in
practice these sanctions tended to consist of only a small fine.
5
  While there is a growing literature examining the experiences of countries and states that have shifted
from criminalization to depenalization—whether that depenalization is effected de jure, as in Portugal’s
decriminalization, or de facto, as in the case of some other European countries―there is a dearth of
evidence on shifts from criminalization to legalization.
6
  Depenalization would reduce these costs less than legalization because criminal justice resources would
still be used to impose penalties on sellers and even users. The more extreme the depenalization, the
greater would be the expected reduction in these costs.
7
  The answer to this question largely depends upon the specifics of the new regime. For example,
depenalization could involve a host of different approaches to enforcement, treatment, and civil penalties,
while legalization could entail a wide range of policies regarding taxation, product quality regulation,
advertising, and possession by minors.
8
   A complete normative evaluation of drug policy, even one from a largely consequentalist perspective,
must necessarily contend with a host of values not amenable to quantification: welfare, liberty, and
justice, to name an important few. Despite such limitations, however, a cost-minimization perspective
has a clarity and relative simplicity that makes it a useful guide for any normative discussion of illegal
drug policy reform.
9
   There are several reasons for treating these statistics with some caution. First, there are many possible
metrics for capturing the extent of drug use, and across countries the percentage of people who have tried
a drug once may be only loosely correlated with the percentage who have used the drug often or recently.
Second, Room et al. (2008, 60) report: “Since [the] methodology in this study was more uniform than in
any previous comparison of cannabis use across countries, it would be [sic] appear to be the most
authoritative source for such statements. However, there are large discrepancies between the findings
reported in Degenhardt et al. and other well known surveys . . . . Consequently, we have not made use of
the WMHS data until these discrepancies, which may represent important methodological differences, are
accounted for.”
10
   For alcohol, Degenhardt et al. (2008) indicate that in terms of cumulative use—i.e., the percentage of
the population that has ever used a given drug—the United States (at 91.6 percent) is within a few points
of several West European nations, including Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the
Ukraine, rather than the clear outlier it is in terms of marijuana and cocaine. Using this same measure for
tobacco, the United States has the highest cumulative incidence of use, 73.6 percent, of any nation
studied. However, the U.S. has had dramatic success in decreasing tobacco consumption since 1985:
according to World Health Organization data on regular basis smoking, the United States is far from a
leader, with 20-29 percent of U.S. men reporting smoking regularly. The analogous percentage is now
higher in most European countries, as well as in China and Russia―where over 60 percent of men report
smoking on a regular basis.
11
   If indeed severe sanctions are necessary to keep America’s use rates from rising even higher above
those of other countries, it is tempting to conclude that Americans must have a greater disposition toward


                                                      67
recreational drug use. However, in attempting cross-country comparisons of sanctions and use rates, it is
important not to lose sight of the broader set of incentives that individuals face. For example, to the extent
that potential drug sellers choose among a set of possible legal and illegal behaviors, the attractiveness of
alternative options—including the quality of social welfare networks, the available legal employment, and
the severity of punishment for other criminal careers—will markedly affect the extent to which each unit
of punishment deters. The U.S. may need more severe sanctions against drug offenders than Western
European countries to produce comparable degrees of deterrence not only or simply because Americans
have a greater cultural propensity to drug use (although this is possible) but also because alternatives to
selling and using are worse in the United States. Lesser social safety nets and harsher penalties for
alternative crimes such as property offenses may mean that greater punishment is necessary in the U.S.
than in some Western European countries in order to make drug selling less attractive than substitute
behaviors. On the other hand, lower levels of structural unemployment in the U.S. could militate in the
opposite direction, further complicating the analysis. Thorough analysis of the complex sets of
alternatives that individuals face which impact the deterrent effect of legal sanctions may be less critical
in the drug possession context because drug use and income-producing crimes are unlikely to be strong
substitute behaviors . Still, it is worth remembering that individual users may choose among broad sets of
recreational substances, both legal and illegal, that differ somewhat across countries.
12
   The National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) is sponsored by the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), which is a part of the Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS). The survey itself is carried out by the Research Triangle Institute of North
Carolina (RTI). RTI selects a random sample of households and draws 70,000 individuals ages twelve
and over to participate annually. A professional RTI interviewer visits the household to conduct the
survey. The actual interview is administered via laptop computer with the respondent entering most
answers directly into the computer such that the interviewer does not know the respondent’s answers to
the questions. Respondents receive $30 in cash following the interview. For further information, see
National Survey on Drug Use and Health, https://nsduhweb.rti.org/.
13
   For example, Joseph Califano Jr., president of the National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse
at Columbia University (CASA) and former Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, uses addiction
estimates in just this way, writing: “Today, we have 50 million nicotine addicts, 18 million alcoholics and
alcohol abusers, and 6 million drug addicts. It is logical to conclude that, if drugs are easier to obtain, less
expensive, and socially acceptable, more individuals will use them. With legalization, experts believe the
number of cocaine addicts alone could jump beyond the number of alcoholics” (Trebach and Califano
2010).
14
   Speaking on Portugal’s experience with decriminalization of illegal drugs, Manuel Cardoso, deputy
director of the Institute for Drugs and Drugs Addiction in Portugal, has said: “Before decriminalization,
addicts were afraid to seek treatment because they feared they would be denounced to the police and
arrested. . . . Now they know they will be treated and not stigmatized as criminals” (Treating Not
Punishing 2009).
15
   One way for someone caught in possession of marijuana to reduce one’s expected sentence is to enter
treatment. Many marijuana treatment admissions are criminal justice referrals (Room et al. 2008, 86). In
that sense, the rise in arrests for possession of marijuana in the past two decades has been a factor
contributing to an increase in the number of marijuana users seeking treatment—although it may be
difficult to accurately estimate the number of individuals who did not seek treatment under the current
criminalization regime, but who would have sought treatment had marijuana been depenalized or
legalized.
16
   In a famous concurrence in Powell v. Texas, Justice White put it this way: “If it cannot be a crime to
have an irresistible compulsion to use narcotics . . . I do not see how it can constitutionally be a crime to
yield to such a compulsion.” Powell v. Texas, 392 U.S. 514, 548 (1968) (White, J., concurring).
17
   Reviewing the “four largest, most methodologically rigorous studies of psychiatric disorders and their
correlates,” Heyman (2009, 69-88) finds that high remission rates are characteristic of addiction. Heyman


                                                      68
also finds the widespread belief that addiction is a chronic disorder to be unsupported by the best
available data (73-74).
18
   This intuitively plausible prediction is backed by evidence demonstrating that addiction is much more
or less likely to spread depending upon social context. Heyman (2009, 31-43) reviews the influences of
cohort and social context on addiction rates and finds that both are significant, despite the biological basis
of addiction. Contrary to received wisdom, Heyman argues convincingly that “[a]ddiction is not an
equal-opportunity disorder; indeed there is no psychiatric disorder that is more closely tied to
circumstance” (39).
19
   Grossman, Chaloupka, and Anderson (1998) find that the Becker-Murphy model—in which demand for
addictive goods is sensitive to past, current and future price—is consistent with some empirical studies of
the demand for cigarettes, alcohol and cocaine, which find negative effects of price on demand, positive
effects of past and future consumption on demand, and greater price elasticities of demand over longer
time horizons. Other economic models of addiction exist, however, that have treated addicts as myopic or
holding inconsistent short and long term preferences.
20
   Becker and Murphy (1988, 695) put it this way: “We do not claim that all idiosyncratic behavior
associated with particular kinds of addictions are consistent with rationality.”
21
   Becker and Murphy write: “Permanent changes in prices of addictive goods may have a modest short-
run effect on the consumption of addictive goods. This could be the source of a general perception that
addicts do not respond much to changes in price. However, we show that the long-run demand for
addictive goods tends to be more elastic than the demand for nonaddictive goods” (1988, 694-95).
22
   The assumption underlying this statement is that the probability of commencing abuse drops sharply
after adolescence, while those who begin abuse are put on a less favorable subsequent life path. As a
result, one would observe that most abusers start early and have worse life outcomes. Of course, this
pattern could also appear if there were simply two types of individuals—those prone to abusing drugs
(that is, those with high probabilities of commencing abuse and having poor life outcomes) and those not
so prone―and individuals in the first group tended to begin abuse in their teen years. Thus, heterogeneity
with stable probabilities could generate the observed pattern in a way that would indicate that delaying
initiation of abuse would not reduce the number of abusers over the life span. Of course, it might still be
desirable to delay addiction to prevent it from stymieing education or growth.
23
   In reporting data on drug use over time, it is important to keep in mind the variety of ways in which use
can be measured. Prevalence of use is the most common use measure, measuring the percentage who
have tried a substance, rather than the quantities or potencies used or distribution of use among users.
Prevalence is only a proxy for an ideal measure of use severity that would somehow incorporate and
weight prevalence, intensity, potency, and other factors contributing to social harms generated by a
population’s drug problem. Among prevalence statistics the most commonly reported are lifetime, last
year, and last month. Each of these time horizons carries with it advantages and disadvantages. Lifetime
use figures pick up all those who have ever tried a substance, even if just one time, thus giving a sense of
how common it has been for a member of a given population to try a substance. By looking across an
individual’s lifetime, however, such measures necessarily obscure the severity of prevalence at narrower
moments in time (e.g., “now” or “in recent years”). If many people try a drug once or just several times,
but drug use problems stem from perpetual users, the measure can be a poor proxy for the severity of the
current problem of drug use within a population. Looking at use during the last year or last month
illuminates the severity of the drug problem within a population at a narrower moment in time, and places
more emphasis on relatively frequent users than lifetime use measures. However, these shorter time
horizons fail to capture the likelihood that an individual in a given population will try or come to abuse
the drug in the long-run.
24
   Monitoring the Future (MTF), sponsored by the Institute for Social Research at the University of
Michigan, has been a mainstay of data collection regarding drug use in the United States since 1975.
MTF consists of an annual survey of 16,000 seniors from public and private high schools across the
contiguous United States. Random sampling procedures are used to select 133 schools for research, with


                                                     69
a maximum of 350 students surveyed within each school. Ten days prior to administration of the survey,
students are given a flyer that explains the purpose of the study and provides notice to parents of the
study, giving each parent an opportunity to refuse their child’s participation. Institute for Social Research
staff administer the questionnaire in classrooms during normal class periods following procedures
outlined in a project instruction manual. All student responses remain confidential. For more
information, visit http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/purpose.html.
25
   This important insight has long been recognized—at least by many advocates of some form of drug
legalization. Kleiman and Saiger (1990, 539) note: “A central accomplishment of the consequentialist
proponents of legalization has been to stress the vital distinction between the costs of drug abuse and the
costs of drug control.”
26
   The war on drugs increased the number of drug offenders in federal prisons by 26 percent from 2000 to
2006, bringing the number to over 93,000 and accounting for over 53 percent of the increase in the federal
prison population during this same time period (Sabol, Couture and Harrison 2007, 9). Sabol, West and
Cooper (2009, 37-38) report that the numbers of drug offenders in state and federal prison were 265,800
(in 2006) and 95,079 (in 2008), respectively (those in jail are not counted in these numbers).
27
   Marijuana possession accounted for 59.8 percent of the cases evaluated for prosecution by U.S.
Attorneys for simple possession, whereas powder cocaine and crack cocaine accounted for 11 and 10.3
percent, respectively (BJS 2001, 3). For drug trafficking offenses, marijuana was involved in 30.7
percent of evaluated cases, with powder cocaine and crack cocaine being involved in 28.2 and 15.5
percent of cases, respectively.
28
   Because offenders may have been involved with multiple substances, the figures do not add up to 100
percent.
29
   The American Corrections Association estimates that the average cost of incarcerating state prison
inmates is $67.55 per day, or around $25,000 per prisoner per year (ACA 2006). Combining this estimate
with one from Sabol, West and Cooper (2009, 21) that 265,800 state prisoners are currently serving
sentences for drug offenses yields an annual cost of state drug incarceration of $6.6 billion. If the total
population of convicts incarcerated in jail and state and federal prison is approximately half-a-million, it
is reasonable to think that the total costs of incapacitating drug offenders each year may be in the
neighborhood of $13 billion.
30
   Prevalence of use of illegal drugs is modestly higher among African-Americans than Caucasians
(SAMHSA 2008, 25). The 2007 NSDUH reported past month illicit drug use rates of 9.5 percent among
“blacks or African-Americans” and 8.2 percent among whites. While these data are useful at dispelling
popular notions that drug use is vastly disproportionate among African-Americans, a comparison between
the percentage of past-month drug users by race and the percentage of drug-abuse offense prisoners by
race does not in and of itself demonstrate disparate enforcement of drug laws against African-Americans.
Because most people imprisoned for drug-related offenses are imprisoned for drug trafficking and dealing
rather than simple possession, and because the indicator of illegal drug use prevalence does not identify
either the type of drug or severity of use, the highly aggregated demographic comparison of illicit drug
users with individuals incarcerated on drug offenses must be interpreted cautiously.
31
   We believe that Portugal’s self-described policy of “decriminalization” is appropriately characterized
(whereas some other laws—such as American states’ reforms in the 1970s—have been misleadingly
called decriminalization) because Portugal has by law explicitly designated short-supply possession as an
“administrative offence” subject only to civil fines (Greenwald 2009; Treating Not Punishing 2009).
32
   It appears that even treatment imposed as a condition for suspension of a fine may not be enforced
rigorously (Greenwald 2009, 3). On the other hand, the Dissuasion Commissions are theoretically
empowered to levy other non-criminal sanctions such as the revocation of certain privileges.
33
    The Argentine Court’s reasoning is similar to that of an earlier Alaska Supreme Court decision. In
Ravin v. State the Alaska Supreme Court held that Article I, Section 22 of the Alaska Constitution (“The
right of the people to privacy is recognized and shall not be infringed.”) protected people's right to
possess marijuana in their own homes for personal use. Ravin v. State, 537 P.2d 494, 511 (Alaska 1975).


                                                     70
More recently the Alaska Court of Appeals interpreted Ravin as applying only to possession of small
amounts of marijuana and upheld an Alaska statute prohibiting possession of eight ounces of marijuana.
Walker v. State, 991 P.2d 799, 802-03 (Alaska App. 1999).
34
   This study uses the cost-of-illness (COI) methodology. The COI methodology evaluates both the direct
costs from drug abuse, such as medical expenditures on treatment of drug users, and indirect costs, such
as work missed due to drug induced illness. This method can be contrasted with the willingness-to-pay
methodology, which computes the public’s willingness to pay for the avoidance of a small amount of
additional harm.
35
   “As used in this report and throughout most of the literature on economic costs, the term ‘alcohol
abuse’ refers to any cost-generating aspect of alcohol consumption. This differs from the clinical
definition of the term, which involves specific diagnostic criteria” (Harwood 2000, 1). An early aggregate
cost study, Rice et al. (1991), estimated economic costs for 1988 of $58.3 billion for drug abuse and $85.8
billion for alcohol abuse. A subsequent study, Rice (1999), estimated that in 1995 there were $114.2
billion in costs from drug abuse and $175.9 billion in costs from alcohol abuse.
36
   These figures, rounded to the nearest billion, were computed using the CPI-based inflation adjustment
calculator of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, available at http://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/cpicalc.pl.
37
   Of course, whether and to what extent drugs benefit their users is not just an empirical question but also
a normative one. For a brief and lucid discussion of various perspectives on the role of drug use benefits
in policy assessment, see MacCoun and Reuter (2001, 70). The authors note that whereas some
economists such as Becker and Murphy argue that the principle of revealed preference evinces benefits
for drug users, others such as Kleiman are skeptical of such an argument given that certain drugs
“instigate neurological and psychological processes that motivate compulsive use.”
38
   In noting the limitations of its scope and reliability, the ONDCP’s 2004 cost study, ONDCP (2004, vi)
points to four brief critiques of the value of such estimates: Reuter (1999a), Kleiman (1999), Kopp
(1999), and Cohen (1999). For an argument that such economic costs of drug use studies do not help
illuminate the relative merits of prohibition or alternative policies, see Miron (2003).
39
   Since Secretary Clinton’s remarks in March 2009, the news media have reported a flurry of stories
concerning the violence in the Mexican drug trade. One particularly gruesome tale published in the New
York Times in October 2009 reported the arrest of Santiago Meza Lopez who had admitted to disposing
of the remains of 300 bodies for a drug cartel by dissolving them in lye. The lye corroded the remains to
the point where DNA could not be recovered to identify the bodies. Due to such tactics, many people
involved in the Mexican drug trade disappear each year (Lacey 2009). While Mexican drug smugglers
are often depicted as cocaine dealers, marijuana remains the largest source of revenue for Mexican drug
cartels. Even though Mexican growers are starting to face stiff competition from “mom and pop” U.S.
producers of pot, the White House Office of National Drug Control reports that in 2006 over 60 percent
of Mexican cartels’ revenue ($8.6 billion out of $13.8 billion) came from U.S. marijuana sales (Fainaru
and Booth 2009). Mexican traffickers have also established marijuana crops in remote American forests
where they have shot at U.S. law enforcement agents, polluted rivers with pesticides and fertilizers, and
started large fires. Most recently, the Associated Press has reported on the $25 billion each year in profits
from drug trafficking in the United States that Mexican cartels send to Mexico from the United States (AP
2009). In spite of attempts by the U.S. Treasury to stop this flow of funds, the AP reports that $99.75 of
every $100 sent by the cartels makes it to Mexico.
40
   Caulkins and Kleiman (2007, 591) summarize the quandary in the cocaine context: “Unless the taxes
and regulations involved in a post-prohibition control regime for cocaine were so high and so tight as to
leave the current illicit market largely in place, the result would almost certainly be a very large increase
in the number of heavy cocaine users . . . . Against that must be set the enormous reduction in violence
and incarceration that would result from abolishing the illicit market in cocaine. (The net impact on
property crime is unclear; users, presumably, would steal less, but some dealers, deprived of their
customers by legal competition, might switch to theft as a source of illicit income. On the other hand,



                                                     71
legalization would free substantial police, prosecution, and prison resources for use against predatory
crime.).”
41
   Another concern that is difficult to assess is the extent to which current drug dealers would substitute
toward other criminal enterprises were a liberalization of illegal drug policy to contract the black market
and its profitability.
42
   In this section we consider drug policy primarily from the standpoint of cost-minimization analysis. A
final assessment on desirable social policy would consider other important concerns such as individual
liberty, distributional justice, and which side of the controversy (those who would maintain the status quo
or those who would enact reform) bears the burden of uncertainty. However, due to limited space and our
interest in clarifying the social science, we do not give such concerns full treatment, but instead simply
note some evidence that might be relevant to the application of these non-efficiency based criteria. For a
discussion seeking to reframe the marijuana policy debate in terms of “just deserts” for offenders, see
Husak (2007, 189). A comprehensive treatment—and indeed a true cost-benefit analysis—of various
schemes would also require serious consideration of the benefits of drugs to their users. To the extent that
reforms such as depenalization or legalization would increase the benefits to users through increased
consumption, for example, our decision to ignore benefits biases our analysis in favor of the status quo
and makes any favorable assessments of such reforms all the more cautiously derived.
43
   A persistent critique of arguments for “legalization” has been that they paint overly rosy pictures of the
consequences of legalization by omitting the specifics—such as the forms of regulation, distribution
mechanisms, level of taxation, treatment of marketing, and special policies toward young people—that if
considered in detail would surely reveal the shortcomings of legalization.
44
   At the extreme, this posture often entails language implicitly denying that legal drugs such as alcohol
and nicotine are drugs at all. The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) exploits this distinction in
opposing legalization. “The Legalization Lobby claims drugs are no more dangerous than alcohol,” the
DEA writes in its summary of the top ten “facts” on legalization (DEA 2003, 3). This statement implicitly
perpetuates the myths that (1) alcohol is not a drug; and (2) the substances properly called drugs are
illegal.
45
   John Kaplan’s The Hardest Drug: Heroin and Public Policy (1983) provides a classic example of the
approach of focusing on the costs and benefits of a single drug, while drawing comparisons with other
drugs. Written on the eve of the American crack “epidemic,” Kaplan considered the costs of heroin use,
formerly considered to be the country’s most problematic drug, and explored the costs and benefits of
possible systems of legalization and heroin maintenance. Kaplan’s careful weighing of costs and benefits
for a particular drug provides an example of a strong methodological framework for those conducting
research in this area.
46
   Caulkins and Kleiman (2007, 564) estimate that “cocaine (including crack) accounts for roughly two-
thirds of the social costs associated with illicit drugs in the United States.”
47
   “Data from non-western countries are much sparser, but suggest more variation and lower rates” (Room
et al. 2008, 61). There are several reasons why lifetime use data are more amenable to cross-country
comparison. First, lifetime use figures are likely to fluctuate less over short periods of time because (a)
people who have used during their lifetimes will not drop out of the pool of those who have ever used
until they die, and (b) those who begin using between sampling periods will make up a smaller percentage
of those who have ever used than those who have used during the past year because at any time far more
people will have ever used than used in the past year. The most recent use figures for different countries
are often for slightly different years. The smaller the expected changes in use from year to year, the lesser
the extent to which different sampling years render statistics from two different countries incomparable.
Second, lifetime use figures using a uniform methodology are available from at least one recent study, the
WHO World Mental Health Surveys, whereas the most comprehensive cross-country data for past year
use of which we are aware come from the World Drug Report 2009, and are pulled together from
disparate studies done within individual nations and with somewhat differing methodologies.



                                                     72
48
   Far fewer—indeed just a small fraction—are actually imprisoned for marijuana possession. Caulkins
and Kleiman (2007, 581) write: “There are more than 1 million arrests per year in the United States for
drug possession . . . but few of them result in prison time, or even jail time following a conviction. That is
especially true of cannabis possession, even in states where it is not formally ‘decriminalized.’ Possession
of quantities suitable for personal consumption by itself is usually punished, if at all, with probation,
fines, community service, or shorter jail terms, not prison sentences.”
49
   That relatively few marijuana users persist in their habit beyond their youth raises two important
questions, however. First, to what extent is this consumption pattern the result of the existing punitive
policy? Second, to what extent does uncertainty about the first question undermine our confidence in the
long-term consequences of marijuana use?
50
   For example, “in 2004 the three leading Democratic hopefuls—John Kerry, Howard Dean, and John
Edwards—all acknowledged without quibbling that they’d smoked pot” (Hertzberg 2008).
51
   A list of the names is available at http://www.prohibitioncosts.org/endorsers.html.
52
   Milton Friedman, George Akerlof, and Vernon Smith.
53
   More recently Miron has expanded upon that report, analyzing the budgetary implications of the
prohibition of all other illegal drugs—including cocaine and heroin specifically (Miron 2008).
54
   Preferences for drugs are likely to be in significant part endogenous—i.e., not independent of, but
rather, partly determined by, policy and market structure. However, while most assume that
criminalization reduces the aggregate demand for drugs, the policy regime undoubtedly affects
individuals in differing ways. For some, the resulting social stigma makes drug use or dealing far less
attractive at any given price whereas, for others, a contrary lure of heresy and rebellion makes such
activities more desirable at each price.
55
   A related issue is whether marijuana is an economic substitute for, or complement to, alcohol and
cigarettes. Williams et al. (2004), for example, find some evidence that marijuana and alcohol are
complements, and therefore increases in the price of alcohol decrease marijuana use. DiNardo and
Lemieux (2001), on the other hand, find evidence that increases in the minimum drinking age were
associated with slight increases in marijuana use, suggesting a substitution effect. We are skeptical that
such studies can resolve the issue of whether marijuana and alcohol or marijuana and cigarettes are
substitutes or complements—much less how the overall price decreases in marijuana from depenalization
or legalization would affect alcohol or cigarette use—because it is unlikely that marijuana and alcohol or
marijuana and cigarettes have stable relationships in individuals’ preference relations across social
contexts and historical time periods. Even if such a stable relation were uncovered given marijuana
criminalization, this would not ensure that the relationship would persist after marijuana reform—
especially legalization.
56
   Reviewing the literature, two analysts write: “The psychopharmacological model hypothesizes that
drug users engage in violent and/or non-violent crime because of the acute psychoactive effects of the
substance. . . . There is very little support for this model in the case of marijuana, except for adolescents.
Laboratory studies generally show that marijuana, unlike alcohol, temporarily inhibits aggression and
violence . . . raising doubt that any association identified in the data is causal in nature. Still, there is
some evidence showing a correlation between chronic marijuana use and increased risk of violent
behavior” (Pacula and Kilmer 2003, 4). The results of the authors’ own models, using Arrestee Drug
Abuse Monitoring (ADAM) and Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) data, suggest a possible causal
mechanism between marijuana use and arrests for property and income-producing crime, but are too
conflicting to affirm or refute the existence of a causal relationship between marijuana use and violent
crime arrests. Even if one were to take a leap from their relatively mixed evidence and conclude that a
causal relationship between marijuana use and non-violent crime arrests exists, however, the nature of
that relationship remains elusive: perhaps most problematic is the possibility that a positive association
between marijuana use and arrest likelihood may be a reflection of marijuana users’ greater likelihood of
arrest conditional on committing a crime—rather than greater likelihood of committing crimes. At best
the authors’ analysis offers weak and indirect support for the thesis that marijuana induces non-violent


                                                     73
crime at all, much less toxicologically.
57
    So-called “broken windows” policing is a strategy wherein law enforcement cracks down on minor
offenses as a means of preventing antisocial behavior from escalating into more serious crimes. The
strategy was advanced in James Q. Wilson’s and George Kelling’s article Broken Windows: The Police
and Neighborhood Safety (Wilson and Kelling 1982).
58
     Not only did the authors find evidence against the “broken windows” theory of policing, they also
observed that African-Americans and Hispanics were much more likely to be arrested for MPV and to
fare poorly in the criminal justice system thereafter.
59
    Room, et al. (2008, 105), explain: “Predominantly, these state laws downgraded the legal status of
marijuana possession offences, defining possession of small amounts as a misdemeanor, i.e. reducing the
severity of penalties following violations while retaining them formally as criminally sanctioned offenses
under this offense rubric. Thus, while these reforms have widely been labeled as ‘decriminalization,’ it
has been suggested that this may have been a misnomer in strict terms. . . .’” In one respect, there is a
common denominator among the state reform laws that makes them somewhat like, though not strictly
examples of, our particular conception of a “depenalization” regime: as Pacula et al. (2004, 9) note “[t]he
only common denominator across these eleven statutes was the lack of imposition of minimum jail/prison
terms.” The failure to specify minimum terms of incarceration is not the same as the removal of any
incapacitating sanctions, however. If decriminalization strictly refers to a regime of sanctions outside the
criminal system, some of the states’ reform laws approach this ideal more closely than others: some
downgraded possession of a small quantity of marijuana to a misdemeanor while others downgraded the
offense to a violation (Pacula et al. 2004).
60
    The 2001 NRC report noted that “most cross-state comparisons in the United States . . . have found no
significant differences in the prevalence of marijuana use in decriminalized and nondecriminalized states
. . . . Even in the few studies that find an effect on prevalence it is a weak one” (NRC 2001, 192-93).
61
    MacCoun et al. (2009, 366-67) write: “Our study finds significant associations between the maximum
penalty specified in state marijuana laws and a citizen’s perceived maximum penalties. But the
associations are very small in magnitude. Citizens in decriminalization states are only about 29 percent
more likely to believe the maximum penalty for possessing an ounce of marijuana is a fine or probation
(relative odds ratio = 1.29). About a third of citizens in each type of state believe the maximum penalty is
a jail sentence. People are not oblivious to their marijuana laws, but the average citizen’s awareness is
pretty tenuous. This fact, combined with prior evidence for only weak effects of perceived sanction
severity on offending . . . goes a long way toward clarifying why decriminalization effects are fairly weak
and inconsistent.”
62
    As van der Gouwe, Ehrlich, and van Laar (2009) explain, possession remains illegal and subject to
incarceration and fines, but those found in possession of fewer than five grams of cannabis will not be
subject to prosecution. Because the Netherlands’ policy systematically removes these low-level
possession cases from the criminal system, despite retaining nominal prohibition, it may appropriately be
termed de facto decriminalization or extreme depenalization.
63
    The survey methodology used by the European School Survey Project was modeled after that used by
the Monitoring the Future study performed in the United States.
64
    COLO. CONST. art. XVIII, § 14, which states that “it shall be an exception from the state’s criminal laws
for any patient or primary care-giver in lawful possession of a registry identification card to engage or
assist in the medical use of marijuana.”
65
    CAL. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE § 11362.5 (West 2009).
66
    CAL. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE § 11362.71 (West 2009).
67
    CAL. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE § 11362.775 (West 2009), which provides that people with valid
medical marijuana identification cards who “associate within the state of California collectively or
cooperatively to cultivate marijuana for medical purposes, shall not solely on the basis of that fact be
subject to state criminal sanctions. . . .”
68
    People v. Mentch, 195 P.3d 1061, 1068 (Cal. 2008).


                                                     74
69
   Ross v. RagingWire Telecommunications, 174 P.3d 200, 204 (Cal. 2008).
70
   Taxing socially harmful substances will enhance social welfare to the extent that it corrects for
externalities (and internalities). The tax revenues themselves are mere transfers from drug users and drug
sellers to the government, although to the extent that the drug cartels are outside the United States, there
may be some transfer of wealth away from countries such as Mexico to the United States. See generally,
Kaplow (2004).
71
   “Caulkins and Pacula (2006) analyzed the National Survey on Drug Use and Health and found that
most users reported that they acquired their marijuana from a friend (89%) and for free (58%)” (Room et
al. 2008, 74).
72
   Room, et al. (2008, 74-75) put it this way: “Violence is not commonly found in cannabis markets. This
is mostly an inference from the absence of reports rather than any positive information that disputes
between market participants are resolved amicably and that competition for territory is lacking. . . . The
fact that the market is so imbedded in social networks may be an important factor in explaining the lack
of violence.” Much of the violence over marijuana distribution in the U.S. is taking place in Mexico,
which is plagued by a shocking level of drug-cartel related violence.
73
   Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company, 478 U.S. 328 (1986).
74
   See, e.g., 44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island, 517 U.S. 484 (1996) (invalidating Rhode Island ban on
advertising liquor prices).
75
   See Capital Broadcasting Company v. Mitchell, 333 F. Supp. 582 (D.C. 1971), aff’d sub nom. Capital
Broad. Company v. Kleindienst, 405 U.S. 1000 (1972).
76
   Complaint, Commonwealth Brands, Inc. v. United States, No. 00-117 (W.D. Ky. Aug. 31, 2009).
77
   Pub. L. No. 111-31, 123 Stat. 1776 (2009).
78
   Commonwealth Brands, Inc. v. United States, 678 F. Supp. 2d 512, 525-26 (W.D. Ky. 2010).
79
   Id.
80
   Id. at 531-32.
81
   Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, art. 36, Mar. 25, 1961.
82
   See, for example, critiques of STRIDE price data (NRC 2001, 108-17).
83
   That many authors focus on America’s experience with alcohol prohibition and its repeal—
notwithstanding the fact that both took place over 75 years ago, when social and economic conditions
were quite different than today—is evidence of the dearth of American experience with transitions from
some form of prohibition to legalization.
84
   Belenko (1993, 40) reports that studies of crack smokers indicate “injury to the bronchial pathways,”
“lung irritation and inflammation, resulting in shortness of breath,” “decreased ability to exchange air,”
pulmonary edema, and “pulmonary hemorrhaging possibly caused by the vasoconstricting action of
cocaine.”
85
   4.1 percent of the murders were categorized as “multidimensional,” meaning that they are drug-related
but that they fit into more than one of these categories. Of the murders involving drugs, 22 percent
involved cocaine and 54 percent involved crack.
86
   Dills, Miron, and Summers (2008) find that for certain regressions on the homicide rate, an index of
drug prohibition spending enters as a statistically significant independent variable. We follow Miron’s
original paper in using Vital Statistics rather than Uniform Crime Rates, for data on the homicide rate
(Miron, 1999, 90).
87
   We used the Hildreth-Lu correction for serial correlation in all our regressions.
88
   We also tested the entire available time span using Eckberg’s adjusted pre-1933 homicide rate for the
same purpose of identifying to what extent Miron’s initial finding depended upon the early 20th century
and its questionable data.
89
   Given the limitations of national time series data we deliberately chose not to replicate Miron’s more
heavily controlled specifications—from either his original 1999 paper or his more recent broader study of
economic analysis of crime, due to concern about drawing strong conclusions from national time series
data and the misleading sense of definitiveness such specifications might suggest. This should in no way


                                                    75
diminish the insights into model sensitivity that we reveal here. Indeed to the extent that results differ
with certain alternative specifications in Miron’s own partial follow up paper, this only reaffirms the
central importance of model specification. Moreover, given our skepticism about the possibility of
comprehensively modeling the determinants of homicide using the relatively thin device that is national
time series data, the problem of specification cannot simply be solved here by identifying some a priori
ideal set of controls and focusing on regressions including them.
90
   For a description of Miron’s drug prohibition enforcement spending index and a variation thereof using
projected rather than actual expenditures, which he also tested, see Miron (1999, 92-93). The drug
spending index for which Miron and Dills sent us data was equal to annual spending in hundreds of 1992
dollars per capita.
91
   For a brief concise discussion of state versus federal spending on drug control, see Boyum and Reuter
(2005, 44). The authors note that state spending data are far sparser than federal spending data but the
state data that do exist suggest state spending likely exceeds federal spending and is also probably more
enforcement oriented than federal spending.
92
   The most recent figures from the U.S. Sentencing Commission indicate that in Fiscal Year 2008, 79.8
percent of those sentenced for offenses related to crack cocaine were Black, 10.4 percent were White, 8.8
percent were Hispanic, and 1 percent were “other.” For powder cocaine, the relevant figures are 30.2
percent Black, 16.6 percent White, 52.3 percent Hispanic, and 1.0 percent “other.” These data include
those sentenced for drug trafficking, drug offenses occurring near a protected location, continuing
criminal enterprise, use of a communication facility to facilitate a drug offense, renting or managing a
drug establishment, and simple possession (U.S. Sentencing Commission 2008a). As would be expected
given the higher mandatory minimum sentences for crack cocaine as compared with powder cocaine,
statistics from this same source indicate that defendants convicted on charges involving crack cocaine
have median sentences of 97 months, compared with a median of 70 months for those convicted of
offenses involving powder cocaine (U.S. Sentencing Commission 2008b).
93
   Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 841 (2006).
94
   The authors focus on federal mandatory minimum sentences because even though most of those
imprisoned for possessing and distributing cocaine are in state prisons, they wish to capture the overall
impact of mandatory sentencing laws rather than analyzing state-to-state differences in such laws.
95
   The exact method by which Caulkins, et al. derive the 0.004 percent increase in cocaine prices is as
follows. They begin with an estimate from Mark Kleiman that a cocaine dealer needs to be compensated
between $25,000 and $50,000 to incur a risk of spending one year in prison, choosing $37,500 because it
is in the middle of Kleiman’s range. They then divide this $37,500 by $25,000 (the cost of incarcerating a
prisoner for one year) to determine that every $1 spent by the government on incarceration imposes a cost
of $1.50 on dealers, thus meaning that for every $1 million spent on incarceration, cocaine costs increase
by $1.5 million. Caulkins, et al. then use a cocaine price of $129.20 per gram and a sales quantity of
291,200 kg per year to calculate that $37.6 billion is spent on cocaine in the United States each year.
Finally, they divide the $1.5 million increase in the cost of cocaine by $37.6 billion to find a 0.004
percent increase in the price of cocaine for every $1 million spent on incarceration.
96
   We also note that many vocal pundits have vested interests in maintaining the status quo
criminalization—a reality that helps explain both much opposition to reform among commentators and
the political intractability of illegal drug policy reform. An entire federal bureaucracy, the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) has been created to enforce the current prohibition regime, the prison
guard unions benefit enormously from the large number of prisoners kept behind bars on drug-related
charges, and a multi-million dollar industry has emerged to supply the pre-employment drug screening
needs of large employers of low-wage workers such as Wal-Mart and Target. The drug-testing industry
may be the group most opposed to changes involving the reduction of penalties for marijuana use. In the
typical urinalysis used in pre-employment drug screens, the detection window for marijuana is longer
than that for drugs considered more serious, such as cocaine (Boyum and Reuter 2005, 82). Thus while
private employers may continue to require drug screens prior to employment, anything that would make


                                                   76
marijuana use more acceptable and thus less of a basis for screening out employment candidates could
significantly damage the drug testing industry.
97
   While it is easy to appreciate in theory that costs borne by the government are channeled back to
society at large through higher taxes and/or forgone spending, such costs are spread diffusely and the
individual taxpayer cannot easily measure changes in her burden, if she can perceive them at all.
98
   In at least one important way, increases in use of a legalized drug would be inherently much less
harmful than increases in use when a drug is proscribed: they would not contribute to the black market
and its associated violence and crime. Would domestic violence and date rape increase? These are
concerns, but in periods of declining crime, domestic violence also tends to fall, so the problem might be
mitigated.
99
   Becker, Murphy, and Grossman (2006, 38) argue that where demand or supply for a good is inelastic,
“a monetary tax could cause a greater reduction in output and increase in price than optimal enforcement
against the same good would if it were illegal, even though some producers may go underground to avoid
a monetary tax.”
100
    Depenalization might be less likely to present this particular problem, although it is worth pondering
whether a regime of legalization coupled with counter-advertising might be able to avoid the appearance
of governmental toleration of drugs and convey an official stance of discouraging use.
101
    Greater product information and lesser risk of contamination would provide significant reasons for
consumers to prefer the legal markets, but could also, undesirably, stimulate new demand—not just divert
existing demand from illegal markets to legal ones.
102
    One possible exception to this otherwise straightforward observation is the case of drugs—such as
marijuana—that can be produced domestically with relative ease. Full decriminalization of marijuana
possession could substantially erode the number of illegal marijuana sales by diverting consumers toward
home cultivation for personal use.
103
    Of course, for reasons already mentioned, such comparisons need to be handled with care.




                                                   77
References

“A Nation of Jailbirds." 2009. Economist, April 4, 40.

“A Toker’s Guide.” 2009. Economist, March 7, 34.

Abraham, Manja D. 1999. “Places of Drug Purchase in the Netherlands.” Paper presented at the
10th Annual Conference on Drug Use and Drug Policy, Vienna, Austria.
http://proxy.baremetal.com/csdp.org/research/places.pdf.

American Correctional Association (ACA). 2006. 2006 Directory of Adult and Juvenile
Correctional Departments, Institutions, Agencies, and Probation and Parole Authorities, 67th
edition. Alexandria, VA: American Correctional Association.

Associated Press (AP). 2009. “U.S. Drug Cartel Crackdown Misses the Money.” MSNBC,
December 17. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/34466436/.

Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1988. “A Theory of Rational Addiction.” Journal of
Political Economy 96(4): 675–700.

Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy, and Michael Grossman. 2006. “The Market for Illegal
Goods: The Case of Drugs.” Journal of Political Economy 114(1): 38–60.

Belenko, Steven R. 1993. Crack and the Evolution of Anti Drug Policy. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.

Beale, Jonathan. 2008. “Montana Meth Ads Winning Drug Battle.” BBC News, August 22.
http://fvgroup.com/news/BBC%208.22.08.pdf.

Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 2009. Drugs and Crime Facts. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs.

_____. 2008. Special Report: Parents in Prison and their Minor Children. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs.

_____. 2001. Federal Drug Offenders, 1999 with Trends 1984-99. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs.

Boyum, David, and Peter Reuter. 2005. An Analytic Assessment of U.S. Drug Policy.
Washington, D.C.: AEI Press.

Brice, Arthur. 2009. “Argentina Ruling Would Allow Personal Use of Pot.” CNN, August 25.
http://www.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/americas/08/25/argentina.drug.decriminalization/index.html.

Browning, Dominique. 2009. “Reefer Madness.” New York Times, August 27.
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/30/books/review/Browning-t.html.



                                               78
Caspers-Merk, Marion. 2003. Action Plan on Drugs and Addiction. Bonn, Germany: German
Federal Ministry of Health.
http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/attachements.cfm/att_35452_EN_Germany%20Action%20plan%
202003-%20Englisch.pdf.

Cato Institute. 2009. “Drug Decriminalization in Portugal.” Policy Forum featuring Glenn
Greenwald and Peter Reuter, April 3. http://www.cato.org/event.php?eventid=5887.

Caulkins, Jonathan P., and Mark A.R. Kleiman. 2007. “Drug Policy.” In Understanding
America: The Anatomy of an Exceptional Nation, edited by Peter H. Schuck and James Q.
Wilson, 563–96. New York: Public Affairs.

Caulkins, Jonathan P., and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula. 2006. “Marijuana Markets: Inferences from
Reports by the Household Population.” Journal of Drug Issues 36(1): 173–200.

Caulkins, Jonathan P., James Chiesa, and Susan S. Everingham. 2000. Response to the National
Research Council’s Controlling Cocaine Study. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Caulkins, Jonathan P., C. Peter Rydell, William L. Schwabe, and James Chiesa. 1997.
Mandatory Minimum Drug Sentences: Throwing Away the Key or the Taxpayer’s Money? Santa
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Cohen, Mark A. 1999. “Alcohol Drugs and Crime: Is ‘Crime’ Really One-Third of the
Problem?” Addiction 94(5): 644–47.

CNN Wire Staff. 2010. “Obama Signs Bill Reducing Cocaine Sentencing Gap.” CNN, August 3.
http://articles.cnn.com/2010-08-03/politics/fair.sentencing_1_powder-cocaine-cocaine-
sentencing-gap-sentencing-disparity?_s=PM:POLITICS.

Cook, Philip J. 2007. Paying the Tab: The Economics of Alcohol Policy. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). 2005. “Drug Intelligence Brief: The Changing Face of
European Drug Policy.” In Drug War Deadlock: The Policy Battle Continues, edited by Laura E.
Higgins, 247–57. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press.

_____. 2003. Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Justice. http://www.justice.gov/dea/demand/speakout/speaking_out-may03.pdf.

Degenhardt, Louisa, Wai-Tat Chiu, Nancy Sampson, Ronald C. Kessler, James C. Anthony,
Matthias Angermeyer, Ronny Bruffaerts, Giovanni de Girolamo, Oye Gureje, Yueqin Huang,
Aimee Karam, Stanislav Kostyuchenko, Jean Pierre Lepine, Maria Elena Medina Mora, Yehuda
Neumark, J. Hans Ormel, Alejandra Pinto-Meza, José Posada-Villa, Dan J. Stein, Tadashi
Takeshima, and J. Elisabeth Wells. 2008. “Toward a Global View of Alcohol, Tobacco,




                                              79
Cannabis, and Cocaine Use: Findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys.” PLoS
Medicine 5(7): e141. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050141.

Dills, Angela K., Jeffrey A. Miron, and Garrett Summers. 2008. “What Do Economists Know
About Crime?” NBER Working Paper 13759. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.

DiNardo, John, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Alcohol, Marijuana, and American Youth: The
Unintended Consequences of Government Regulation.” Journal of Health Economics 20(6):
991–1010.

Donohue III, John J. 2009. “Assessing the Relative Benefits of Incarceration: The Overall
Change over the Previous Decades and the Benefits on the Margin.” In Do Prisons Make Us
Safer? The Benefits and Costs of the Prison Boom, edited by Steven Raphael and Michael Stoll,
269–341. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Duke, Steven B., and Albert C. Gross. 2006. “Issues in Legalization.” In Drugs and Society: U.S.
Public Policy, edited by Jefferson M. Fish, 201–22. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers.

Eckberg, Douglas L. 1995. “Estimates of Early Twentieth Century U.S. Homicide Rates: An
Econometric Forecasting Approach.” Demography 32(1): 1–16.

European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA). 2008. Annual Report:
The State of the Drug Problem in Europe. Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the
European Communities.

_____. 2005. Illicit Drug Use in the EU: Legislative Approaches. Lisbon: European Monitoring
Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction.

European School Survey Project on Alcohol and Other Drugs (ESSPAOD). 2003. The ESPAD
Report 2003: Alcohol and Other Drug Use Among Students in 35 European Countries.
Stockholm: Modintryckoffset.
http://www.espad.org/documents/Espad/ESPAD_reports/The_2003_ESPAD_report.pdf.

Fainaru, Steve, and William Booth. 2009. “Cartels Face an Economic Battle.” Washington Post,
October 7.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/10/06/AR2009100603847.html.

FBI Uniform Crime Reporting Program. 2007. Persons Arrested – Crime in the United States,
2007. Washington, D.C.: Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Gable, Robert S. 2006. “Acute Toxicity of Drugs Versus Regulatory Status.” In Drugs and
Society: U.S. Public Policy, edited by Jefferson M. Fish, 149–62. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield Publishers.




                                              80
Givel, Michael. 2007. “A Comparison of the Impact of U.S. and Canadian Cigarette Pack
Warning Label Requirements on Tobacco Industry Profitability and the Public Health.” Health
Policy 83(2-3): 343–52.

Goldstein, Paul J., Henry H. Brownstein, Patrick J. Ryan, and Patricia A. Bellucci. 1997. “Crack
and Homicide in New York City: A Case Study in the Epidemiology of Violence.” In Crack in
America: Demon Drugs and Social Justice, edited by Craig Reinarman and Harry G. Levine,
113–30. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Gore, Robert, and Mitch Earleywine. 2007. “Marijuana’s Perceived Addictiveness: A Survey of
Clinicians and Researchers.” In Pot Politics: Marijuana and the Costs of Prohibition, edited by
Mitch Earleywine, 176–88. New York: Oxford University Press.

Greene, Judith A. 1988. “Structuring Criminal Fines: Making an ‘Intermediate Penalty’ More
Useful and Equitable.” Justice System Journal 13(1): 37–50.

Greenwald, Glenn. 2009. Drug Decriminalization in Portugal: Lessons for Creating Fair and
Successful Drug Policies. Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute.
http://www.cato.org/pub_display.php?pub_id=10080.

Grossman, Michael, Frank J. Chaloupka, and Richard Anderson. 1998. “A Survey of Economic
Models of Addictive Behavior.” Journal of Drug Issues 28(3): 631–43.

Harcourt, Bernard E., and Jens Ludwig. 2007. “Reefer Madness: Broken Windows Policing and
Misdemeanor Marijuana Arrests in New York City, 1989-2000.” Criminology and Public Policy
6(1): 165–82.

Harwood, Hendrick. 2000. Updating Estimates of the Economic Costs of Alcohol Abuse in the
United States: Estimates, Update Methods, and Data. Washington, D.C.: National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/economic-
2000/alcoholcost.pdf.

Hawken, Angela, and Mark Kleiman. 2009. Managing Drug Involved Probationers with Swift
and Certain Sanctions: Evaluating Hawaii’s HOPE. Award No. 2007-IJ-CX-0033. Washington,
D.C.: National Institute of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice.

Hertzberg, Hendrick. 2008. “Higher Standards.” New Yorker, February 25.

Heyman, Gene M. 2009. Addiction: A Disorder of Choice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Home Office. 2009. Cannabis Reclassification. London. Accessed December 20.
http://drugs.homeoffice.gov.uk/drugs-laws/cannabis-reclassifications/.




                                               81
Husak, Douglas. 2007. “Do Marijuana Offenders Deserve Punishment?” In Pot Politics:
Marijuana and the Costs of Prohibition, edited by Mitch Earleywine, 189–207. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Johnson, Carrie. 2009. “U.S. Eases Stance on Medical Marijuana.” Washington Post, October
20.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/content/article/2009/10/19/AR2009101903638.html.

Kaplan, John. 1983. The Hardest Drug: Heroin and Public Policy. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.

Kaplow, Louis. 2004. “On the (Ir)Relevance of Distribution and Labor Supply Distortion to
Government Policy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(4): 159–75.

Kershaw, Sarah, and Rebecca Cathcart. 2009. “Marijuana is Gateway Drug for Two Debates.”
New York Times, July 19. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/19/fashion/19pot.html.

Kessler, Ronald C., Patricia Berglund, Olga Demler, Robert Jin, Kathleen R. Merikangas, and
Ellen E. Walters. 2005. “Lifetime Prevalence and Age-of-Onset Distributions of DSM-IV
Disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.” Archives of General Psychiatry
62(6): 593–602.

King, Ryan S., and Marc Mauer. 2006. “The War on Marijuana: The Transformation of the War
on Drugs in the 1990s.” Harm Reduction 3:6. doi:10.1186/1477-7517-3-6.

Kleiman, Mark A.R. 2009. When Brute Force Fails: How to Have Less Crime and Less
Punishment. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

_____. 2006. “Prohibition: A Rum Do.” Druglink 22(4): 14–5.

_____. 1999. “’Economic Cost’ Measurements, Damage Minimization and Drug Abuse Control
Policy.” Addiction 94(5): 638–41.

Kleiman, Mark A.R., and Aaron J. Saiger. 1990. “Drug Legalization: The Importance of Asking
the Right Question.” Hofstra Law Review 18(3): 527–65.

Klein, Joe. 2009. “Why Legalizing Marijuana Makes Sense.” Time, April 2.

Kopp, Pierre. 1999. “Economic Costs Calculations and Drug Policy Evaluation.” Addiction
94(5): 641–44.

Lacey, Marc. 2009. “In Mexican Drug War, Investigators Are Fearful.” New York Times,
October 16. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/17/world/americas/17juarez.html.

Landler, Marc. 2009. “Clinton Says U.S. Feeds Mexico Drug Trade.” New York Times, March
25. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/26/world/americas/26mexico.html.



                                              82
Levine, Harry G., and Craig Reinarman. 2006. “Alcohol Prohibition and Drug Prohibition.” In
Drugs and Society: U.S. Public Policy, edited by Jefferson M. Fish, 43–76. Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

Luhnow, David, and José de Cordoba. 2009. “Mexico Eases Ban on Drug Possession.” The Wall
Street Journal, August 22, A1.

MacCoun, Robert J., and Peter Reuter. 2005. “Does Europe Do it Better?” In Drug War
Deadlock: The Policy Battle Continues, edited by Laura E. Huggins, 262–69. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.

_____. 2001. Drug War Heresies: Learning from Other Vices, Times, and Places. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.

MacCoun, Robert J., Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Jamie Chriqui, Katherine Harris, and Peter
Reuter. 2009. “Do Citizens Know Whether Their State Has Decriminalized Marijuana?
Assessing the Perceptual Component of Deterrence Theory.” Review of Law and Economics
5(1): 347–71.

MacCoun, Robert, Peter Reuter, and Thomas Schelling. 1996. “Assessing Alternative Drug
Control Regimes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 15(3): 330–52.

Martin, Michel, and Mandalit del Barco. 2009. “In California, Medical Marijuana Dispensaries
Outnumber Starbucks.” National Public Radio, October 15.
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=113822156.

Mauer, Marc. 2009. The Changing Racial Dynamics of the War on Drugs. Washington, D.C.:
The Sentencing Project.

Miron, Jeffrey. 2008. The Budgetary Implications of Drug Prohibition. Silver Spring, MD:
Criminal Justice Policy Foundation. http://big.assets.huffingtonpost.com/miron-economic-
report.pdf.

_____. 2005. The Budgetary Implications of Marijuana Prohibition. Washington, D.C.:
Marijuana Policy Project. http://www.heartland.org/custom/semod_policybot/pdf/17483.pdf.

_____. 2003. A Critique of Estimates of the Economic Cost of Drug Abuse. New York: Drug
Policy Alliance.

_____. 1999. “Violence and the U.S. Prohibition of Drugs and Alcohol.” American Law and
Economics Review 1(1): 78–114.

Moffett, Matt. 2009. “Argentina Eases Rules on Marijuana.” Wall Street Journal, August 26,
A11.




                                             83
Morgan, John P., and Lynn Zimmer. 1997. “The Social Pharmacology of Smokeable Cocaine:
It’s Not All It’s Cracked up To Be.” In Crack in America: Demon Drugs and Social Justice,
edited by Craig Reinarman and Harry G. Levine, 131–70. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.

Mumola, Christopher J., and Jennifer C. Karberg. 2007. Drug Use and Dependence, State and
Federal Prisoners, 2004. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs.

National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence (NCADD). 2002. “Alcoholism and Drug
Dependence Are America’s Number One Health Problem.” Accessed December 20, 2009.
http://www.ncadd.org/facts/numberoneprob.html.

National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). 2009. Monitoring the Future, National Survey Results
on Drug Use: 1975-2008, Secondary Students. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/pubs/monographs/vol1_2008.pdf.

National Research Council (NRC). 2001. Informing America’s Policy on Illegal Drugs: What We
Don’t Know Keeps Hurting Us. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP). 2010. Marijuana: Facts & Figures.
Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President.

_____. 2009. Office of National Drug Control Policy: FY2010 Budget Strategy. Washington,
D.C.: Office of National Drug Control Policy.
http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/publications/policy/10budget/index.html.

_____. 2009. ADAM II: 2008 Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the
President. http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/publications/pdf/adam2008.pdf.

_____. 2004. The Economic Costs of Drug Abuse in the United States, 1992-2002. Publication
207303. Washington, D.C.: Executive Office of the President.
www.ncjrs.gov/ondcppubs/publications/pdf/economic_costs.pdf.

_____. 2002. National Drug Control Strategy: FY2003 Budget Summary. Washington, D.C.:
Office of National Drug Control Policy.
http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/publications/pdf/budget2002.pdf.

_____. 1998. The National Drug Control Strategy 1998: Budget Summary. Washington, D.C.:
Office of National Drug Control Policy.
http://www.ncjrs.gov/ondcppubs/publications/pdf/budget98.pdf.

Pacula, Rosalie Liccardo, and Beau Kilmer. 2003. “Marijuana and Crime: Is there a Connection
Beyond Prohibition?” NBER Working Paper 10046. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.




                                             84
Pacula, Rosalie Liccardo, Jamie F. Chriqui and Joanna King. 2003. "Marijuana
Decriminalization: What Does it Mean in the United States?" NBER Working Paper 9690.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Reuter, Peter. 2009. Can Heroin Maintenance Help Baltimore? What Baltimore Can Learn
From the Experience of Other Countries. Baltimore, MD: The Abell Foundation.

_____. 1999a. “Are Calculations of the Economic Costs of Drug Abuse Either Possible or
Useful?” Addiction 94(5): 635–38.

_____. 1999b. “Drug Use Measures: What Are They Really Telling Us?” National Institute of
Justice Journal 239: 12–19.

Rice, Dorothy P. 1999. “Economic Costs of Substance Abuse.” Proceedings of the Association
of American Physicians 111(2): 119–25.

Rice, Dorothy P., Sander Kelman, and Leonard S. Miller. 1991. “Estimates of Economic Costs
of Alcohol and Drug Abuse and Mental Illness, 1985 and 1988.” Public Health Reports 106(3):
280–92.

Room, Robin, Benedikt Fischer, Wayne Hall, Simon Lenton, and Peter Reuter. 2008. Cannabis
Policy: Moving Beyond Stalemate. Oxford, England: The Beckley Foundation.
http://www.beckleyfoundation.org/pdf/BF_Cannabis_Commission_Report.pdf.

Rydell, C. Peter, and Susan Everingham. 1994. Controlling Cocaine: Supply Versus Demand
Programs. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Sabol, William J., Heather C. West, and Matthew Cooper. 2009. Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin: Prisoners in 2008. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs.

Sabol, William J., Heather Couture, and Paige M. Harrison. 2007. Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin: Prisoners in 2006. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). 2009. Results from
the 2008 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings. Washington, D.C.:
Department of Health and Human Services.
http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/nsduh/2k8nsduh/2k8Results.pdf.

_____. 2008. Results from the 2007 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National
Findings. Washington, D.C.: Department of Health and Human Services.
http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/nsduh/2k7nsduh/2k7Results.pdf.

Schneider Institute for Health Policy, Brandeis University (SIHP). 2001. Substance Abuse: The
Nations Number One Health Problem. Princeton, NJ: The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.



                                               85
State of California. 2008. Department of Justice Guidelines for the Security and Non Diversion
of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use. Sacramento, CA: Department of Justice, State of
California. http://ag.ca.gov/cms_attachments/press/pdfs/n1601_medicalmarijuanaguidelines.pdf.

Suk, Julie C. 2008. “Procedural Path Dependence: Discrimination and the Civil-Criminal
Divide.” Washington University Law Review 85(6): 1315–71.

“Treating, Not Punishing.” 2009. The Economist, August 29, 43.

Trebach, Arnold S., and Joseph A. Califano, Jr. 2010. “Close to Home Online, Viewpoints.
Should Illegal Drugs Be Decriminalized?” In Close to Home: Moyers on Addiction. Accessed
August 30. http://www.pbs.org/wnet/closetohome/viewpoints/html/decrim.html.

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). 2009. World Drug Report 2009. Vienna,
Austria: United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
http://www.unodc.org/documents/wdr/WDR_2009/WDR2009_eng_web.pdf.

_____. 2008. World Drug Report 2008. Vienna, Austria: United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime. http://www.unodc.org/documents/wdr/WDR_2008/WDR_2008_eng_web.pdf.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. 2007 Population Estimates. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Accessed March 4, 2010. http://www.census.gov/popest/national/asrh/NC-EST2007-srh.html.

U.S. Sentencing Commission. 2008a. Table 34: Race of Drug Offenders for Each Drug Type.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Sentencing Commission. Accessed March 4, 2010.
http://www.ussc.gov/ANNRPT/2008/Table34.pdf.

U.S. Sentencing Commission. 2008b. Figure J: Average Length of Imprisonment for Each Drug
Type. Accessed March 4, 2010. http://www.ussc.gov/ANNRPT/2008/figj.pdf.

van der Gouwe, D., E. Ehrlich, and M.W. van Laar. 2009. Drug Policies in the Netherlands.
Utrecht: Trimbos Institute.
http://www.minvws.nl/includes/dl/openbestand.asp?File=/images/fo-drug-policies-_tcm20-
180356.pdf.

Walmsley, Roy. 2009. World Prison Population List, 8th edition. London: King’s College
London, International Centre for Prison Studies.
http://www.kcl.ac.uk/depsta/law/research/icps/downloads/wppl-8th_41.pdf.

Wilkinson, Tracy. 2009. “Mexico Moves Quietly to Decriminalize Minor Drug Use.” Los
Angeles Times, June 21. http://articles.latimes.com/2009/jun/21/world/fg-mexico-
decriminalize21.




                                              86
Williams, J., Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Frank J. Chaloupka, and Henry Wechsler. 2004. “Alcohol
and Marijuana Use Among College Students: Economic Complements or Substitutes?” Health
Economics 13(9): 825–43.

Wilson, James Q., and George Kelling. 1982. “Broken Windows: The Police and Neighborhood
Safety.” Atlantic Monthly 249(3): 29–37.

Wohlsen, Marcus, and Greg Risling. 2009. “Medical Marijuana Shops Abound in California.”
Associated Press, November 5. http://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory?id=9009353.

Woo, Stu. 2009. “Oakland Council Backs a Tax on Marijuana.” Wall Street Journal, April 30,
A4. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB124105239168771233.html.

Yamamuru, Kevin. 2009. “Governor Asks: What if Pot’s Legal and Taxed?” Sacramento Bee,
May 6, 1A.




                                             87
                                        Table 1: Regressions of the Homicide Rate on Prohibition Enforcement
                 Miron (1999)                                                       Donohue, Ewing & Peloquin
                                                                                          1900-2004
                  1900-1995
                                         1900-1995              1900-2004                  (Adj. Pre-   1933-2004             1966-2004
               (Original Results)
                                                                                             1933)
              139.2         90.1
 Miron                                     71.40       38.99      58.99          60.42       42.43        37.64      27.44      88.88      94.39
            (NW t-stat:   (NW t-stat:
 Index                                    (32.98)     (31.26)    (27.06)        (32.13)     (29.48)      (38.83)    (51.96)    (35.44)    (43.27)
              3.44)         3.08)
Linear                                       0.43                                 -0.01       0.08          0.15                             -0.13
                *             *
 Trend                                     (0.08)                                 (0.13)     (0.10)       (0.20)                            (0.46)
% Aged                                      49.14                 53.28           51.76       74.25        -6.01                -345.34    -367.77
                              *
  5-14                                    (33.29)                (40.32)         (40.72)    (35.86)      (44.16)               (109.29)   (137.83)
% Aged                                      25.15                 41.84           41.42       49.13         8.74                -201.40    -206.03
                              *
 15-24                                    (18.50)                (28.90)         (30.07)    (22.81)      (32.24)                (60.92)    (64.89)
% Aged                                      81.50                 70.12           69.10       90.60        39.64                -302.64    -304.45
                              *
 25-34                                    (32.73)                (41.11)         (41.65)    (35.46)      (37.16)                (92.35)    (94.46)
% Aged                                      -5.59                -31.29          -33.15       -4.35      -102.19                -405.10    -394.10
                              *
 35-44                                    (33.27)                (50.13)         (50.80)    (39.16)      (56.43)                (85.74)    (92.09)
% Aged                                      -5.11                 -8.80           -8.79      -16.26       -53.85                -280.60    -247.32
                              *
 45-54                                    (36.13)                (43.16)         (48.94)    (42.56)      (64.38)                (70.93)   (133.60)
% Aged                                      27.90                -81.38          -85.88      -27.45      -212.03                -558.29    -537.64
                              *
 55-64                                    (45.94)                (68.44)         (71.66)    (54.65)     (102.87)               (115.97)   (132.90)
% Aged                                    -352.92                 53.44           54.03       0.51        -90.55                -138.92     -93.46
                              *
  65+                                     (75.82)                (37.55)        (116.18)    (94.03)     (199.72)               (234.89)   (290.42)
                                           -13.84      18.88     -12.50          -10.97      -27.99        37.34     -10.12     292.01     295.51
Intercept       *             *
                                          (21.80)     (26.45)    (27.60)         (28.81)    (24.07)      (40.79)    (58.46)     (69.18)    (72.00)
                                             0.67       1.00       0.94            0.94       0.78          0.75      1.00        0.52        0.53
   ρ           N/A           N/A
                                           (0.08)      (0.00)     (0.01)          (0.01)     (0.05)       (0.07)     (0.01)      (0.07)     (0.06)
  R2           .53           .94             .72        .02        .20             .20         .45           .60       .01         .81         .80
Adj. R2         *             *              .70        .01        .13             .12         .40          .54       -.02        .75         .74




                                                                           88
Table 1 notes:

In his original paper Miron reported Newey and West t-statistics and incorporated a trend term;

however, he did not specify in his article a chosen maximum lag order of autocorrelation for the

Newey-West approach and did not further elaborate on the construction of his trend term. We

regressed the homicide rate on Miron’s chosen variables using the Hildreth-Lu correction for

serial correlation. We report standard errors in parentheses. Asterisks indicate that the coefficient

was not reported. Coefficients in bold are statistically significant at the 5 percent level;

coefficients in bold and underlined are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                  89
Figure 1: Percentage Reporting Use of Cannabis in Lifetime, Population Aged 18+, 2001-2005


 50%


 40%


 30%


 20%


 10%


  0%




Source: Degenhardt et al. (2008, 1057). * Aged 18-65, **21+, ***20+, ****16+




                                                              90
Figure 2: Percentage Reporting Use of Cocaine in Lifetime, Population Aged 18+, 2001-2005


 20%


 16%


 12%


  8%


  4%


  0%




Source: Degenhardt et al. (2008, 1057). * Aged 18-65, **21+, ***20+, ****16+




                                                              91
Figure 3: Percentage Reporting Use of Tobacco in Lifetime, Population Aged 18+, 2001-2005


 80%


 60%


 40%


 20%


  0%




Source: Degenhardt et al. (2008, 1057). * Aged 18-65, **21+, ***20+, ****16+




                                                              92
Figure 4: Percentage Reporting Use of Alcohol in Lifetime, Population Aged 18+, 2001-2005


 100%


  75%


  50%


  25%


    0%




Source: Degenhardt et al. (2008, 1057). * Aged 18-65, **21+, ***20+, ****16+




                                                              93
Figure 5: Percentage of 12th Graders Reporting Use of Illicit Drugs in Past 30 Days




 50%



 40%



 30%
                                                                             Illicit Drugs


 20%                                                                        Marijuana

                                                                           Illicit Drugs Other
                                                                            Than Marijuana
 10%

                                                                                                    Cocaine
  0%
       1975     1978     1981     1984      1987     1990     1993      1996     1999        2002   2005   2008




Source: NIDA (2009, 198-99).



                                                                 94
Figure 6: Federal Drug Control Spending, 1986-2001 (Billions of 2008 Dollars)




Source: Nominal figures from ONDCP (2002, 10-11) and ONDCP (1998, 16).

A slight variation on this graph appears in Boyum and Reuter (2005, 38).




                                              95
Figure 7: Annual Prevalence of Cannabis Use, Population Aged 15-64 (2004-2008)


 20%

 16%

 12%

  8%

  4%

  0%




Source: UNODC (2009, 245-49). *Aged 16-59, **16-64, ***18-64; **** Percentage is the midpoint of a range




                                                             96
Figure 8: Annual Prevalence of Cocaine Use, Population Aged 15-64 (2004-2008)


 4%


 3%


 2%


 1%


 0%




Source: UNODC (2009, 240-44).* Aged 16-59, **16-64, ***18-64; **** Percentage is the midpoint of a range




                                                             97
Figure 9: Of Those Who Tried, Percentage Later Dependent, 1999



 40%



 30%



 20%



 10%



  0%
          Tobacco       Heroin         Cocaine   Alcohol          Anti-    Marijuana
                                                                 anxiety




Source: Kershaw and Cathcart (2009).




                                            98
Figure 10: Homicide Rate (Per 100,000 Persons) v. Drug Prohibition Enforcement Index (Hundreds of 1992 Dollars Per Capita)




 12                                                                                                                             0.06


 10                                                                                                                             0.05


  8                                                                                                                             0.04


  6                                                                                                                             0.03
                                                                 Homicide Rate


  4                                                                                                                             0.02


  2                                                                                                                             0.01
                                                              Miron Drug Prohibition
                                                               Enforcement Index
  0                                                                                                                             0
   1900        1910        1920       1930        1940        1950        1960       1970        1980        1990        2000



Source: Data supplied by Angela Dills and Jeffrey Miron (homicide rate from U.S. Vital Statistics; prohibition enforcement

expenditures based on Miron (1999) with data from the Budget of the United States Government (various years))
Figure 11: Percentage of 12th Graders Reporting Use of Licit Drugs in Past 30 Days




80%




60%
                                                             Alcohol



40%
                                                       Cigarettes



20%




  0%
       1975    1978     1981     1984     1987     1990     1993       1996   1999   2002   2005   2008




Source: NIDA (2009, 198-99).
