NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRANSITION TO FDI OPENNESS:
RECONCILING THEORY AND EVIDENCE
Ellen R. McGrattan
Working Paper 16774
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16774

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2011

I thank my colleagues at the Minneapolis Federal Reserve and seminar participants at the London
School of Economics, the European University Institute, Ohio State, Yale, the Cleveland Fed, the Bureau
of Economic Analysis, Kansas State, the NBER, and the Society for Economic Dynamics for their
comments on earlier drafts of the paper. For editorial assistance, I thank Kathy Rolfe and Joan Gieseke.
For helpful tips on parallelizing my codes, I thank Graham Candler. Codes, data, and a separate technical
appendix are available at my website, www.minnepolisfed.org/research. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2011 by Ellen R. McGrattan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Transition to FDI Openness: Reconciling Theory and Evidence
Ellen R. McGrattan
NBER Working Paper No. 16774
February 2011
JEL No. E01,E2,F21,F23,F36,F41
ABSTRACT
Empirical studies quantifying the economic effects of increased foreign direct investment (FDI) have
not provided conclusive evidence that they are positive, as theory predicts. This paper shows that
the lack of empirical evidence is consistent with theory if countries are in transition to FDI openness.
Anticipated welfare gains lead to temporary declines in domestic investment and employment. Also,
growth measures miss some intangible FDI, which is expensed from company profits. The reconciliation
of theory and evidence is accomplished with a multicountry dynamic general equilibrium model parameterized
with data from a sample of 104 countries during 1980-2005. Although no systematic benefits of FDI
openness are found, the model demonstrates that the eventual gains in growth and welfare can be huge,
especially for small countries.
Ellen R. McGrattan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480
and NBER
erm@mcgrattan.mpls.frb.fed.us

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16774

1. Introduction
Theory predicts that the economic effects in a host country of increased foreign direct
investment (FDI) are positive, but empirical studies have been unable to provide conclusive
evidence consistent with that prediction. For example, Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei’s
(2009) survey of empirical cross-country studies reports that only one finds a positive
impact of FDI on economic growth. Here, I show that these inconclusive findings do not
contradict theory, but in fact are to be expected when countries are in transition to capital
market openness.
I show this by closely examining such a transition period in a multicountry dynamic
general equilibrium model. In the model, countries initially face restrictions on foreign
capital investments—both FDI and portfolio—that are gradually relaxed. Building on
my 2010 work with Prescott, I allow for a large number of integrated economies with
multinational companies investing at home in technology capital that can also be used
nonrivalrously in their subsidiaries abroad. As a country’s restrictions on the investment
of foreign capital begin to be relaxed, the model predicts per capita GDP and employment
initially both fall below historical trends and do not recover until the restrictions are
sufficiently relaxed.
GDP and employment decline for two reasons. One is that when such a relaxation is
expected, households increase consumption and leisure in expectation of higher permanent
income, thereby reducing domestic investment and labor. This income effect occurs because
relaxed restrictions on future FDI imply a higher effective level of total factor productivity
(TFP). The other reason for GDP declines is a measurement issue. Part of the increased
FDI will be expensed intangible investment and not counted as part of corporate profits,
so will not be captured in measured GDP. Theory predicts that intangible investments
are abnormally high while barriers to FDI are being removed; that implies a negative
correlation between FDI investment and host country GDP.1
But, again, theory also predicts positive effects in the host country from increased FDI.
1

Thus, it appears that capital is flowing in the wrong direction—namely, to countries with slow or
negative growth—which is consistent with observations but puzzling for standard neoclassical theory
that abstracts from intangible investment. See Gourinchas and Jeanne (2007).

1

GDP and employment eventually rise above trend once the transition period has passed.
And, if there are no constraints on international borrowing and lending, consumption rises
as soon as relaxed restrictions are announced. If there are borrowing constraints that limit
portfolio investments, the rise in consumption is more gradual. But, in either case, welfare
in the host country is higher.
I investigate the transition path to FDI openness in two versions of the model: a
simple two-country version and a more realistically parameterized 104-country version.
The simple version of the model allows me to qualitatively describe, fairly precisely,
the transition paths of various economic variables in countries of different sizes, where size
is defined by population and level of technology. The transition is defined basically as the
period between the time an announcement is made that FDI restrictions are to be relaxed
at a specified future date and the time the restrictions are actually relaxed. I consider
equilibrium paths with and without coincident restrictions on portfolio investments.
The more realistic version allows me, first, to conduct the standard empirical analysis of quantifying the impact of FDI on economic growth. Countries are included in the
analysis if they have complete data on inward FDI, net portfolio investment, GDP, and
populations over the period 1980–2005. Observations on inward FDI are used to parameterize time paths of country openness parameters, which are policy parameters determining
the inflow of FDI. Observations on net portfolio investment are used to parameterize borrowing constraints on portfolio flows. The model is simulated and growth in GDP per
capita computed. The result of this 104-country analysis is consistent with that in the
literature. Using standard analysis, the model finds no evidence of large positive effects
from FDI. The amount of FDI in a country is not positively correlated with growth in GDP
or TFP and not statistically significant in a standard cross-country growth recession.
Yet this same model does predict large positive effects to FDI openness, in terms
of both growth and welfare. I demonstrate this effect by conducting a counterfactual
experiment. I recompute equilibria for the 104-country version of the model, relaxing
capital market restrictions almost completely for one country at a time, and estimate per

2

capita growth in GDP and the welfare gain to each country from doing that. I find increases
in annual growth rates in the range of 0 to 7 percentage points and welfare gains that are
equivalent to consumption increases in the range of 4 percent to 460 percent. The gains
in growth and welfare are both inversely related to country size.
A methodological contribution of my work here is the computation of equilibria in a
dynamic general equilibrium model with a large number of integrated countries. Multinationals in the model choose investments in tangible capital, plant-specific intangible
capital, and technology capital, both at home and abroad. With many countries and different types of capital, the problem is tractable only if the computations are divided across
parallel processors. An initial guess for all prices and transfers is distributed across processors, and equilibrium quantities are computed and then passed back to the main processor.
Prices and transfers are updated, and the algorithm continues until a fixed point is found.
My work here is related to the literature that quantifies the impact of capital account
liberalization. Most of the theoretical work in this literature abstracts from FDI flows,
focusing instead on portfolio investment and the integration of countries with different
financial systems or levels of capital at different stages of financial development.2 Here,
foreign direct and portfolio investment are both essential: lowering barriers to FDI increases
the effective production sets for firms, and lowering barriers to portfolio investment allows
households to better smooth consumption.
Related work that does explore the quantitative impact of FDI openness finds large
output and welfare gains. Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009) estimate the gains of reallocating managerial know-how abroad using a span-of-control model as in Lucas (1978).
Ramondo (2010) estimates the gains of lower barriers to FDI in Eaton and Kortum’s (2002)
model without trade, but with multinational production. Ramondo and Rodrı́guez-Clare
(2010a, 2010b) consider both trade and FDI in the Eaton-Kortum framework.3 The results
in these studies are the motivation for the current study, since they all conclude that the
2

3

Recent examples include Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006), Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008),
Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rı́os-Rull (2009), and Aoki, Benigno, and Kiyotaki (2009).
In McGrattan and Prescott (2009), we concluded that there are large potential gains to FDI openness
based on several numerical examples, but we did not calibrate the model to actual data.

3

output and welfare gains to FDI openness are large, whereas empirical studies have found
little conclusive evidence of positive economic effects.4
Section 2 lays out the multicountry general equilibrium model used in the analysis.
Section 3 is a set of propositions that qualitatively characterize the transition path in
a two-country version of the model. Section 4 is an application of the model to actual
cross-country data and so quantifies that transition path as well as the overall output and
welfare gains. Section 5 concludes.

2. Model
In this section, I describe a multicountry general equilibrium model that builds on McGrattan and Prescott (2009, 2010). I describe first the problem solved by multinational
companies and then the problems faced by households. Finally, I define a competitive
equilibrium for the model economy and describe how to match up national accounting
statistics with their model counterparts.

2.1. Multinationals
Multinational companies from country j operating in country i produce output Yitj in
period t,
!
"φ ! "1−φ
j
Zit
,
Yitj = Ait σit Nit Mtj

j 5
with technology capital Mtj and a composite of country-specific inputs denoted by Zit
.

The parameter φ ≥ 0 governs technology capital’s share of income. Technology capital
is accumulated know-how from investments in such things as research and development
(R&D), brands, and organizational capital that can be used in as many locations as firms
choose, both at home and abroad. The total number of locations available in country i in
period t is Nit , and firms take this as given in solving their optimization problem. Since
technology capital can be used simultaneously in multiple locations, it is not indexed by i.
4

5

A recent empirical literature has begun to focus on countries that have passed certain thresholds when
relaxing capital restrictions. See, for example, the work of Kose, Prasad, and Taylor (forthcoming).
For a micro-foundation of this aggregate production function, see the work of McGrattan and Prescott
(2009).

4

The span of control of this organizational capital is limited because countries are assumed
to have a fixed number of production locations.
Country i’s total factor productivity in t is denoted by Ait . For multinationals incorporated outside i, the effective level of productivity if they operate in i is Ai σi , where σi
is the degree of openness of country i to FDI. A value for σi of 1 implies that the country
is totally open—or that domestic and foreign firms have the same opportunities. A value
of less than 1 implies that domestic and foreign firms are not treated equally by the host
country. In particular, with σi < 1, investment by foreign firms entails extra costs, and
these costs have the same effect as if the foreign firms had lower TFP than domestic firms.
The composite capital-labor input in country i is modeled as a Cobb-Douglas technology,
"αI ! "1−αT −αI
"αT !
!
KIj,i
Lji
,
Zij = KTj ,i

(2.1)

with inputs of tangible capital KTj ,i , plant-specific intangible capital KIj,i , and labor Lji .
This specification of technology implies that multinationals use two types of intangible
capital, one that is plant-specific and one that is not.
The stand-in multinational company from country j maximizes the present value of
the stream of after-tax dividends:
max (1 − τd )

#

t

pt Dtj ,

(2.2)

where τd is the tax rate on dividends and the sum of dividends across all operations in all
$ j
, with
countries indexed by i is given by Dtj = i Dit
"
!
j
j
j
j
Dit
= (1 − τpi ) Yitj − Wit Ljit − δT KTj ,it − XIj,it − χji XM
(2.3)
,t − KT ,i,t+1 + KT ,it ,

where χji = 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise, δT is the depreciation rate of tangible capital,
XIj,i is investment in plant-specific intangible capital which is split among the locations in
j
is the technology capital investment of multinational j
country i that j operates, and XM

used in all locations in which j operates.6 The multinational takes as given sequences of
prices pt and wages Wit . The same wage rate is paid by all multinationals operating in i.
6

To avoid having to account for clientele effects, I assume that all dividends are taxed at the same
rate.

5

Dividends for the multinational companies (indexed by j) are equal to worldwide
$
after-tax profits less net investment of tangible capital, i (KTj ,i,t+1 − KTj ,it ). Taxable

profits are equal to sales less expenses, where the expenses are wage payments, tangible
depreciation, and expensed investments on plant-specific intangible capital and technology
capital. Taxable profits in country i are taxed at rate τpi . The capital stocks of the
multinational in the next period are given by
KTj ,i,t+1 = (1 − δT ) KTj ,it + XTj ,it

(2.4)

KIj,i,t+1 = (1 − δI ) KIj,it + XIj,it

(2.5)

j
j
Mt+1
= (1 − δM ) Mtj + XM
,t ,

(2.6)

where δI and δM are depreciation rates of plant-specific intangible capital and technology
capital, respectively.

2.2. Households
In each period t, households in country i choose how much to consume Cit , how much
total labor to supply Lit , and how much to borrow from abroad, Bi,t+1 − Bi,t . Without
loss of generality, I assume that households in i own all of the equity shares of multinationals incorporated in i; thus, foreign borrowing and lending residually determine their
net portfolio income. The maximization problem for the stand-in household is to
max

{Cit ,Lit ,Bi,t+1 }

#

β t Nit [log (Cit /Nit ) + ψ log (1 − Lit /Nit )]

t

subject to
#
t

pt [Cit + Bi,t+1 − Bit ] ≤

#
t

%
&
pt (1 − τli ) Wit Lit + (1 − τd ) Dti + rbt Bit + κit ,

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, ψ ≥ 0 is a preference parameter governing disutility
of labor, and the total population in i is assumed to be proportional to the total number
of locations Nit . Without loss of generality, I assume a constant of proportionality of 1
between the number of people and the number of production locations within a country.
6

Households take as given the sequence of returns on portfolio income rbt , wage rates Wit ,
prices pt , and government transfers κit . Labor is not mobile across countries but can be
supplied to domestic or foreign companies. Taxes are levied on labor at rate τli .7

2.3. Competitive Equilibrium
The competitive equilibrium in this model is defined as a set of prices {pt , rbt , Wit } and
j
j
, Yitj , KTj ,it , KIj,it , Mtj , Ljit , Lit , Cit , Bit , XTj ,it , XIj,it , XM
quantities {Dit
t } that are consistent

with the maximization problems of multinationals and households. In addition, markets
must clear. The market-clearing condition for the labor market in each country i is that
#

Ljit = Lit .

j

The market-clearing condition for financial assets is that
#

Bit = 0.

i

The market-clearing condition for goods is that
( #
"
#! j
#'
j
i
Cit +
XT ,it + XI ,it + XM ,t =
Yitj .
i

i,j

j

These conditions, along with the household budget constraints above, imply that government transfers in country i satisfy this:
(
'# !
"
j
j
j
i
i
Yit − δT KT ,it − XI ,it − Wit Lit − XM ,t .
κit = τli Wit Lit + τd Dt + τpi
j

2.4. Accounting Measures
Before deriving properties of the competitive equilibrium, I need to describe how to construct the national accounting statistics for the model. The measures I use are those used
as inputs in the empirical studies surveyed by Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009).
7

Since tax rates are constant, I here combine taxes on consumption and labor into the labor wedge
τli .

7

Gross domestic product (GDP) for country i in period t is given by
GDPit = Cit +

#

j

XTj ,it + NXit ,

(2.7)

where NXi is net exports of goods and services by country i. Consumption and investment
include both private and public expenditures. Intangible investments are expensed and
therefore not included in the measure of GDP. In other words, GDP is not a measure of
total output. GDP is lower because some investments are expensed.
To see this, consider a second way of calculating GDP: namely, to add up all domestic
incomes. Specifically, if we sum compensation of households Wi Li , total before-tax profits
$
i
, and tangible depreciation
of businesses operating in i, Yi −Wi Li − j (δT KTj ,i +XIj,i )−XM
$
j
j δT KT ,i , then we have GDP from the income side:
i
GDPit = Yit − XM
,t −

#

j

XIj,it .

(2.8)

This sum has to be equal to the sum of products in (2.7). From (2.7) and (2.8), it is easy
to calculate net exports as total output produced in country i less the sum of consumption
and all investments.
Next, add flows to and from other countries. Gross national product (GNP) is the
sum of GDP and net factor income from abroad. Net factor receipts (NFR) are the sum
of the FDI income of multinationals and the portfolio income of households:8
NFRit =

#

i
{Dlt
+ KTi ,l,t+1 − KTi ,lt } + max (rbt Bit , 0) .

(2.9)

l"=i

Analogously, net factor payments (NFP) from i to the rest of the world are the sum of
FDI income of foreign affiliates in i sent back to foreign parents and portfolio incomes of
country i that are sent to investors outside of i:
NFPit =

#

l
{Dit
+ KTl ,i,t+1 − KTl ,it } + max (−rbt Bit , 0) .

(2.10)

l"=i

8

Equity in overseas operations is categorized as capital from direct investment when the ownership
exceeds 10 percent. Otherwise, it is categorized as capital from portfolio investment.

8

Adding net factor income to net exports and to GDP gives the current account (CA) and
GNP:
CAit = NXit + NFRit − NFPit

(2.11)

GNPit = GDPit + NFRit − NFPit .

(2.12)

In the balance of payments, the current account must equal the financial account,
which is the sum of new acquisitions abroad. For the model, the financial account for
country i is
FAit =

#)
l"=i

* #) l
*
KTi ,l,t+1 − KTi ,lt −
KT ,i,t+1 − KTl ,it + (Bit+1 − Bit ) ,

(2.13)

l"=i

where the first term is net FDI by multinationals from i abroad, the second term is the
(negative) of net new investment by foreigners operating in i, and the third term is new
portfolio acquisitions by households from i. Empirical studies report regressions of per
capita growth of GDP on FDI (or FDI relative to some measure of aggregate output),
controlling for changes in other variables. The right-side variable of those regressions is
the second term of (2.13).

3. A Qualitative Assessment
Now I describe, qualitatively, the equilibrium path of this economy as capital markets
open. In order to make precise predictions about these paths in transition, I consider two
countries, differing only in size, that agree to open their capital markets to each other at a
prespecified date in the future. I examine how common measures of economic performance
change between the time the liberalization is announced and the time it actually occurs. In
order to investigate the relationship between FDI and portfolio investment, I also compare
a situation in which there are no restrictions on portfolio investments to one in which
there are restrictions that are relaxed along with FDI restrictions. I find that country
size and portfolio investment opportunities strongly affect the pattern of economic activity
during transition to FDI openness, and I demonstrate that common measures of economic
performance obscure the benefits of FDI openness.
9

3.1. Additional Assumptions
The propositions below assume that there are two countries of different sizes, where size
1−(1−φ)(αT+αI )

is defined to be Nit Ait

and thus depends on a country i’s population and level

of TFP. Both countries start out closed, and then both announce an FDI openness policy
∗
in t = 1. In Figure 1, I display the path of the degree of FDI openness {σit }, which is
σit

assumed to be the same for both countries. After t∗ , companies are allowed to produce at
home and abroad.
I assume that Nit = Ni (1 + γN )t and Ait = (1 + γA )t for some fixed Ni and Ai and
report results relative to historical trends, where γN is the common trend growth rate in
populations and γA is the common trend growth rate in technologies. In other words, I
divide all variables that grow (except labor inputs) by (1 + γY )t , where
γY = (1 + γN )

1−(1−φ)(αT +αI )
(1−φ)(1−αT −αI )

1

(1 + γA ) (1−φ)(1−αT −αI ) − 1.

For labor inputs, I divide by (1 + γN )t . Lowercase letters are used to denote the detrended
variables, for example, cit = Cit /[Ni (1 + γY )t ] and lit = Lit /[Ni (1 + γN )t ]. Throughout
this section, the historical trend is assumed to be consistent with closed capital markets;
therefore, for the equilibrium described below, σi0 = 0 and Bi0 = 0.9
In order to make precise statements about the equilibrium paths, I make three addi∗
is high
tional assumptions. One concerns the degree of FDI openness: at t = t∗ + 1, σit

enough so that the smaller country does not find it optimal to make any further expenditures in technology capital in t > t∗ . A second assumption is that companies in the
smaller country operate only domestically.10 In this case, I need only focus on FDI flows
into the small country. Figure 2 shows the path of inward FDI of that country, which
peaks at t∗ , one period before the restrictions are actually relaxed. For the model, the FDI
investment by multinationals is summarized by the second term in (2.13), which is the net
new investment in tangible capital.
9
10

The equilibrium patterns do not change for σi0 > 0 as long as σi0 is below a particular threshold.
Relaxing this assumption complicates the mathematics but changes the results only slightly because
the accumulated technology capital of the smaller country is lower than that of the larger country.

10

My final assumption, which is relevant only for the case without portfolio restrictions,
is to assume that households in the larger country receive an exogenous amount of income,
denoted by *t , between the periods t = 1 and t = t∗ (which could be positive or negative).
The income stream is such that the interest rate is constant and equal to its historical value
for all periods t = 1, . . . , t∗ .11 In practice, the income needed to ensure a constant interest
rate is tiny, but this assumption lets me make precise statements about a complicated
dynamic path in an economy that is so close to the economy of interest (with *t = 0) that
the paths cannot be easily distinguished when graphed. I refer to the related economy as
the *-economy.

3.2. Without Portfolio Restrictions
I begin this qualitative exercise by exploring what happens in the two countries when
restrictions on portfolio investments are relaxed immediately, but restrictions on FDI are
relaxed after a prespecified date t∗ .
Proposition 1. The small country’s output, labor, and capital stocks in the *-economy
are at or below their historical trends between t = 1 and t = t∗ , while its consumption is
above trend. The reverse is true for the large country.
Proof. Suppose that in t = 1, consumption cst in the small country, with index i = s, rises
relative to its historical trend, cs1 > cs0 . Then, between t = 2 and t = t∗ , cst = cs1 since rbt
is constant by the choice of the {*t } adjustment. To be consistent with the intertemporal
condition for asset holdings, this rate of interest has to equal (1 +γy )/β −1, where γy is the
rate of growth of per capita output, γy = (1 + γY )/(1 + γN ) − 1, and β is the household’s
discount factor.
From the intratemporal first-order condition of households (with log preferences), we
know that
cst
yd
yst
= dst ∝
,
lst
1 − lst
lst
11

t = 1, . . . , t∗ ,

(3.1)

If #t = 0 for all t, then the equilibrium interest rate is nearly constant. For a plot of the interest rates
with and without the income adjustment, see McGrattan (2011).

11

d
where yst
is the output of domestic companies (indexed by d) in the small country. The

first equality in (3.1) follows from the assumption that countries are initially closed to
all foreign investment, so all labor is supplied to domestic companies and all output is
produced by them. With capital stocks initially fixed and consumption higher in period
t = 1, we know that ls1 < ls0 and ys1 < ys0 if (3.1) holds. With capital fixed, we also
know that labor falls by more than output in t = 1.
In period t = 2, output and labor must fall further relative to the historic trend
because domestic capital stocks fall between the first and second periods. To see this, note
that the capital-output ratio is pinned down by the return rbt . If this return in the second
period is equal to (1 + γy )/β − 1, then the capital-output ratios have to be equal to their
historical levels (in t = 0). This fact plus the production technologies implies that labor
productivity in the second period must also be at its historical level. Thus, from (3.1), we
know that ys2 < ys1 and ls2 < ls1 since labor productivity in the second period is below
labor productivity in the first.
Since the interest rate does not change between t = 2 and t∗ , we know that yst = ys2
and lst = ls2 for t ≤ t∗ . This follows from the intratemporal condition and the fact that
capital-output ratios and consumptions relative to trend are constant.
The arguments made for the small country can also be made for the large country.
However, because the global resource constraint must hold, the paths relative to trend for
the large country must be reversed. In other words, if consumption for the small country
is above its historical trend from t = 1 to t = t∗ , then consumption for the large country
must be below its historical trend. This follows because output and investment are below
(or above) trend by the same percentage over the period from t = 2 to t = t∗ − 1 since
capital-output ratios are constant. If consumption in both countries were above trend and
output less investment in both countries below trend, then the global resource constraint
would be violated.
Finally, we can easily show that consumption is initially above trend in the small
country, which is the recipient of future FDI, and initially below trend for the large country,

12

which is the source of the FDI. This follows from the fact that effective TFP is higher in
the small country when FDI, and hence foreign technology capital, is allowed in. For the
large country there is no change in effective TFP because small country firms only produce
domestically.
This proof of Proposition 1 is instructive in that it implies specific patterns for the
key macroeconomic aggregates in the transition period between the announcement and
the enactment of the policy to relax restrictions on FDI. Figure 3 shows the equilibrium
paths for consumption, output, and labor in the small country (left panels) and the large
country (right panels). The scale of the figures in the left panels of Figure 3 are comparable
to those in the right panels, indicating that the relaxed FDI restrictions have a relatively
larger impact on the small country.
Figure 3 shows that consumption in the small country rises above its historical trend
at the announcement of the new policy, stays on a new higher trend until the restrictions
are actually relaxed, and then rises further. At the same time, consumption in the large
country is below its historical trend, but ultimately rises above trend as global production
expands; after t = t∗ , the multinationals in the large country are able to produce at home
and abroad.
Equilibrium paths for output and labor relative to their historical trends are shown in
the bottom half of Figure 3. I put output and labor on the same graph in order to show
that in the period from t = 2 to t = t∗ , they are below trend by the same percentage.
When restrictions are relaxed, output in the small country rises relatively more than labor
because TFP and capital are both higher. As with consumption, I find that output and
labor in the large country, which by assumption has no inward FDI, is little changed.
Equilibrium paths for the capital stocks are shown in the top half of Figure 4. The
domestic capital stocks fall for one period after the announcement and then remain flat
until the policy is actually enacted. After t = 1 and before the policy goes into effect,
capital-output ratios and labor productivity remain at their historical trends. When the
policy is changed, investment in the technology capital of domestic companies ceases. At

13

this point, the optimal policy is to leave it to foreign multinationals to invest in technology
capital. Total tangible and plant-specific intangible capital stocks rise because foreign
companies are now investing in the small country.
With multinationals investing in intangible capital, output (shown in Figure 3) is
not equal to GDP or GNP, which are typical measures of economic performance used in
cross-country empirical studies. The following proposition qualifies the equilibrium paths
of these series in the transition.
Proposition 2. The small country’s GDP and GNP in the *-economy initially, after the
announcement, rise above their historical trends and then fall below trend between t = 2
and t = t∗ . The reverse is true for the large country.
Proof. Recall the definitions of GDP and GNP in (2.8) and (2.12), respectively. In the
first period, when the policy in announced, net factor incomes for the period are already
determined; therefore, GNP must equal GDP. To show that both are above their historical
trend in the small country in t = 1, I must show that intangible investments of domestic
firms (indexed by d) in the small country (indexed by s) fall by more than output, since
GDP is defined as output less the sum of investment in plant-specific intangible capital
and technology capital. This is shown as follows:
,
+
kId,s2 − kId,s0
xdI ,s1 − xdI ,s0
1 + γY
=
δI + γY
xdI ,s0
kId,s0
.
- d
d
1 + γY
ys2 − ys0
=
d
δI + γY
ys0
.
- d
d
1 + γY
ys1 − ys0
,
<
d
δI + γY
ys0
where the first equality uses the capital accumulation equation after detrending all variables, the second equality follows from the fact that the capital-output ratio in the second
period is equal to the historical capital-output ratio, and the inequality follows from Proposition 1. Since δI ≤ 1, plant-specific intangible investment must fall by more than output.
The same argument can be made for technology capital. Therefore GDP and GNP are
both above trend in t = 1.
14

In the second period, since the capital-output ratios are at their historical trends,
GDP in the small country must be below its own trend by the same amount as output.
In t = t∗ , GDP falls further below its historical trend than output has fallen because
investment of foreign multinationals in both tangible and plant-specific intangible capital
rises above zero. GDP is lower because of the rise in plant-specific intangible investment.
The path of GNP depends on the path of portfolio investment from abroad. Since
there are no portfolio restrictions, the small country borrows as soon as the policy change
is announced and must make bond repayments thereafter. Thus, GNP is above GDP in
t = 2 and below in t = 3, . . . , t∗ − 1, with the difference between GNP and GDP equal to
the interest payments rbt bit .
In the transition period, the pattern of debt can be determined from net exports
which are equal to the change in debt holdings less interest payments. Net exports are
equal to GDP less domestic consumption and investment—and all three of these variables
are constant relative to their historical trends between t = 2 and t = t∗ − 1. Thus net
exports must also be constant relative to its historical trend.
The arguments made for the small country can be made for the large country, but the
direction of change is reversed for the periods t = 1 to t = t∗ .
The bottom half of Figure 4 shows the equilibrium paths for GDP and GNP. As
the propositions above show, both GDP and GNP in the small country are above trend
initially. But in t = 2, small country GDP has dropped below trend by the same amount as
true output and stays constant relative to that historical trend until intangible investment
by foreign multinationals rises significantly. GNP falls throughout the preliberalization
period because the small country is paying portfolio income to households abroad. The
large country paths are shown for comparison; as in the case of output and labor, there is
a smaller impact of FDI openness in the large country.
A comparison of Figure 2 and the bottom left panel of Figure 4 clearly illustrates one
of the main messages of the paper, namely, that when foreign direct investment is high,
GDP is low. The reason is simple: FDI is high because foreign tangible investment is
15

high, GDP is low because foreign plant-specific intangible investment is high, and both
investments are high when countries are open to FDI.
The rise in consumption and leisure in the small country hosting the new FDI is
indicative of a positive welfare gain to openness, if the welfare gain is measured as the
consumption increase necessary to keep the small country indifferent between remaining
closed and being open. Assuming that countries have good measures of consumption, this
suggests that empirical studies could use this alternative measure of economic performance
instead of the ones typically used, namely, per capita GDP or GNP. I will show next that
the usefulness of consumption as a proxy for economic gains depends on whether or not
there are restrictions on portfolio investments. So far, I have assumed that there are no
restrictions.

3.3. With Portfolio Restrictions
Now I consider what happens if restrictions on portfolio and foreign direct investments are
relaxed together. In this case, Bi,t+1 = 0, for both i and t = 1, . . . , t∗ . With σit = 0 over
the same period, the two economies are initially effectively closed, and the only changes in
the time series are due to the anticipation of a future relaxation of the capital accounts.

Proposition 3. The small country’s output and labor with full capital account restrictions
are below their historical trend between t = 1 and t = t∗ . The reverse is true for the large
country.

Proof. If, in period t = 1, consumption in the small country rises relative to its historical
trend, cs1 > cs0 , then the intratemporal first-order condition of households in (3.1) implies
that labor and output fall initially. With capital fixed, labor falls more than output.
With no borrowing or lending allowed across countries, total investment in period
t = 1, ys1 − cs1 , must be below trend. With returns equated across assets, investment in
all three types of assets—tangible capital, plant-specific intangible capital, and technology
capital—must also be below trend.
16

In period t = 2, output and labor must fall further because domestic capital stocks
are lower between the first and second periods when investment in t = 1 is below trend.
Households cannot borrow from abroad; thus, output, investment, and labor continue to
fall until t = t∗ , and net exports remain equal to zero until the restrictions on FDI are
relaxed.
Again, the same arguments can be made for the large country, but because the global
resource constraint must hold, the paths relative to trend for the large country must be
reversed. Because the small country is the recipient of future FDI while the large country
is its source, the initial consumption in the small country must be above its historical
trend, and the initial consumption in the large country must be below. Otherwise, the
global resource constraint would be violated.

3.4. A Comparison
The two situations, with and without portfolio restrictions, are compared in Figure 5.
Clearly, the ability to borrow from abroad affects an economy’s transition to FDI openness.
Without this ability, the adjustments are slow before t = t∗ , but rapid when restrictions
on capital accounts are relaxed.
If portfolio investments are restricted, the economic benefits of the new policy are
not easily detectable—either in terms of improved consumption and welfare or in terms
of improved production and employment—until after a threshold degree of openness has
been reached.
The results in Figures 3–5 shed light on what Gourinchas and Jeanne (2007) have
called the “allocation puzzle.” According to standard neoclassical theory, countries with
faster productivity growth should attract more foreign capital, but observed capital flows
are not consistent with this prediction. They find that countries with lower GDP and TFP
growth receive most of the capital inflows. In the simple two-country version of the model
with countries differing in size, I find this too. To be specific, let me define measured TFP

17

as
TFPit =

GDPit
1/3

2/3

KT ,it Lit

,

where KT ,it is the total tangible capital in country i. As in the case of GDP, measured
TFP is abnormally low when inward FDI is abnormally high. This is true even if true
TFP does not change. Thus, care must be taken when diagnosing economies with low or
slow-growing GDP and TFP.
In McGrattan (2011), I show how the results change as I vary the length of the transition to openness—the time delay between policy announcement and policy enactment—the
relative sizes of countries, the maximal degree of openness, and the share of income that
goes to technology capital. The qualitative features shown in Figure 3–5 are not altered.

4. A Quantitative Assessment
Next, I consider more realistic choices for the time paths governing the relative size and
degrees of openness in the world economy and the number of countries. I enlarge the
model to a 104-country version parameterized with data from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators (WDI), for the period 1980–2005.12 After demonstrating that the
model generates empirically consistent employment shares of affiliates at home and abroad,
I simulate transition paths and get a result like those of many other studies: no systematic
pattern between the degree of FDI openness and the level of economic growth predicted
by the model.13 But then I go beyond other studies. For each country in the sample, I
also estimate the growth impact and welfare gains for the country of unilaterally relaxing
capital market restrictions. I find that the boost to annual per capita GDP growth over
the period 1980–2005 is large, as much as 7 percentage points. I find that the welfare gains
12

For data sources, see Appendix A. See Appendix B and McGrattan (2011) for details on the computational methods. Note that in the 104-country version of the model, I allow for small quadratic costs
of adjusting capital stocks. This approach avoids numerical difficulties due to binding nonnegativity
constraints on investments.

13

Many factors are left out of the analysis here in order to highlight the impact of relaxing capital
market restrictions on economic performance. Sensitivity analysis in McGrattan (2011) shows that
the main results are not overturned if changes in other factors are included.

18

are also large, as much as 460 percent in consumption-equivalent units. Both effects are
inversely related to country size.

4.1. Model Specifications
Inputs in the larger version of the model are chosen so that it generates trends in inward
FDI to GDP that mimic the trends in the data. Because the focus is on trends, a period is
defined as five years. The choice of 104 countries is dictated by data availability on inward
FDI, net portfolio investment, GDP, and population. I assume that countries have four
differences: (1) relative technology levels Ai , which I assume are on trend and chosen so
that real GDP per capita in 1980 is the same in the model and the data; (2) populations
Nit , which are taken directly from the WDI data; (3) degrees of FDI openness σit , which
are chosen so that the ratio of inward FDI to GDP in the model has the same trend as
a moving average of the actual series; and (4) the number of periods that international
borrowing Bit is held at zero, which I denote as Tc and set by comparing net portfolio
investments in the model and the data.14
The implied productivities, Ai , and the path for populations, Nit , at five-year intervals
are reported in Table 1 for all countries i in the sample (along with the country codes
used in the following figures). All estimates are relative to the United States, which is
normalized to be 100. After 2005, I assume that the populations relative to that of the
United States stay at their 2005 level. As the values in the table indicate, the dispersion
in country relative size is large, which is not surprising given the wide range of TFPs and
populations.
The path of the degree of openness, σit , is reported in Table 2 for all countries i along
with the number of periods during which international borrowing is held at zero. For many
of the countries, using a step function for the sequence σit generates a realistic pattern
for the ratio of FDI to GDP. Thus, the time path used in the two-country example is not
atypical.
14

As before, measured TFPs are time-varying since they depend on time paths of population and
technology capital.

19

For all other parameters, I use estimates from my 2010 study with Prescott of the
U.S. current account, which are listed in Table 3.15 To ensure that none of the results rest
critically on any of these choices, I have also done an extensive sensitivity analysis. (See
McGrattan, 2011.)
In Appendix B and McGrattan (2011), I provide details on the first-order conditions
of the maximization problems and the methods used for computing equilibria in this model
with many states. The main innovation here is the use of parallel processors, one for each
country.

4.2. A Test
Before turning to the main quantitative result, I first test the model by checking to see
if it generates realistic employment shares between domestic and foreign firms. I do this
because I have abstracted from many factors that differentiate countries, most importantly
for the purposes here, their geography, language, and trade policies, which potentially affect
these shares. I find that despite those abstractions, the model’s employment predictions
are quite good.
In Figures 6–8, I show evidence from three sources: the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) statistics on inward activity of multinationals and
employment (OECD, 2010a, 2010b, 2010c), the survey of foreign affiliates in the United
States from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) (U.S. Department of Commerce,
2007), and the BEA’s survey of U.S. affiliates abroad (U.S. Department of Commerce,
2008). I use data on manufacturing employment, since that measure is available and most
relevant; service industries have been a much smaller share of multinational operations to
date.
Figure 6 compares for each country the predicted and actual employment under foreign
control as a share of the country’s total employment. Data are available for 17 OECD

15

Averages are used for time-varying tax rates.

20

countries. The graph shows that the model does well on this dimension: the correlation
between the predicted and actual shares is 0.82.
Figure 7 compares the predicted and actual employment of foreign affiliates in the
United States by country of origin. The countries in the figure cover 88 percent of all
foreign employment in U.S. manufacturing. In the model, these same countries cover
86 percent of all foreign employment in the United States. The correlation between the
predicted and actual share is 0.80.
Figure 8 compares the predicted and actual employment of U.S. affiliates abroad relative to employment in the host country. One country—Canada—is not shown because
the actual employment in Canada is much higher than the model predicts. Here, geography does matter; in the model, Canada is no different from any other developed country
with 30 million people, but in reality, it has close ties with the United States that are
unique: it is geographically close, shares a language, and is a partner in a trade union.
Including Canada, the correlation between the predicted and actual employment shares
for U.S. affiliates is 0.39; excluding Canada, the correlation is much higher, at 0.73.
Overall, the predicted and actual employment shares match up well.

4.3. Current Predictions
Since the parameterized model passes the employment share test, we can expect its other
predictions to be at least reasonable. For the issue here—the relationship between FDI
openness and growth—the model predicts what many empirical studies have found: no
positive relationship.
Figure 9 is the analogue of Lucas’s (2009) Figure 2, which compares countries doing a
little and a lot of trade. Here, I distinguish instead between countries doing a little or a lot
of inward FDI. The x-axis of Figure 9 shows the initial real GDP per capita relative to the
level of the country parameterized to match U.S. observations. The y-axis is the annual
growth rate in real GDP per capita over the period 1980–2005. This rate is relative to the
growth rate of the country parameterized to match U.S. observations. Thus, an annual
21

growth rate of zero implies that a country is growing at the same rate as the country
matched to the United States. Rates above zero imply that the country is catching up to
the U.S. level of per capita GDP, and rates below zero imply that it is falling behind. I
use a cut-off for the average FDI to GDP of 1.8 percent and identify only countries that
are above it, which is half of the sample. Other cut-offs for FDI could be used, and I could
replace growth in GDP by growth in TFP, but the message would be the same: the data
show no obvious relationship between capital restrictions and economic performance.
Another way to demonstrate this result is by way of a cross-country regression of
growth on initial per capita GDP and the ratio of FDI to GDP.16 In Table 4, I report the
results of such a regression for both the data and the model. The coefficient of interest is
a2 . This coefficient is 0.052 in the data, but is not significantly different from zero. In the
model, the estimate is 0.046 with a smaller standard error than in the data, but it is not
economically significant. If I double the FDI to GDP ratio from 2 percent (which is close
to the median in my sample) to 4 percent, the predicted change in the growth rate for real
GDP per capita relative to the U.S. growth rate remains less than 0.1 percentage point.

4.4. Potential Gains
Still, the lack of a robust positive relationship between relationship between FDI openness
and growth does not necessarily mean that the effects of FDI openness are not positive
and large. To demonstrate that, I compute the economic impact of relaxing capital market
restrictions almost completely for one country at a time. I estimate the benefits in terms
of higher GDP growth and welfare and find that they can be huge, especially for small
countries.
To be more specific, I run the following counterfactual experiment: for each country
i, I increase the {σit } to 0.95 for all periods after 1980, and I remove all restrictions on
portfolio investments.17 In each case, I calculate the growth in per capita GDP less the
16

Many of the studies surveyed by Kose, Prasad, Rogoff, and Wei (2009) include other control variables
about which the model is silent. But researchers have found that adding them reduces the already
small coefficients on the ratio of FDI to GDP.

17

I cannot raise σit to 1 for two reasons. First, at 1, there is an indeterminacy in terms of who should

22

growth rate computed in the benchmark model and the consumption-equivalent gain, that
is, the increase in consumption needed to keep the country indifferent between the old and
new policy.
Figure 10 shows the prediction for GDP growth when countries are close to completely
open relative to that of the benchmark parameterization.18 The differences in predicted
growth rates are plotted relative to country size (in log scale). As expected from the earlier
propositions, there is an inverse relationship between a host country’s growth following
capital market liberalization and its relative size. In almost all cases, the boost in growth
in transition is substantial, with the highest annual estimates around 7 percentage points.19
Figure 11 shows the predicted welfare gains for each country unilaterally opening their
capital markets. As with growth, there is an inverse relationship between gains and the
country’s relative size, which is close to linear in logarithms. The smallest potential gain is
found for the United States, at a 4 percent increase in consumption, and the largest gain
for the Solomon Islands, at a 460 percent increase. If we compare two countries close to
the best-fit line in Figure 11—say, Great Britain and Botswana—we find that a country
smaller by a factor of 300 has a welfare gain that is 11 to 12 times larger. In other words,
for small countries, the potential gains to openness are huge.20

5. Conclusion
Here, I have studied the equilibrium paths of a multicountry dynamic general equilibrium
model as countries relax restrictions on portfolio and foreign direct investment. By taking
account of a transition period, the model reconciles theoretical claims that allowing FDI
leads to higher growth and welfare for host countries with the lack of robust empirical

produce technology capital. Second, it is difficult numerically to raise σit much higher than 0.95 with
many countries near corners in terms of investment.
18
19

20

Results for Figures 10 and 11 are also reported in tables in McGrattan (2011).
As in basic neoclassical growth model, increased growth rates in my model are temporary as countries
catch up. See Henry (2007).
The inverse relation between gains and size is also found in work by Ramondo and Rodrı́guez-Clare
(2010b), who estimate the gains of moving from autarky to current-day capital and current account
restrictions for 19 OECD countries.

23

evidence for such benefits. In the model, benefits to FDI openness are large, but only
eventually, once some threshold of openness is reached.
This result implies at least two research challenges. More work is required to delineate
the characteristics of the openness threshold. And the standard method of analyzing the
effects of FDI openness must be abandoned. After all, even using the method here, on the
data generated by my model, results in the mistaken conclusion that relaxing restrictions
on capital movements is not beneficial to the host country.

24

Appendix A. Data Sources
The World Bank’s World Development Indicators is the source of individual-country data
used in this study. All countries with complete time series for the period 1980–2005 are
included.21 (The complete list of countries is shown in Tables 1 and 2.) Specifically, I
construct the ratio of inward FDI relative to GDP and real GDP per capita using the
following variables (with WDI codes in parentheses):

• Foreign direct investment, net inflows, in current U.S. dollars (BX.KLT.DINV.CD.WD);
• Portfolio investment in current U.S. dollars (BN.KLT.PTXL.CD);
• GDP in current U.S. dollars (NY.GDP.MKTP.CD);
• GDP in constant 2000 U.S. dollars (NY.GDP.MKTP.KD);
• Total population (SP.POP.TOTL).

The OECD and the BEA are the sources of data used to construct employment shares of
foreign affiliates shown in Figures 6–8. Specifically, I use the following:

• Figure 6: OECD.Stat Inward activity of multinationals (and, as a supplementary
source, the OECD Factbook 2010);
• Figure 7: FDIUS Establishment Data for 2002, Table A1.9, has employment of foreignowned establishments in the United States by country;
• Figure 8: USDIA 2004 Final Benchmark Data, Table I.H3, has employment of affiliates, and the OECD STAN database for Structural Analysis has total manufacturing
employment in the host country.

21

See McGrattan (2011) for results based on a subsample of the 104 countries, namely, those with
complete inward FDI data (variable 4555) for the period 1980–2005 in the International Monetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments (IMF, 1980–2010).

25

Appendix B. Computational Methods
In this appendix, I briefly describe the two main numerical issues that arise in computing
equilibria for the 104-country version of the model: the large dimensionality of the state
space and the nonnegativity constraint on investment decisions.22
The issue of dimensionality arises because the investment decisions of firms in one
country affect decisions in all other countries. To handle this, I used a parallel computer
and a code that uses the message passing interface (MPI). An initial guess is made for the
vector of interest rates, wages in all countries, and transfers in all countries. If there are
I countries and T time periods, a fixed point must be found for (2I + 1)T − 1 prices and
transfers. The guess is distributed by the master processor to all slave processors. Given
prices and transfers, equilibrium quantities are computed on the slave processors, passed
back to the master, and the guess for the prices and transfers is updated. A fixed point
in quantities must also be solved at each iteration. This is done with a standard Newton
method, although I have found that analytical derivatives of the Jacobians are necessary to
avoid very slow computations given the large number of unknowns being computed. A fixed
point must be found for (2I + 4)T quantities that include consumptions, labor supplies,
bond holdings, investments in technology capital, I investments in tangible capital, and I
investments in plant-specific intangible capital for each period. In all, (4I + 5)T − 1 prices
and quantities are computed.
The other issue is, again, the nonnegativity of investment decisions. As small countries
relax capital restrictions and let technology capital flow in from abroad, the returns to
investing in their own technology capital fall—possibly nonmonotonically, but ultimately to
zero. With a large number of countries in the model, it is difficult to apply standard penalty
function methods to avoid negative investments. Instead, I allow for (small) quadratic
adjustment costs in the accumulation equations (2.4)–(2.6) to aid the solution of the fixed
points in prices and quantities. For countries that are close to the corner at the start of
the simulation (which is matched up to 1980 observations), I assume that they are at the
corner and set the appropriate investments to zero.
22

For full details of the methods used and equations solved, see McGrattan (2011).

26

References
Aoki, Kosuke, Gianluca Benigno, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2009, “Adjusting to Capital
Account Liberalization,” Manuscript, Princeton University.
Burstein, Ariel T., and Alexander Monge-Naranjo, 2009, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124(1): 149–195.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008, “An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic
Review, 98(1): 358–393.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum, 2002, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5): 1741–1779.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne, 2006, “The Elusive Gains from International Financial Integration,” Review of Economic Studies, 73(3): 715–741.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne, 2007, “Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The Allocation Puzzle,” Working Paper 13602, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Henry, Peter B., 2007, “Theory, Evidence, and Speculation,” Journal of Economic Literature, 45(4): 887–935.
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 1980–2010, Balance of Payments, www.imfstatistics.
org/bop.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2009, “Financial
Globalization: A Reappraisal,” IMF Staff Papers, 56(1): 8–62.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Ashley D. Taylor, forthcoming, “Thresholds in the
Process of International Financial Integration,” Journal of International Money and
Finance.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1978, “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of
Economics, 9(2): 508–523.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 2009, “Trade and the Diffusion of the Industrial Revolution,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 1–25.
McGrattan, Ellen R., 2011, “Technical Appendix: Transition to FDI Openness—Reconciling
27

Theory and Evidence,” Research Department Staff Report 455, Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2009, “Openness, Technology Capital, and
Development,” Journal of Economic Theory, 144(6): 2454–2476.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2010, “Technology Capital and the U.S. Current Account,” American Economic Review, 100(4): 1493–1522.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and José Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, 2009, “Financial
Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances,” Journal of Political Economy,
117(3): 371–416.
Ramondo, Natalia, 2010, “A Quantitative Approach to Multinational Productions,” Manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, 2010a, “Growth, Size, and Openness: A
Quantitative Approach,” American Economic Review, 100(2): 62–67.
Ramondo, Natalia, and Andrés Rodrı́guez-Clare, 2010b, “Trade, Multinational Production, and the Gains from Openness,” Manuscript, Pennsylvania State University.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010a, OECD.Stat, Inward
Activity of Multinationals by Industrial Sector, Activity of Multinationals, www.source
oecd.org.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010b, OECD.Stat, STAN
Database for Structural Analysis, Main Economic Indicators, www.sourceoecd.org.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010c, OECD Factbook 2010,
Employment in Foreign Affiliates, www.oecd-ilibrary.org.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis and U.S. Bureau of the
Census, 2007, Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: Establishment Data for
2002 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office).
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2008, U.S. Direct Investment
Abroad: 2004 Final Benchmark Data (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office).
World Bank Group, 1960–2010, World Development Indicators, www.worldbank.org.

28

Figure 1. Degree of Openness for Both Countries over Time
in the Two-Country Model

!*

0

t*

time

Figure 2. Inward FDI of the Small Country over Time
in the Two-Country Model

FDI

0

t*

time

29

Figure 3. Detrended Consumption, Output, and Labor over Time
in the Two-Country Model without Portfolio Restrictions
(Initial Steady State = 100)
A. Small Country

B. Large Country

Consumption

Consumption

100

100

t*

t*

100

100

Output
Labor

Output
Labor

t*

t*

30

Figure 4. Detrended Capital Stocks, GDP, and GNP over Time
in the Two-Country Model without Portfolio Restrictions
(Initial Steady State = 100)
A. Small Country

B. Large Country

100

100
Tangible
Technology
Plant-Specific
Intangible

Tangible
Technology
Plant-Specific
Intangible

t*

t*

100

100

GDP
GNP

GDP
GNP

t*

t*

31

Figure 5. A Comparison of Detrended Consumption and GDP
with and without Portfolio Restrictions in the Two-Country Model
(Initial Steady State = 100)
A. Small Country

B. Large Country

Consumption Without
Portfolio Restrictions

Consumption With
Portfolio Restrictions

Consumption With
Portfolio Restrictions

100

100
Consumption Without
Portfolio Restrictions

t*

t*

GDP Without
Portfolio Restrictions
GDP With
Portfolio Restrictions

100

100
GDP With
Portfolio Restrictions
GDP Without
Portfolio Restrictions

t*

t*

32

Figure 6. Predicted vs. Actual Share of Each Country’s
Total Employment Controlled by Foreign Firms
(Source: OECD Statistics, Manufacturing Employment Shares, Averages 2000"2005)

50
IRL

Correlation: 0.82

40

SWE

Actual

30
FRA
GBR
AUT

NLD

NOR

20

DNK
FIN

ESP

DEU
ISR ITA USA

10

PRT

TUR

JPN

0

0

10

20

30

Predicted

33

40

50

Figure 7. Predicted vs. Actual Share of Total U.S. Employment
in Foreign Controlled Establishments by Country
(Source: FDIUS Establishment Data, Manufacturing, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2002)
2

10

Correlation: 0.80

GBR

1

10

CAN

DEU

JPN

FRA

NLD
SWE
FIN

0

10

Actual

IRL
BEL

MEX
AUS

ITA

DNK
SAU
NOR
AUT
ISR KOR ESP BRA
ZAF
VEN

PAN
MYS

10-1

CHN

IND

BHS

10-2

10-3 -3
10

NZL

10-2

10-1

100

Predicted

34

101

102

Figure 8. Predicted vs. Actual Share of Each Country’s Total
Employment Controlled by U.S. Firms*
(Source: USDIA Benchmark Data, Manufacturing, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2004)

30
Correlation: 0.73 without Canada

20

Actual

IRL

AUS

NLD

BEL

GBR

10
SWE

FRA

NZL

NOR
DEU
DNKESP
ITA AUTFIN
PRT
JPN KOR

0

0

10

20

Predicted
*Canada at (10%, 53%) not shown

35

30

Figure 9. 1980 Real GDP and Predicted Growth Rates, 104 Countries
(Countries with average FDI/GDP > 1.8% labeled)

Predicted 1980"2005 Annual Per Capita Growth (USA = 0)

4
KNA

3

2

SGP

LBR
VCT
BOL

1

VUT
ECULCA
PNG CHL
PERPANMLT
CYP
NGA
COGDOM
MEX
THA
COL
MYS
MOZ
PRT
HND
TUN
ZMB
FJI CRI
EGY
JOR
SYC
GUY
TCD
BWA

0

IRL
ESP
NZL

AUS

BHS
BHR

BEL
NLD
CAN
GBR

SWE
DNK

AUT

-1
SWZ

-2

MRT

Relatively Closed
Relatively Open

GMB
SLB

-3

TGO

-4

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1980 Real GDP Per Capita (USA = 1)

36

1

Figure 10. Predicted Change in Relative Growth of Unilaterally
Opening to FDI and Portfolio Investment, by Country
(Degree of openness increased to 0.95 after 1980 and portfolio restrictions removed)

8

Increase in Annual Per Capita GDP Growth (%)

SLB

7

GMB

TGO

# growth = 2.5 " 1.3 log10(size)
6

(.088)

VCT

(.092)

MRT
SWZ

5
SYC

4

VUT

BWA
TCD
FJI
BHS
CAF
ISL
COG ZMB
MWI
JOR
BFA
BEN
GHA
HND
MLI
MOZ
LKA
SEN
HTI
TUN
CYP
CRI
SLV
GAB DOM
BDI
CMR
KEN
NZL
GTM
ECU
CIVMAR
EGY AUT
CHL
THA
BOL
MYS
DZA
PRT
PAK
IRL
IDN
NOR
LBR
NGA
COL
PER
PHL
DNK
FIN KOR
AUS
GIN
SWE
ARGESP
TUR
BEL
VEN
NLDMEX ITA
BRA FRA
SAUCAN
DEU
GBR

3
2
1

SGP

IND

0
-1 -3
10

JPN USA

10-2

10-1

100

Relative Size (USA = 100)

37

101

102

Figure 11. Predicted Welfare Gains of Unilaterally Opening to
FDI and Portfolio Investment, by Country
(Degree of openness increased to 0.95 after 1980 and portfolio restrictions removed)
3

10

SLB

TGO

log10(gain) = 1.7 " 0.37 log10(size)

GMBSWZ
VCT
VUT
SYC
2

Welfare Gains (%)

10

(.015)

(.016)

MRT
BWA

CAF
BDI
MWI
BEN
BFA
TCD
FJI
COG
MLI
GIN
BHS
SEN
CYP
MOZ
GHA
ZMB
GAB
JOR
HTI
HND
KEN
CMR
LKA
BOL
ISL
CRI
TUN
CIV
GTM
DOM
ECU
SLV
LBR
MYS
MAR
PAK
EGY
CHL
NGA
IRL
DZA
NZL
THA
PER
PHL
IDN
COL
PRT
NOR
FIN
VEN
DNK
TUR SAU
KOR
AUT
AUS
ARG
IND
SWE
NLDMEX
CAN
ESP
BRA
BEL

SGP

GBR
ITA
FRA

101
DEU

JPN

USA

100 -3
10

10-2

10-1

100

Relative Size (USA = 100)

38

101

102

Table 1. TFP and Population Inputs, 104-Country Model, USA = 100
A
N1980
N1985
N1990
N1995
N2000
North & Central America
United States (USA)
100
100
100
100
100
100
Canada (CAN)
93.5
10.8
10.9
11.1
11.0
10.9
Costa Rica (CRI)
38.4
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Dominican Republic (DOM)
23.7
2.5
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.1
El Salvador (SLV)
29.3
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.1
Guatemala (GTM)
22.9
3.0
3.3
3.6
3.8
4.0
Honduras (HND)
18.9
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.1
2.2
Mexico (MEX)
38.4
28.8
31.7
33.3
34.2
34.7
Panama (PAN)
38.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.0
1.0
Europe
Austria (AUT)
98.7
3.4
3.2
3.1
3.0
2.8
Belgium-Luxembourg (BEL)
94.4
4.6
4.3
4.1
4.0
3.8
Cyprus (CYP)
54.0
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
Denmark (DNK)
119
2.3
2.1
2.1
2.0
1.9
Finland (FIN)
97.7
2.1
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.8
France (FRA)
86.5
24.0
23.2
22.7
21.7
20.9
Germany (DEU)
83.1
35.1
32.7
31.8
30.7
29.1
Iceland (ISL)
155
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Ireland (IRL)
76.5
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.3
Italy (ITA)
74.2
25.2
23.8
22.7
21.3
20.2
Malta (MLT)
49.5
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Netherlands (NLD)
95.1
6.3
6.1
6.0
5.8
5.6
Norway (NOR)
125
1.8
1.7
1.7
1.6
1.6
Portugal (PRT)
52.5
4.3
4.2
4.0
3.8
3.6
Sweden (SWE)
113
3.7
3.5
3.4
3.3
3.1
Spain (ESP)
61.6
16.5
16.1
15.6
14.8
14.3
Turkey (TUR)
27.8
19.8
21.6
22.5
23.0
23.6
United Kingdom (GBR)
86.2
25.3
23.8
22.9
21.8
20.9
Asia
China (CHN)
3.7
429.5
442
455
453
448
Korea (KOR)
32.6
16.6
17.2
17.2
16.9
16.7
India (IND)
4.7
295
322
340
350
360
Indonesia (IDN)
6.9
63.9
68.5
71.4
72.4
73.1
Japan (JPN)
106
51.6
50.8
49.5
47.1
45.0
Malaysia (MYS)
22.5
5.9
6.6
7.3
7.7
8.2
Pakistan (PAK)
6.6
35.0
39.8
43.3
46.0
48.9
Philippines (PHL)
14.2
20.5
23.1
25.0
26.3
27.5
Singapore (SGP)
65.6
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Sri Lanka (LKA)
8.9
6.5
6.7
6.9
6.8
6.6
Thailand (THA)
12.1
20.3
22.1
22.7
22.6
22.1
Vanuatu (VUT)
23.8
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Middle East
Bahrain (BHR)
102
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
Oman (OMN)
51.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Egypt (EGY)
12.3
19.0
21.3
23.1
24.0
24.9
Israel (ISR)
88.8
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.2
Jordan (JOR)
24.4
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.6
1.7
Saudi Arabia (SAU)
101
3.8
5.4
6.6
7.0
7.3
Syria (SYR)
16.3
3.8
4.5
5.1
5.5
5.9
Oceania
Australia (AUS)
88.0
6.4
6.6
6.8
6.8
6.8
Fiji (FJI)
29.0
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
New Zealand (NZL)
80.0
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
Papua N. Guinea (PNG)
13.6
1.4
1.5
1.7
1.8
1.9
Solomon Is. (SLB)
17.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
39

N2005
100
10.9
1.5
3.2
2.0
4.3
2.3
34.9
1.1
2.8
3.7
0.3
1.8
1.8
20.6
27.9
0.1
1.4
19.8
0.1
5.5
1.6
3.6
3.1
14.7
24.1
20.4
441
16.3
370
74.6
43.2
8.7
52.7
28.9
1.4
6.7
22.3
0.1
0.2
0.9
26.1
2.3
1.8
7.8
6.5
6.9
0.3
1.4
2.1
0.2

Table 1. TFP and Population Inputs, 104-Country Model, USA = 100 (cont.)
South America & Caribbean
Argentina (ARG)
Bahamas (BHS)
Bolivia (BOL)
Brazil (BRA)
Chile (CHL)
Colombia (COL)
Ecuador (ECU)
Guyana (GUY)
Haiti (HTI)
Jamaica (JAM)
Paraguay (PRY)
Peru (PER)
St. Kitts (KNA)
St. Lucia (LCA)
St. Vincent (VCT)
Uruguay (URY)
Venezuela (VEN)
Africa
Algeria (DZA)
Benin (BEN)
Botswana (BWA)
Burkina Faso (BFA)
Burundi (BDI)
Cameroon (CMR)
Central Af. Rep. (CAF)
Chad (TCD)
Congo (COG)
Cote d’Ivoire (CIV)
Gabon (GAB)
Gambia (GMB)
Ghana (GHA)
Guinea (GIN)
Kenya (KEN)
Liberia (LBR)
Madagascar (MDG)
Malawi (MWI)
Mali (MLI)
Mauritania (MRT)
Mauritius (MUS)
Morocco (MAR)
Mozambique (MOZ)
Niger (NER)
Nigeria (NGA)
Rwanda (RWA)
Senegal (SEN)
Seychelles (SYC)
Sierra Leone (SLE)
South Africa (ZAF)
Sudan (SDN)
Swaziland (SWZ)
Togo (TGO)
Tunisia (TUN)
Zambia (ZMB)
Zimbabwe (ZWE)

A

N1980

N1985

N1990

N1995

N2000

N2005

55.2
105
18.7
29.5
27.3
22.5
20.0
17.4
14.0
37.6
20.2
26.8
43.4
34.8
27.1
52.1
54.1

12.2
0.1
2.3
52.1
4.9
11.7
3.4
0.3
2.5
0.9
1.3
7.4
0.0
0.1
0.0
1.3
6.4

12.7
0.1
2.5
57.2
5.1
12.6
3.8
0.3
2.7
1.0
1.5
8.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
1.3
7.3

13.1
0.1
2.7
59.9
5.3
13.3
4.1
0.3
2.8
1.0
1.7
8.7
0.0
0.1
0.0
1.2
7.9

13.1
0.1
2.8
60.7
5.4
13.7
4.3
0.3
2.9
0.9
1.8
9.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
1.2
8.3

13.1
0.1
2.9
61.7
5.5
14.1
4.4
0.3
3.0
0.9
1.9
9.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
1.2
8.6

13.1
0.1
3.1
63.0
5.5
14.5
4.4
0.3
3.1
0.9
2.0
9.4
0.0
0.1
0.0
1.1
9.0

23.5
7.9
19.0
5.2
4.9
12.9
9.2
5.9
16.0
17.6
63.5
9.9
6.6
8.4
9.0
15.1
8.6
5.2
7.1
11.0
25.9
16.0
5.7
7.1
8.4
6.7
11.0
56.6
7.6
33.5
7.2
15.6
8.2
19.5
10.9
11.6

7.9
1.5
0.4
2.9
1.8
3.8
1.0
2.0
0.8
3.4
0.3
0.3
4.7
2.0
6.8
0.8
3.7
2.6
2.6
0.6
0.4
8.3
5.2
2.4
30.1
2.2
2.4
0.0
1.4
11.8
8.6
0.3
1.2
2.7
2.4
3.1

9.3
1.7
0.5
3.2
2.1
4.4
1.1
2.2
0.9
4.4
0.3
0.3
5.5
2.2
8.3
0.9
4.1
3.1
2.9
0.7
0.4
9.2
5.6
2.8
34.3
2.6
2.7
0.0
1.5
13.2
10.1
0.3
1.4
3.1
2.9
3.7

10.1
1.9
0.5
3.6
2.3
4.9
1.2
2.4
1.0
5.1
0.4
0.4
6.0
2.5
9.4
0.9
4.5
3.8
3.1
0.8
0.4
9.7
5.4
3.1
37.8
2.9
3.0
0.0
1.6
14.1
10.9
0.3
1.6
3.3
3.2
4.2

10.6
2.1
0.6
3.9
2.3
5.3
1.3
2.7
1.0
5.6
0.4
0.4
6.5
2.8
10.3
0.7
4.9
3.8
3.3
0.8
0.4
9.9
6.0
3.5
40.9
2.0
3.3
0.0
1.5
14.7
11.6
0.4
1.7
3.4
3.4
4.4

10.8
2.4
0.6
4.2
2.3
5.6
1.4
3.0
1.1
6.1
0.4
0.5
6.9
3.0
11.1
1.0
5.4
4.1
3.5
0.9
0.4
10.1
6.4
3.9
44.2
2.8
3.5
0.0
1.5
15.6
12.4
0.4
1.9
3.4
3.7
4.4

11.1
2.7
0.6
4.7
2.5
6.0
1.4
3.4
1.2
6.5
0.5
0.5
7.4
3.1
12.0
1.1
6.0
4.5
3.9
1.0
0.4
10.2
6.9
4.5
47.8
3.0
3.8
0.0
1.7
15.9
13.1
0.4
2.0
3.4
4.0
4.2

40

Table 2. Degree of Openness σ and Periods Portfolio is Constrained Tc , 104-Country Model
σ1980
σ1985
σ1990
σ1995
σ2000
σ2005
σ2010
σ2015
Tc
North & Central America
United States (USA)
0.76
0.76
0.76
0.76
0.76
0.86
0.86
0.86
0
Canada (CAN)
0.72
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.75
0.75
0.75
0
Costa Rica (CRI)
0.53
0.53
0.53
0.53
0.53
0.53
0.59
0.59
6
Dominican Republic (DOM)
0.53
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.58
0.58
0.58
3
El Salvador (SLV)
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.56
0.56
0.56
4
Guatemala (GTM)
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.56
6
Honduras (HND)
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.56
0.56
7
Mexico (MEX)
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.69
0.73
0.73
0.73
3
Panama (PAN)
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.54
0.58
0.58
0.58
1
Europe
Austria (AUT)
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.71
0.71
0
Belgium-Luxembourg (BEL)
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.82
0.82
0.82
4
Cyprus (CYP)
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.57
0.57
0.57
4
Denmark (DNK)
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.67
0.67
0.67
0
Finland (FIN)
0.52
0.48
0.48
0.48
0.48
0.72
0.62
0.62
0
France (FRA)
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.69
0.72
0.75
0.78
0
Germany (DEU)
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.78
0.74
0.74
0
Iceland (ISL)
0.45
0.40
0.40
0.40
0.40
0.40
0.50
0.58
0
Ireland (IRL)
0.60
0.59
0.58
0.57
0.56
0.66
0.66
0.66
0
Italy (ITA)
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.70
0.70
0.70
0
Malta (MLT)
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.54
0.54
0.54
0
Netherlands (NLD)
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.77
0.68
0.75
0
Norway (NOR)
0.62
0.62
0.62
0.62
0.62
0.64
0.64
0.64
0
Portugal (PRT)
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.65
0.63
0.63
0
Sweden (SWE)
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.76
0.72
0.72
0
Spain (ESP)
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.72
0.72
0.72
0
Turkey (TUR)
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.65
0.65
7
United Kingdom (GBR)
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.78
0.78
0.78
0
Asia
China (CHN)
0.34
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.73
4
Korea (KOR)
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.63
0.63
0.63
1
India (IND)
0.44
0.44
0.44
0.44
0.44
0.44
0.67
0.67
4
Indonesia (IDN)
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
0.57
3
Japan (JPN)
0.57
0.58
0.59
0.61
0.64
0.68
0.70
0.71
0
Malaysia (MYS)
0.60
0.59
0.59
0.63
0.63
0.63
0.63
0.63
0
Pakistan (PAK)
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.61
0.61
6
Philippines (PHL)
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.56
0.57
0.59
0.61
3
Singapore (SGP)
0.62
0.63
0.63
0.66
0.74
0.92
0.92
0.92
8
Sri Lanka (LKA)
0.48
0.48
0.48
0.48
0.48
0.52
0.52
0.52
6
Thailand (THA)
0.53
0.53
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.63
0.63
0.63
2
Vanuatu (VUT)
0.43
0.39
0.39
0.39
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.47
7
Middle East
Bahrain (BHR)
0.26
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
0
Oman (OMN)
0.54
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.56
0.56
4
Egypt (EGY)
0.62
0.61
0.61
0.61
0.61
0.61
0.66
0.66
5
Israel (ISR)
0.54
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.52
0.66
0.66
1
Jordan (JOR)
0.49
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.60
0.60
6
Saudi Arabia (SAU)
0.57
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
0.64
1
Syria (SYR)
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.55
0.55
0.55
0.55
7
Oceania
Australia (AUS)
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.70
0.70
0
Fiji (FJI)
0.47
0.48
0.48
0.48
0.48
0.48
0.52
0.52
5
New Zealand (NZL)
0.59
0.59
0.59
0.59
0.60
0.61
0.62
0.64
0
Papua N. Guinea (PNG)
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.53
0.53
0.53
0.53
7
Solomon Is. (SLB)
0.44
0.35
0.30
0.26
0.26
0.26
0.26
0.26
6
41

Table 2. Degree of Openness σ and Periods Portfolio is Constrained Tc , 104-Country Model (cont.)
South America & Caribbean
Argentina (ARG)
Bahamas (BHS)
Bolivia (BOL)
Brazil (BRA)
Chile (CHL)
Colombia (COL)
Ecuador (ECU)
Guyana (GUY)
Haiti (HTI)
Jamaica (JAM)
Paraguay (PRY)
Peru (PER)
St. Kitts (KNA)
St. Lucia (LCA)
St. Vincent (VCT)
Uruguay (URY)
Venezuela (VEN)
Africa
Algeria (DZA)
Benin (BEN)
Botswana (BWA)
Burkina Faso (BFA)
Burundi (BDI)
Cameroon (CMR)
Central Af. Rep. (CAF)
Chad (TCD)
Congo (COG)
Cote d’Ivoire (CIV)
Gabon (GAB)
Gambia (GMB)
Ghana (GHA)
Guinea (GIN)
Kenya (KEN)
Liberia (LBR)
Madagascar (MDG)
Malawi (MWI)
Mali (MLI)
Mauritania (MRT)
Mauritius (MUS)
Morocco (MAR)
Mozambique (MOZ)
Niger (NER)
Nigeria (NGA)
Rwanda (RWA)
Senegal (SEN)
Seychelles (SYC)
Sierra Leone (SLE)
South Africa (ZAF)
Sudan (SDN)
Swaziland (SWZ)
Togo (TGO)
Tunisia (TUN)
Zambia (ZMB)
Zimbabwe (ZWE)

σ1980

σ1985

σ1990

σ1995

σ2000

σ2005

σ2010

σ2015

Tc

0.60
0.50
0.49
0.68
0.56
0.55
0.51
0.23
0.50
0.27
0.50
0.54
0.41
0.46
0.29
0.58
0.53

0.60
0.48
0.49
0.65
0.54
0.55
0.49
0.50
0.50
0.59
0.47
0.54
0.41
0.50
0.29
0.55
0.46

0.60
0.48
0.49
0.65
0.54
0.55
0.49
0.50
0.50
0.59
0.47
0.54
0.41
0.50
0.29
0.55
0.46

0.60
0.48
0.49
0.65
0.54
0.55
0.49
0.50
0.50
0.59
0.47
0.54
0.63
0.50
0.29
0.55
0.46

0.60
0.48
0.49
0.65
0.54
0.55
0.49
0.50
0.50
0.59
0.52
0.62
0.63
0.50
0.37
0.55
0.66

0.72
0.48
0.65
0.77
0.65
0.64
0.63
0.50
0.50
0.59
0.52
0.62
0.86
0.50
0.37
0.55
0.69

0.68
0.55
0.56
0.73
0.65
0.65
0.58
0.50
0.50
0.59
0.52
0.62
0.86
0.65
0.45
0.60
0.65

0.68
0.55
0.56
0.73
0.65
0.65
0.58
0.50
0.50
0.59
0.52
0.62
0.86
0.65
0.45
0.60
0.65

3
7
5
3
3
5
3
0
7
5
7
3
3
4
5
0
2

0.55
0.41
0.50
0.40
0.33
0.50
0.45
0.46
0.47
0.51
0.52
0.42
0.44
0.33
0.52
0.52
0.25
0.43
0.40
0.48
0.39
0.46
0.41
0.48
0.56
0.45
0.46
0.46
0.46
0.32
0.41
0.47
0.50
0.53
0.49
0.26

0.55
0.30
0.49
0.40
0.33
0.50
0.45
0.46
0.47
0.48
0.52
0.40
0.44
0.33
0.51
0.65
0.25
0.43
0.40
0.46
0.39
0.46
0.41
0.48
0.56
0.45
0.46
0.46
0.46
0.32
0.41
0.40
0.40
0.53
0.49
0.26

0.55
0.30
0.48
0.40
0.33
0.50
0.45
0.46
0.47
0.48
0.52
0.31
0.44
0.33
0.51
0.65
0.25
0.43
0.40
0.42
0.39
0.46
0.41
0.48
0.56
0.45
0.46
0.46
0.46
0.32
0.41
0.36
0.34
0.53
0.49
0.26

0.55
0.50
0.47
0.40
0.33
0.50
0.45
0.46
0.47
0.48
0.52
0.28
0.44
0.33
0.50
0.65
0.25
0.43
0.41
0.39
0.39
0.46
0.41
0.48
0.56
0.45
0.46
0.46
0.46
0.32
0.41
0.36
0.31
0.53
0.49
0.55

0.55
0.47
0.45
0.40
0.33
0.50
0.45
0.46
0.47
0.56
0.52
0.28
0.44
0.33
0.50
0.65
0.25
0.43
0.41
0.35
0.39
0.46
0.41
0.48
0.64
0.45
0.47
0.46
0.46
0.68
0.41
0.36
0.29
0.53
0.49
0.55

0.60
0.47
0.45
0.40
0.34
0.54
0.45
0.46
0.55
0.56
0.52
0.28
0.44
0.33
0.50
0.65
0.25
0.47
0.50
0.33
0.48
0.46
0.54
0.48
0.64
0.45
0.48
0.49
0.46
0.68
0.41
0.36
0.28
0.53
0.49
0.55

0.60
0.47
0.45
0.40
0.34
0.54
0.45
0.55
0.55
0.56
0.52
0.32
0.54
0.50
0.53
0.65
0.50
0.47
0.50
0.42
0.48
0.61
0.54
0.48
0.64
0.45
0.49
0.51
0.46
0.68
0.58
0.36
0.28
0.58
0.55
0.55

0.60
0.47
0.45
0.50
0.34
0.54
0.45
0.55
0.55
0.56
0.52
0.37
0.54
0.50
0.53
0.65
0.58
0.47
0.51
0.42
0.48
0.61
0.54
0.48
0.64
0.45
0.50
0.51
0.46
0.68
0.58
0.36
0.28
0.58
0.57
0.55

5
7
0
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
3
8
7
7
7
2
7
7
5
7
3
7
7
7
2
7
7
5
6
4
7
0
5
1
5
4

42

Table 3. Model Constants at Annual Ratesa
Parameter

Expression

Value

Discount factor

β

.98

Leisure weight

ψ

1.32

Population

γN

1.0

Technology

γA

1.2

φ

7.0

Tangible capital

(1 − φ)αT

21.4

Plant-specific intangible capital

(1 − φ)αI

6.5

(1 − φ)(1−αT −αI )

65.1

Technology capital

δM

8.0

Tangible capital

δT

6.0

Plant-specific intangible capital

δI

0

Labor wedge

τli

34

Profits

τpi

37

Dividends

τd

28

Preferences

Growth Rates (%)

Income Shares (%)
Technology capital

Labor
Depreciation Rates (%)

Tax Rates (%)

a

See McGrattan and Prescott (2010) for details on these parameter choices.

43

Table 4. Impact of FDI on Per Capita GDP Growtha
Regression: g = a0 + a1 gdp0 + a2 f di/gdp
g = annual growth in real GDP per capita relative to US, 1980–2005 (US = 0)
gdp0 = real GDP per capita relative to US in 1980 (US = 1)
f di/gdp = average ratio of FDI to GDP (in percentages), 1980–2005
Coefficient

Data

Model

a

a0

a1

a2

−1.062

1.065

0.052

(.288)

(.660)

(.063)

−0.209

0.174

0.046

(.123)

(.264)

(.026)

Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.

44

